CITY CODE
of
CHARLESTON, ILLINOIS
2006
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-O-40, passed 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Charleston, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-O-40, passed 2025. Ordinances of
the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the code
has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 07-O-6
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE 2007 CITY CODE OF CHARLESTON, ILLINOIS
   BE IT ORDAINED by the mayor and city council of the city of Charleston,
Illinois, as follows:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the city of Charleston, Illinois prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the city, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the official
code and law of the city as enacted by the mayor and city council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the official city code is identified by the proper catch line and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, one copy of which
shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official city
code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said official city code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, vacating
ordinances and annexation ordinances shall continue in full force and effect
unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of the city code. Such
ordinances are not intended to be included in the official city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the code adopted by the same shall be recorded
and shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage, approval and
publication as provided by law.
   INTRODUCED this         day of                        2007.
   PASSED this  6  day of  March  2007.
   APPROVED this          day of                        2007.
                                                   
      Mayor
ATTEST:
                              
City Clerk
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
CHARLESTON CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official code of the city. This city code of
ordinances shall be known and cited as the CHARLESTON CITY CODE and it is
hereby published by authority of the council and shall be kept up to date as
provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. (1991 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (1991 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (1991 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of the city code shall make every
effort to maintain said code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the city clerk.
Said code books, while in actual possession of official and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and shall be returned to
the office of the clerk when directed to do so by order of the city council.
(1991 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this city
code are hereby repealed to the extent they are superseded by the terms of this
code, except such as are included in this city code or are by necessary
implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses
contained in the following sections), and excluding the following ordinances
which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances;
ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and
other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract
ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the
issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or
vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond
ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the
transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the city; and all special
ordinances, including, but not limited to, traffic ordinances. (1991 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as the city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this city code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1991 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance, whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not,
as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act
done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued
or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect
any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Extend To All Repeals: This section shall extend to all repeals, either
by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making
any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Current Pending Actions: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provision; nor shall this chapter be deemed
as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to
accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as
waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force
at the time of the adoption of this city code. (1991 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this code, or any part thereof. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1991 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS; INTERPRETATIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: General Rules Of Interpretation
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: GENERAL RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: In the interpretation and application of any
provisions of this code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience
and general welfare. Where any provision of the code imposes greater
restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this
code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be
deemed to be controlling.
   C.   Computation Of Time: The time within which any act provided by law is
to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last,
unless the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday as defined or fixed in
any statute now or hereafter in force in the state, and then it shall also be
excluded. If the day succeeding such Saturday, Sunday or holiday is also a
holiday or a Saturday or Sunday, then such succeeding day shall also be
excluded.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
   E.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
   F.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
   G.   May; Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
   H.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   I.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
   J.   Officers And Employees Generally: Whenever any officer or employee is
referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the city of Charleston".
   K.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
   L.   Ordinance: The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the city
has been changed in the content of this city code to "title", "chapter",
"section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the city ordinances is not meant to
amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (2006 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The city of Charleston, county of Coles, state of Illinois.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Charleston.
COUNTY: The county of Coles, state of Illinois.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MAYOR: The mayor of the city.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity which, by its perpetuation, can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OATH: Shall include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear"
and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed".
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PROPERTY: Shall include real, personal and mixed property.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
STATE: The state of Illinois.
STREET: Includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts
and all other public ways in the city, and shall include all areas thereof
embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public use.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer"
as used in this code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in
quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law on any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person or, in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (2006 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or
reenacted. (2006 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: License Revocation
1-4-3: Judicial Supervision
1-4-4: Application Of Provisions
1-4-5: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be fined
in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) 1 . (Ord. 67-O-7,
4-18-1967; amd. Ord. 95-O-44A, 9-19-1995)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1 and 5/11-3-2.
1-4-2: LICENSE REVOCATION:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued to him by the city may be revoked by the court or by
the city council. (1964 Code)
1-4-3: JUDICIAL SUPERVISION:
The court may, upon a plea of guilty or a stipulation by the defendant of the
facts supporting the charge or finding of guilt, defer further proceedings and
the imposition of a sentence and enter an order of supervision for the
defendant, if the defendant is not barred from receiving an order of
supervision after considering the circumstances of the offense and the history,
character and condition of the offender, if the court is of the opinion that:
   A.   The defendant is not likely to commit further ordinance violations.
   B.   The defendant and the public would be best served if the defendant were
not to receive a conviction of an ordinance violation.
   C.   In the best interest of justice, an order of supervision is more
important than a conviction of an ordinance violation. (Ord. 05-O-32, 12-20-
2005)
1-4-4: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Application Of Penalty: The penalty provided in this chapter shall be
applicable to every section of this code the same as though it were a part of
each and every separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or
where any act which is of a continuing nature or declared to be unlawful, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code.
   B.   Acts Punishable Under Different Sections: In all cases where the same
offense is made punishable or is created by different clauses or sections of
this code, the prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed, but not
more than one recovery shall be had against the same person for the same
offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered a recovery or penalty being enforced.
   C.   Breach Of Provisions: Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to
do any act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code and
there shall be no fine or penalty specifically declared for such breach, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during or on which a breach or violation occurs or
continues. (1964 Code)
1-4-5: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of the city
council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1964
Code)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Composition; Terms; Vacancies
1-5-2: Powers And Duties
1-5-3: Mayor
1-5-4: Bond
1-5-5: Compensation
1-5-6: Meetings
1-5-7: Conduct Of Business
1-5-1: COMPOSITION; TERMS; VACANCIES:
The Council shall consist of four (4) Commissioners elected for staggered terms
of four (4) years, as provided by statute. Terms of office of the newly elected
Mayor and Commissioners shall commence at the first regular or special meeting
to be conducted in the month of May following any general election and shall
continue until their successors are elected and qualified. Vacancies occurring
on the Council shall be filled by the remaining members as prescribed by
statute. (Ord. 84-O-9, 5-8-1984; amd. 2006 Code)
1-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The Council shall be the Governing Body of the City and shall have the powers
and duties prescribed by statute. (Ord. 84-O-9, 5-8-1984)
1-5-3: MAYOR:
   A.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive Officer and shall perform all
duties assigned to the Office of the Mayor by the Illinois Compiled Statutes,
as amended.
      2.   The Mayor shall preside at all regular and special meetings of the
Council; provided, that in the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall be
the presiding officer.
      3.   Local State Of Emergency:
         a.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in
this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
 
           A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing or
           motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises
CURFEW:    within the corporate limits of the City except officials of any governmental
           unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil
           emergency.
           (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
           violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to execute
           by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law; or
           (2)   Any natural disaster, epidemic, or manmade calamity, including outbreak of
EMERGENCY: disease, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion, or
           eminent threat of any of those events within the corporate limits of the City,
           resulting in or threatening the death or injury of persons or the destruction of
           property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect
           the public health, safety and welfare.
 
         b.   Declaration: Whenever an emergency, as defined in subsection (a)
of this section exists, the Mayor is authorized to declare the existence of a
local state of emergency by means of a written declaration of the Mayor, under
oath, setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency, describing the
nature of the emergency and declaring that a local state of emergency exists in
accordance with the definitions set forth in this section. This declaration
must be filed with the Municipal Clerk as soon as practicable after issuance.
         c.   Curfew Authorized: After proclamation of a local state of
emergency by the Mayor, he or she may order a general curfew applicable to such
geographical areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as he or she deems
reasonable and advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night
as he or she deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
         d.   Orders Authorized: After the proclamation of a local state of
emergency, the Mayor may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare,
and to address the issues caused or threatened by the emergency, may take any
or all of the following actions by executive order during the state of
emergency:
            (1)   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency;
            (2)   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the City for
the purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality;
            (3)   In the event the local state of emergency extends beyond the
current fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the Mayor shall be
authorized to approve new spending by the City during the existence of the
local state of emergency;
            (4)   Temporarily postpone all meetings of the City Council and any
City committee, commission, board authority, or other City body, as deemed
appropriate by the Mayor; and/or
            (5)   Issue any and all such other orders or undertake such other
functions and activities as the Mayor reasonably believes are required to
protect the health, safety, and welfare of persons or property within the City
or otherwise preserve the public peace or abate, clean up, or mitigate the
effects of any emergency or disaster.
         e.   Duration: The declaration herein authorized shall be effective
for a period of up to twenty one (21) days or until the adjournment of the next
regular or special meeting of the City Council, whichever comes first, unless
sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor, or, his or her interim
emergency successor, indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The
Mayor or his or her interim emergency successor, shall have the power to re-
proclaim the existence of an emergency at the end of each twenty one (21) day
period during the time said emergency exists.
         f.   Notice: Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the
Municipal Clerk shall notify the news media situated within the City, and shall
cause at least four (4) copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of
the emergency and any curfew to be posted at the following places within the
City: the City Hall, the police station, the post office, and in the area of
any curfew.
         g.   Violations: Any person violating the provisions of this section
or executive orders issued pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense
against the City and shall be punished as provided by section
1-4-4: Application of Provisions of the City Code.
         h.   Effect On Other Ordinances: Nothing contained in this section
shall be construed to impair the powers contained in this code, giving powers
to the police and fire departments, but shall be construed together with
existing ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of
the City.
   B.   Mayor Pro Tem: The Mayor Pro Tem shall be selected by the Council from
among its members at the first regular meeting in May of each year. When the
Mayor is absent from the City or is unable to discharge his duties, the Mayor
Pro Tem shall have full power and authority to discharge all said duties.
(Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; amd. Ord. 20-O-7, 3-23-2020)
1-5-4: BOND:
The Mayor and each Commissioner shall give a bond of three thousand dollars
($3,000.00), such bond to be filed and approved as prescribed by statute. (Ord.
84-O-9, 5-8-1984)
1-5-5: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the Mayor shall be twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00) per year
and the salary of each of the Council members shall be six thousand dollars
($6,000.00) per year. (Ord. 18-O-31, 10-16-2018)
1-5-6: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the Council shall be held the
first and third Tuesdays of each month at the hour of six thirty o'clock (6:30)
P.M. in the Council Chambers of City Hall. (Ord. 13-O-16, 7-16-2013, eff. 8-6-
2013)
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or any
two (2) Commissioners upon a twenty four (24) hour notice to every member of
the Council; provided, that the requirements of a notice shall not be binding
in any special meeting at which all of the members of the Council are present,
as is provided by statute. Such notices may be served by any member of the
Police Department or by any other person in the City, and it shall be the duty
of the Clerk, when given copies of such notices, to serve the same or cause the
same to be served immediately.
   C.   Open Meetings: All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public
pursuant to 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-
1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-5-7: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
Rule 1. Convene: The mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed to meet
and immediately call the members of the council to order.
Rule 2. Order Of Business: The order of business at all regular and special
meetings shall be:
   A.   Calling the roll.
   B.   Reading and approving the minutes of the last meeting; provided, that
the minutes of the meetings may be read only at regular meetings.
   C.   Auditing claims.
   D.   Receiving petitions.
   E.   Report of officers.
   F.   Report of special committees.
   G.   Unfinished business of preceding meetings.
   H.   New business.
   I.   Miscellaneous business.
   J.   Adjournment.
Rule 3. Maintain Order: The mayor shall preserve order and decorum, and shall
decide all questions of order, subject to an appeal to the council, and none
but the member appealing and the presiding officer shall be permitted to speak
on the appeal, and they but once, to explain.
Rule 4. Address Chair: Every member, previous to his speaking, shall rise and
address the mayor, and shall not proceed with his remarks until recognized and
named by the chair.
Rule 5. Motions Presented: When a motion has been made and seconded, the mayor
shall state the same, and when so stated, shall not be withdrawn, unless by
consent of the council.
Rule 6. Motions Not Debatable: The previous question, to postpone indefinitely,
to lay on the table, and to adjourn, shall not be debated.
Rule 7. Precluding Motions: A motion for the "previous question" or "to lay on
the table" shall preclude any amendment and debate of the main question, and a
motion to postpone or to adjourn to a certain day shall, until it is decided,
preclude any amendment to the main question.
Rule 8. Previous Question: The previous question shall be put as follows:
"Shall the main question now be put?"
Rule 9. Consideration Of Ordinances: Every ordinance shall be carefully read
when introduced, and all its parts and provisions well considered in connection
with the law upon which it is based, at that or some succeeding meeting or
meetings of the council, before the same shall be voted on for passage.
Rule 10. Voting: The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all
ordinances and on all propositions to create any liability against the city, or
for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at
the request of any member, which shall be entered on the journal of its
proceedings, and the concurrence of a majority of all members elected in the
council shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance or proposition,
provided, it shall require two-thirds (2/3) of all the council members elected
to sell any city property.
Rule 11. Committees: All committees shall be appointed by the mayor, unless
otherwise directed by resolution of the city council, in which case, the
council shall appoint the same on motion. The person first named on the
committee shall serve as chair.
Rule 12. Duty Of Clerk: The clerk shall forward all papers to the appropriate
committees and officers as early as practicable after the reference is made.
Rule 13. Addressing Meetings: It shall be unlawful for any person to address or
attempt to address any regular or special meeting of the council excepting upon
the consent of the mayor or with the consent of the majority of the members
present. Any person addressing the council shall, for the record, state his
name and address.
Rule 14. Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interrupt any
regular or special meeting of the council. Any person violating any provision
of this rule shall be fined not less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than ten
dollars ($10.00) for each offense and may be summarily ejected from the council
chambers and city hall.
Rule 15. Amendment Of Rules: Any one of the foregoing rules and regulations may
be altered or amended at any regular or special meeting of the council, where
such alteration or amendment does not conflict with any ordinance, provided,
notice has been given, in writing, one meeting previous, and these rules or any
of them may be suspended at any meeting by a majority of the members voting for
the same when such suspension does not conflict with any ordinance. (Ord. 96-O-
64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
CHAPTER 6
CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-6-1: Appointment; Term; Bond
1-6-2: Removal From Office
1-6-3: Powers And Duties Generally
1-6-4: Hiring And Discharging Employees
1-6-5: Officers And Department Heads
1-6-6: Purchasing Agent; Purchases
1-6-7: Contracts
1-6-8: Appropriations And Levies
1-6-9: Accounts
1-6-10: Inventory Of City Property; Custodian
1-6-11: Publications
1-6-12: Record Of Maps And Plats
1-6-13: Preparation, Certification Of Records
1-6-14: Ex Officio Collector And Comptroller
1-6-15: Acting Manager
1-6-16: Deputy City Manager
1-6-1: APPOINTMENT; TERM; BOND:
   A.   Appointment And Term: The city manager shall be the administrative head
of the city and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all
departments. The city manager shall be appointed without regard to their
political beliefs and need not be a resident of the city when appointed.
However, the city manager shall reside within the corporate city limits of the
city, or within the geographical boundaries of the Charleston Community Unit
School District 1, within six (6) months of appointment by the city council.
The city manager shall be appointed by the council for an indefinite term as
provided by law.
   B.   Bond: Before taking office, the city manager shall furnish a fidelity
bond in such amount as the council may determine, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the city manager’s duties with a corporation licensed to do
business in the state as surety. Such bond shall be filed with the clerk after
being approved by the council. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; amd.
Ord. 03-O-37, 12-16-2003; Ord. 2025-O-05, 2-18-2025)
1-6-2: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
Subject to the terms of his written contract, if any, the city manager may, at
any time, be removed from office by a majority vote of the members of the
council. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-3: POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY:
   A.   The city manager shall be the administrative head of the municipal
government and shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him by
statute and such other authority as may be granted by the council. He shall be
charged with the enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the city insofar
as their enforcement is within the powers of the city. (Ord. 2003-O-22, 5-6-
2003)
   B.   The city manager shall attend all meetings of the city council and all
meetings of the board of zoning appeals and planning. The city manager shall
attend such additional meetings as directed by the council. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-
17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; amd. 2006 Code)
   C.   The city manager shall keep the council informed as to the affairs of
the city, and shall recommend to the council such actions as may be necessary
or expedient for the welfare of the city. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-
1997)
1-6-4: HIRING AND DISCHARGING EMPLOYEES:
The city manager shall hire and discharge all employees (other than the city
clerk) authorized by council. All employees shall perform their duties subject
to the direction of the city manager or that of the superior to whom the city
manager may assign any such employee. Except, that the employees of the fire
and police departments shall be hired and discharged by the board of fire and
police commissioners as provided by statute. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-
6-1997; amd. 2006 Code)
1-6-5: OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS:
The city manager shall appoint and remove all directors and superintendents and
shall report all appointments and removals made by him to the mayor and the
council as soon after the appointment or removal as practicable. No
appointments shall be made on any basis other than that of merit and fitness,
and no removal shall be made except for cause. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff.
5-6-1997)
1-6-6: PURCHASING AGENT; PURCHASES:
   A.   Manager Serve As Purchasing Agent: The city manager shall be general
purchasing agent of the city, and except for specific provisions to the
contrary as made by law or by the council, he shall make all purchases of
supplies, materials, and equipment authorized by the council, in the manner
prescribed by and subject to the limitations imposed by law. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-
17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
   B.   Purchases: No purchases shall be made or obligations incurred except
upon authorization by the council. The city manager shall secure specific
authorization from the council prior to making any purchase in excess of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00). No expense shall be incurred except for the
purpose for which no prior appropriation is required by law, if the amount
thereof is not covered by an unexpended appropriation for the purpose. (Ord.
96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; amd. Ord. 97-O-27, 8-5-1997)
1-6-7: CONTRACTS:
The city manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be
a party and may sign on behalf of the city any contract authorized by the
council, except where the council directs or some other officer executes said
contract. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-8: APPROPRIATIONS AND LEVIES:
The city manager shall cause to be prepared for passage each year the annual
budget and the annual tax levy ordinance, and cause the same to be published
with the proper county officials as required by law. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996,
eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-9: ACCOUNTS:
The city manager shall cause to be kept current accounts showing at all times
the financial condition of the city, including the current and anticipated
expenses, appropriation cash on hand, and anticipated revenues for all
municipal funds and accounts; and he shall cause current accounts to be kept of
the amount appropriated and the amount spent for each appropriation. (Ord. 96-
O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-10: INVENTORY OF CITY PROPERTY; CUSTODIAN:
   A.   The city manager shall construct and maintain a current inventory
listing of all real and personal property of the city, its location and date of
purchase and original cost.
   B.   The city manager shall be responsible for the care and custody of all
city property, including equipment, buildings, parks and all other city
property, which is not by law assigned to some other office for care and
control. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-11: PUBLICATIONS:
The city manager shall see to the publication of all notices, ordinances, or
other documents required by law to be published; and prepare or cause to be
prepared all reports which the city or any of the officials thereof is required
by law to prepare. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-12: RECORD OF MAPS AND PLATS:
The city manager shall cause to be kept a complete set of maps and plats
showing the location of all city utilities and other city properties, all
streets and other public places and all lots or parcels of land subdivided
according to law. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-13: PREPARATION, CERTIFICATION OF RECORDS:
   A.   The city manager shall prepare and have custody of all city records
required by law to be kept by the city and not by a specific officer. Where the
law makes it the duty of a specific officer to keep or maintain records, the
city manager shall make available to such officer all necessary clerical
assistance for the preparation of such records and shall make available a place
for the custody of such records. The city manager shall make available to the
clerk, stenographic or clerical assistance necessary for the preparation of the
journal of council proceedings, the record of ordinances, and all other
documents which by law the clerk is required to keep. The city manager shall
perform similar service for the comptroller and in his maintenance of bond
registers, and all other records or documents which by law the comptroller is
required to keep or prepare. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; amd.
Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
   B.   Where the law requires or provides for certification of any documents
by an officer of the city, the city manager shall cause such records or
documents to be properly prepared and presented to each officer for signature.
(Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-14: EX OFFICIO COLLECTOR AND COMPTROLLER:
The city manager shall be ex officio city collector and city comptroller unless
such offices, or either of them, are duly filled by appointment. He shall
perform the duties of each such office in the absence of such appointment to
either of them. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-6-15: ACTING MANAGER:
In the event that the city manager shall be absent from the city or
incapacitated from performing the duties of their position, the council shall
appoint a deputy city manager who shall act during such incapacity. (Ord. 96-O-
64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-O-05, 2-18-2025)
1-6-16: DEPUTY CITY MANAGER:
   A.   Definition:
      DEPUTY CITY MANAGER: There is hereby created the office of the deputy
city manager, said office consisting of up to two (2) positions of deputy city
manager. The deputy city manager shall be appointed by the city manager with
the advice and consent of the mayor and city council.
   B.   In the absence of the city manager, a deputy manager shall act in the
City Manager’s behalf.
   C.   Deputy city manager(s) shall report to and assist the city manager, in
the performance of their responsibilities and shall perform such functions as
directed from time to time by the city manager. (Ord. 2023-O-3, 2-21-2023; amd.
Ord. 2025-O-05, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Appointment
1-7A-2: Reserved
1-7A-3: Deputy City Clerk
1-7A-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city clerk, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council, shall devote such time to the office as the duties of the office shall
require, subject to the direction of the city manager. The city clerk shall
superintend the work of the deputy clerk and any assistants furnished to the
office of the city clerk. (Ord. 2025-O-05, 2-18-2025)
1-7A-2: RESERVED:
1-7A-3: DEPUTY CITY CLERK:
The deputy city clerk shall be appointed by the city clerk, as provided by
statute. In the absence of the city clerk, the deputy clerk shall act in the
clerk’s behalf. The deputy city clerk shall serve as the legal assistant and
report to a deputy city manager, or their designee. The deputy city clerk
assists the city clerk and the city attorney. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff.
5-6-1997; amd. 2006 Code)
ARTICLE B. CITY COMPTROLLER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment
1-7B-2: Duties And Powers
1-7B-3: Serve As Treasurer
1-7B-4: Ex Officio Collector
1-7B-5: Bond
1-7B-6: Deputy Comptroller
1-7B-7: Senior Accountant
1-7B-8: Water Billing Supervisor 
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
The city comptroller shall be appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 03-O-38, 12-
16-2003; amd. Ord. 04-O-9, 2-17-2004; Ord. 2025-O-05, 2-18-2025)
1-7B-2: DUTIES AND POWERS:
The city comptroller shall further have the duties and powers expressly set in
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-35-100 through 5/3.1-35-115, inclusive.
(Ord. 2025-O-05, 2-18-2025)
1-7B-3: SERVE AS TREASURER:
The city comptroller shall act in all ways as the "city treasurer", as defined
by statute. The city comptroller shall be designated as the city treasurer and
shall be granted all authority and powers set forth by the Illinois Compiled
Statutes as the statutes relate to said duties and obligations. (Ord. 03-O-38,
12-16-2003)
1-7B-4: EX OFFICIO COLLECTOR:
The city comptroller shall serve as the ex officio collector. (Ord. 2025-O-05,
2-18-2025)
1-7B-5: BOND:
The bond of the comptroller is two hundred fifty thousand dollars
($250,000.00). (Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
1-7B-6: DEPUTY COMPTROLLER:
The deputy comptroller shall be appointed by the comptroller. In the absence of
the comptroller, the deputy comptroller shall act in the comptroller's behalf.
(Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
1-7B-7: SENIOR ACCOUNTANT:
The senior accountant shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at
the pleasure of the city manager. The senior accountant shall assist the
comptroller with finance related activities and report to the comptroller.
(Ord. 2025-O-05, 2-18-2025)
1-7B-8: WATER BILLING SUPERVISOR:
The water billing supervisor shall be appointed by the city manager and shall
serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The work is performed under the
general direction of the comptroller. (Ord. 2025-O-05, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Office Created And Appointment
1-7C-1: OFFICE CREATED AND APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of the city attorney. The city attorney
shall be a qualified elector of the city and shall be an attorney admitted to
the bar and licensed to practice law in the state. The city attorney shall be
appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; amd.
Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 8
CITY DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE A. POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Department Created
1-8A-2: Supervision
1-8A-3: Department Personnel
1-8A-4: Reserved
1-8A-5: Rules And Regulations
1-8A-6: Appointments And Promotions
1-8A-7: Vacancies
1-8A-8: Discharge After Hearing
1-8A-9: Police Pension Fund And Board
1-8A-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a police department, an executive department of the
city. The police chief and any of his or her subordinate employees shall be
assigned to the police department. The police department may consist of the
chief of police, two (2) deputy chiefs of police, five (5) lieutenants, four
(4) sergeants and twenty four (24) patrolman. (Ord. 90-O-15, 5-1-1990; amd.
Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; Ord. 05-O-17, 6-7-2005; Ord. 20-O-25,
8-4-2020; Ord. 21-O-20, 7-6-2021)
1-8A-2: SUPERVISION:
The city manager shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the
duties that are, or may be prescribed by law or this code. He shall have
supervision over the police department. (Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-
1997)
1-8A-3: DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
   A.   Chief Of Police: There is hereby created the office of the chief of
police. The chief shall be appointed by the city manager in accordance with the
statutes in such case made and provided by the provisions of this code, and he
shall be ex officio city marshal. Ord. 73-O-48, 12-4-1973; amd. Ord. 76-O-3, 1-
6-1976; Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997; Ord. 04-O-9, 2-17-2004; Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
   B.   Deputy Chief Of Police: There is hereby created the office of the
deputy chief of police, said office consisting of two (2) positions of deputy
chief of police. The deputy chief of police shall be appointed by the chief of
the police department 1 , subject to the consent of the city manager. The
deputy chief of police position shall be an exempt rank immediately below that
of the chief of police. The deputy chief may be appointed from any rank of
sworn, full time officers of the city, but must have at least five (5) years of
full time service as a police officer in the city police department. The deputy
chief shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and, if removed from
the position, shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to the
appointment to deputy chief of police. (Ord. 05-O-17, 6-7-2005)
   C.   Lieutenants Of Police: There is hereby created the office of lieutenant
of police. The lieutenants of police shall be appointed by the board of fire
and police commissioners and shall outrank sergeants and patrolmen.
   D.   Sergeants Of Police: There is hereby created the office of sergeant of
police. The sergeants of police shall be appointed by the board of fire and
police commissioners and shall outrank patrolmen. (Ord. 73-O-48, 12-4-1973)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 1-9-4B4b of this title.
1-8A-4: RESERVED:
1-8A-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police, by and with the consent of the city manager, shall make or
prescribe such rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the
members of the police department as he shall deem advisable, and such rules,
when approved by the council, shall be binding on such matters. (Ord. 73-O-48,
12-4-1973; amd. Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-8A-6: APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS:
   A.   Appointments to and promotions within the police department shall be
made by the board of fire and police commissioners. Resolutions requesting the
appointment of members or additional members of the police department shall be
duly adopted and recorded by the council, and a certified copy of said
resolution shall be delivered from the clerk to the board of fire and police
commissioners for appointment, or appointments of office or offices in
accordance with the statute in such case made and provided, when the finances
of the city will permit.
   B.   Upon written certification to the council by the board of fire and
police commissioners of the appointment of a member or members of the police
department, the council shall make the same a matter of public record. The
member or members so certified shall subscribe to an oath and give bond. The
mayor and clerk are authorized to issue a commission to said member or members
of said police department certifying his membership as a member of said
department. (Ord. 73-O-48, 12-4-1973)
1-8A-7: VACANCIES:
When a vacancy occurs in the police department due to death, retirement,
discharge, resignation or any other reason, the same shall be reported by the
city manager in writing to the council, chief of police or board of fire and
police commissioners, and shall be made a matter of public record by the
council. When the finances of the city will permit, the council may request
appointment of such member or members to fill said vacancy or vacancies by the
board of fire and police commissioners in the manner set forth in section
1-8A-6 of this article. (Ord. 73-O-48, 12-4-1973; amd. Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-
1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
1-8A-8: DISCHARGE AFTER HEARING:
No police officer shall be discharged from the department except after a
hearing before the board of fire and police commissioners. (Ord. 73-O-48, 12-4-
1973)
1-8A-9: POLICE PENSION FUND AND BOARD:
   A.   Pension Fund:
      1.   Fund Established: It is hereby provided for the setting apart,
formation and disbursement of a police pension fund, which is hereby declared
to be adopted and in full force and effect in the city. (Ord., 4-25-1951)
      2.   Financing Of Fund: The following monies and appropriations shall be
set apart and constitute the police pension fund:
         a.   The council shall annually hereafter levy a tax upon all the
taxable property at the rate on the dollar of all such taxable property which
will produce an amount, which when added to the deductions from the salaries or
wages of police officers and receipts available from all other sources as
hereinafter referred to, will equal a sufficient sum to meet the annual
requirements of the pension fund under the provisions of the police pension
fund, 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes. Such tax shall annually be an amount
determined by the pension authority of the state. This tax shall be levied and
collected in a like manner with general taxes of the city, and shall be in
addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon all
property within the city and shall be in addition to the amount authorized to
be levied for general purposes as provided by statute. In the event that the
pension fund in any year over and above the reserve fund is sufficient to meet
all demands of those requiring payment therefrom in such year, the council or
board of trustees may dispense with the levy of such tax. (Ord., 4-25-1951;
amd. 1991 Code; 2006 Code)
         b.   All rewards given or paid to members of the police force except
such as are accepted by the board of trustees of the police pension fund.
         c.   An amount determined by the pension authority of the state per
month which shall be deducted from the salary of each member of the police
department.
         d.   All such other monies as hereafter be required by statute to be
placed in the police pension fund. (Ord., 4-25-1951; amd. 1991 Code)
      3.   Funding Limitations: The aggregate amount of monies to be set apart
for the police pension fund from subsection A2 of this section shall not exceed
the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in any one year.
      4.   Gifts To Fund: The board of trustees may take by gift, devise or
bequest any money, real estate, and personal property, and such money, real
estate and personal property so obtained shall be paid into said pension fund
and treated as a part thereof. (Ord., 4-25-1951)
   B.   Board Of Trustees Of Fund: There is hereby created a board to be known
as the board of trustees of the police pension fund. This board shall consist
of five (5) members, residents of the city, and the city comptroller shall be
an ex officio member. Two (2) members of said board shall be appointed by the
mayor, and one of the said members so appointed shall serve for a period of one
year, beginning on the second Tuesday of May, and the other member so appointed
shall serve for a period of two (2) years beginning on the second Tuesday of
May. The successor to any of the foregoing trustees shall serve for a period of
two (2) years each, or until such time as their successors are appointed and
qualified. The third and fourth members of the board shall be elected from the
regular police force by the active members. The fifth member shall be elected
from the beneficiaries under the provisions of this article by such
beneficiaries. The members to be elected shall be elected by ballot for a term
of two (2) years, beginning on the second Tuesday of May after said election,
at a regular election, as aforesaid, and at which election all members of the
regular police force shall be entitled to vote for the police force members of
the board, and all beneficiaries of lawful age shall be entitled to vote for
the member chosen from among the beneficiaries. The election provided for in
this subsection shall be held biennially on the third Monday in April under the
Australian ballot system, at such place or places in the city and under such
regulations as shall be prescribed by the appointed members of the board;
provided, however, that no person entitled to vote, under the provisions of
this article, shall cast more than one ballot at any such election. In the
event of the death, resignation or inability to act of any member of said board
elected under the provisions of this subsection, the successor of such member
shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election, which shall be
called by said board and shall be conducted in the same manner as are the
annual elections provided for in this subsection. (Ord., 4-25-1951; amd. 1991
Code; Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
ARTICLE B. FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8B-1: Department Established
1-8B-2: Supervision
1-8B-3: Department Personnel
1-8B-4: Qualifications
1-8B-5: Appointments
1-8B-6: Officers Elected
1-8B-7: Authority And Duties Of Chief
1-8B-8: Authority Of Assistant Fire Chief
1-8B-9: Reserved
1-8B-10: Reserved
1-8B-11: Reserved
1-8B-12: Apparatus And Equipment; Fire Calls
1-8B-13: General Provisions
1-8B-14: Violations; Enforcement
1-8B-15: Firefighters' Pension Fund And Board
1-8B-16: Rapid Entry System Key Boxes
1-8B-17: Hazardous Materials; Cost And Penalties
1-8B-18: Firefighter Services Outside Corporate Limits
1-8B-19: Reimbursement For Specialized Rescue Services
1-8B-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established the Fire Department, an executive office of the
City, for the prevention and extinguishment of fire endangering life and
property within the limits of the city and beyond the city limits where
contractual fire protection agreements have been or may be made. The fire chief
and any of their subordinate employees shall be assigned to the Fire
Department. (Ord. 73-O-23, 7-17-1973; amd. Ord. 98-O-1, 1-20-1998; Ord. 2025-O-
5, 2-18-2025)
1-8B-2: SUPERVISION:
The City Manager shall have and exercise all the powers and perform all the
duties that are or may be prescribed by law or this Code. He shall have
supervision over the Fire Department and ambulance service 1 . (Ord. 98-O-1, 1-
20-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 4, chapter 1 of this Code for ambulance service.
1-8B-3: DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
The personnel of the Fire Department are established as follows:
   A.   The city council shall, from time to time, determine the number of
firefighters necessary for the effective operation of the Fire Department.
   B.   The Fire Department of the city shall consist of thirty-five (35)
members, namely: the fire chief of the department; one (1) assistant fire
chief; three (3) captains; six (6) lieutenants; and twenty-four (24)
firefighters. (Ord. 17-O-27, 8-1-2017; amd. Ord. 2022-O-8, 4-5-2022; Ord. 2025-
O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8B-4: QUALIFICATIONS:
Applicants for membership in the department shall satisfy the requirements as
established by the Fire and Police Commission, the department and applicable
statutes and codes. Fire Department members shall reside within the boundaries
specified by the current labor agreement. (Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013; amd. Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8B-5: APPOINTMENTS:
Appointments to the Fire Department shall be made as follows:
   A.   All officers and members of the department shall be appointed by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
   B.   The Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall be appointed by the City
Manager in accordance with current statutes. Qualifications shall be determined
by the City Manager. Throughout this Code, the Fire Marshal shall be known and
referred to as the Fire Chief. (Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
1-8B-6: OFFICERS ELECTED:
Officers of the Fire Department shall be made as follows:
   A.   The membership of the fire department, both paid and on call, may elect
a president, vice president and secretary; in addition, they shall elect a
treasurer to receive such monies as accrue to the department from the two
percent (2%) foreign insurance fund tax and such other sums as are, under state
law, legally payable to the department. The treasurer shall furnish bond for
the faithful performance of his duties, which shall be of a type agreeable to
and approved by the mayor.
   B.   These officers may be elected in any manner and for any term that the
membership shall, by majority vote, determine. These officers shall control all
social functions of the department and any monies received from social
functions. The monies from the foreign insurance fund tax and from the
operation of social functions shall be kept separate.
   C.   The social officers may recommend to the fire chief any matter for the
good and betterment of the department.
   D.   The duties of social officers shall not interfere with the duties of
regular fire officers of the department who are responsible for fire service
activity. (Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
1-8B-7: AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF CHIEF:
   A.   The fire chief shall be the ranking officer of the fire department. He
shall be responsible for and have control of all activities of the department,
including fire suppression, fire protection, fire prevention, ambulance service
and rescue service. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8B-8: AUTHORITY OF ASSISTANT FIRE CHIEF:
The assistant fire chief shall rank below the fire chief in authority and shall
act on their behalf in their absence. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8B-9: RESERVED:
1-8B-10: RESERVED:
1-8B-11: RESERVED:
1-8B-12: APPARATUS AND EQUIPMENT; FIRE CALLS:
The council shall determine, with the advice and counsel of the fire chief, the
amount, type and size of all fire apparatus and equipment comprising the fire
department and shall purchase, repair or replace any and all fire apparatus,
equipment and accessories they deem necessary as provided by state law. In
addition:
   A.   The council shall designate and provide safe and convenient housing for
all fire apparatus and equipment.
   B.   The council shall establish suitable arrangements for notifying all
members of the department of alarms of fire, and it is incumbent upon members
to arrange for forwarding alarms to themselves when they are called away from
home or their place of business.
   C.   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment of the city for any
private purpose; nor shall said apparatus or equipment be used by any other
department of the city without express permission from the fire chief; nor
shall any person wilfully and without proper authority take away or conceal any
article used in any way by the fire department.
   D.   Calls for fire aid from neighboring communities necessitating any
response of fire apparatus or manpower of the department must have the consent
of the mayor or the fire chief or, in case neither can be contacted, the next
subordinate officer of the department, before response may be made beyond the
department's jurisdiction.
   E.   The mayor is hereby authorized, with the approval of the council, to
enter into agreements with contiguous fire protection districts, properly
formed under state law, and adjacent municipalities; provided, such agreements
shall specify that the officer in charge of the fire department shall have the
authority to refuse response to such calls if, in his judgment, the absence of
fire apparatus would unduly endanger the protection of the city. (Ord. 13-O-15,
6-18-2013)
1-8B-13: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
The following general provisions shall apply to the operation of the fire
department:
   A.   Badge: The city shall furnish every member of the department with a
badge designating his rank in the department.
   B.   Right Of Way Of Vehicles: City fire apparatus shall have the right of
way over all other vehicular and pedestrian traffic only when responding to an
alarm of fire or other emergency call. Fire apparatus may, at that time,
properly disregard traffic control signs and signals; provided, due precaution
is taken by reducing speed, by continuously operating sirens and signal lights,
and using all other safety precautions. When returning to the station after a
fire response, all traffic signs and signals shall be obeyed.
   C.   Driving Over Fire Hose: No person shall drive any vehicle over hose
laid at a fire where the hose is in use, except by permission of the fire
officer in charge.
   D.   Parking Near Facilities; Following Apparatus: No person shall park any
vehicle or cause any obstruction within fifteen feet (15') of the driveway
entrance to any fire station, or within ten feet (10') of any fire hydrant, nor
shall the driver of any vehicle, except cars of members of the fire department,
follow within three hundred feet (300') of any fire apparatus responding to an
alarm of fire, nor park within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped
at a fire.
   E.   Interference With, Refusal To Aid Fire Department Personnel: No person
shall interfere with a firefighter in the performance of his duty, nor shall
said person refuse or neglect to furnish any member of the fire department any
help or information he may possess as to the cause or origin of any fire, or
hinder any fire investigation in any manner.
   F.   False Alarms: No person shall turn in, or cause to be turned in, any
false alarm of fire. (Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
1-8B-14: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the general penalty provided by
this code. In addition:
   A.   All members of the fire department are hereby given the necessary
police powers for enforcing this article applying at the scene of a fire.
   B.   Any member of the department violating the rules and regulations of the
department or who is guilty of the charges preferred against him before the
fire and police commission may be fined, suspended for a specified time without
pay, or discharged from the department as the commission shall determine and
direct. (Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
1-8B-15: FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION FUND AND BOARD:
   A.   Pension Fund:
      1.   Fund Created: There is hereby created a firefighters' pension fund
which is hereby declared to be adopted and in full force and effect in the
city.
      2.   Financing Fund: The following monies and appropriations shall be set
apart and constitute the firefighters' pension fund: (Ord., 4-25-1951; amd.
Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
         a.   An amount determined by the pension authority of the state
deducted from the salaries of the active firefighters. (1991 Code; amd. Ord.
13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
         b.   All rewards given or paid to members of the fire department.
         c.   The council shall annually hereafter levy a tax upon all the
taxable property at the rate on the dollar on all such taxable property which
will produce an amount which, when added to the deductions of the salaries and
wages of firefighters and receipts available from all other sources as
hereinafter referred to, will equal a sufficient sum to meet the annual
requirements of the pension fund under the provisions of this article. Such tax
shall be levied and collected in a like manner with general taxes, and shall be
in addition to all other taxes now or hereafter authorized to be levied upon
all property and shall be in addition to the amount authorized to be levied for
general purposes as provided by state law, provided, the council may dispense
with the levy of such tax if the pension fund, over and above the reserve fund,
is sufficient to meet all demands of those requiring payment from the pension
fund.
      3.   Gifts To Fund: The board of trustees may take, by gift, devise or
bequest, any money, real estate and personal property, and such money, real
estate and personal property so obtained shall be paid into said pension fund
and treated as a part thereof. (Ord., 4-25-1951; amd. Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
   B.   Board Of Trustees Of Fund:
      1.   Board Created; Composition: There is hereby created a board of
trustees of the firefighters' pension fund which shall consist of the following
members:
         a.   Two (2) members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor;
         b.   Two (2) active participants of the pension fund who are elected
from the active participants of the fund; and
         c.   One retired person retired under the firemen's pension fund act
of 1919 who is elected from persons retired under the firemen's pension fund
act.
         d.   For the purposes of this section, a firefighter receiving a
disability pension shall be considered a retired firefighter. In the event that
there are no retired firefighters under the fund or if none is willing to serve
on the board, then an additional active firefighter shall be elected to the
board in lieu of the retired firefighter that would otherwise be elected.
         e.   Each member of the board so elected shall hold office for a term
of three (3) years and until his or her successor has been duly elected and
qualified. The board shall canvass the ballots and declare which persons have
been elected and for what term or terms respectively. In case of a tie vote
between two (2) or more candidates, the board shall determine by lot which
candidate or candidates have been elected and for what term or terms
respectively.
         f.   In the event of the failure, resignation, or inability to act of
any board member, a successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a
special election called by the board and conducted in the same manner as a
regular election.
         g.   The board shall elect annually from its members a president and
secretary.
         h.   Board members shall not receive or have any right to receive any
salary from a pension fund for services performed as board members.
      2.   Duties: The powers and duties of the board of trustees shall be in
accordance with the provisions of state statute governing the same. (Ord. 07-O-
57, 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
1-8B-16: RAPID ENTRY SYSTEM KEY BOXES:
   A.   Required:
      1.   The owner or person in control of the following types of buildings
shall install and maintain a fire department rapid entry key lock box of a type
approved by the fire chief:
         a.   A structure which contains a fire alarm that uses an automatic
dialer or contains an automatic fire suppression system.
         b.   Multi-family residential structures, with four (4) or more units,
including senior apartment/condo complexes that have restricted access to the
living units.
         c.   Commercial and industrial buildings identified by fire officials
as difficult to access during emergencies.
Note: Any building or structure having on site twenty four (24) hour security
personnel may be exempt from the requirement of this section at the discretion
of the fire department.
      2.   Persons or entities who own existing buildings or structures which
are subject to the requirements of this section shall have two (2) years from
the effective date hereof to comply with the requirements. Persons or entities
who construct buildings or structures which would be subject to the
requirements of this section shall comply with the requirements at the time of
construction.
   B.   Keys Required And Installation: The owner or person in control of
buildings or facilities described in subsection A of this section required to
have a fire department rapid entry key lock box shall cause to be placed in
such lock box a key to the following areas:
      1.   The owner is responsible for ordering and installing the knox box.
      2.   The fire chief shall designate the type of key lock system to be
implemented.
      3.   The lock box shall be installed on the front of the building near
the main entry door, on the right hand side, between six (6) and eight feet
(8') above the ground, unless approved at a higher or lower level, by the
building department or fire department. The fire department may wish to locate
in an alternate site in some cases. The owner should contact the fire
department prior to mounting the knox box to ensure proper location.
      4.   The lock box shall contain the key(s) for the exterior doors, the
keys for all interior doors within the building which control access to shared
systems (HVAC, alarm panels, sprinkler controls and electrical panels). The
keys should be labeled and easily identified.
   C.   Access To Fire Department Rapid Entry Key Lock Box: The owner or person
in control of any building or facility described in subsection A of this
section required to have a fire department rapid entry key lock box shall be
present, himself or through his agent, during access to such lock box by the
fire department except when the fire department has responded to an emergency
at the property.
   D.   Rules And Regulations: The fire chief may establish rules and
regulations for the placement and maintenance of fire department rapid entry
key lock boxes within the city, including, but not limited to, the
specification of approved types of fire department rapid entry key lock boxes.
   E.   Update Of Keys And Information: The owner or person in control of any
building or facility described in subsection A of this section required to have
a fire department rapid entry key lock box shall provide keys capable of access
from such lock box at all times to the fire department.
   F.   Limitation Of Liability: The city assumes no liability for any of the
following:
      1.   Any defects in the operation of the fire department rapid entry key
lock box, of any of the keys contained within such lock box or any information
stored within the lock box or otherwise provided to the city;
      2.   The failure or neglect of any owner or person in control of a
building or facility required to have a fire department rapid entry key lock
box to provide access to the lock box; or
      3.   The security of any property required to have a fire department
rapid entry key lockbox due to access to the lockbox by any person. (Ord. 09-O-
1, 1-20-2009; amd. Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
1-8B-17: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS; COST AND PENALTIES:
Any person responsible for or liable for any remedial action, removal, release
or threatened release of hazardous material shall reimburse the city of
Charleston for costs and charges incurred in connection with any such remedial
action, removal, release or threatened release of hazardous material emergency
action for removal, remedial action within sixty (60) days after such action is
rendered by the city of Charleston or any other agency rendering mutual aid.
Minimum charges for such remedial action, removal, release or threatened
release of hazardous material shall be as follows:
   A.   The reasonable cost of each vehicle responding as determined by the
responding agency, but in no case less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
hour per vehicle; and
   B.   The cost of all personnel, including any overtime cost to the city of
Charleston or to any responding agency incurred as a result of remedial action,
removal, release or threatened release of hazardous material, or any mitigation
or containment operations; and
   C.   The cost of all materials and equipment used, expended, depleted,
destroyed or removed from service in accordance with federal, state or local
law, regulations or ordinances as a result of the remedial action, removal,
release or threatened release of hazardous material, or any mitigation or
containment operations.
Any person liable for the release or threatened release of a hazardous material
who fails without sufficient cause to pay for or provide removal or remedial
action upon or in accordance with a notice and request of the city of
Charleston, or in accordance with any order of any court having jurisdiction on
the matter, shall be liable to the city of Charleston for any cost incurred by
the city of Charleston as a result of such failure to provide or take such
removal or remedial action, together with the cost of any removal or remedial
action taken by the city of Charleston in accordance with this section, and for
any and all attorney fees and related costs incurred in connection therewith.
In addition, any such person who negligently violates this section shall be
fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each day on which a violation occurs or
continues to occur. (Ord. 10-O-1, 2-16-2010; amd. Ord. 13-O-15, 6-18-2013)
1-8B-18: FIREFIGHTER SERVICES OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS:
Any persons, businesses, and other entities that are not residents of the city
of Charleston or whose property is located outside of the corporate limits are
liable to the city for any firefighting service fees rendered to them or their
property in an amount not exceeding the actual cost of the service for all
firefighting services rendered by the city of Charleston. Such persons,
businesses and other entities shall reimburse the city of Charleston for costs
and charges incurred in connection with any such firefighting services within
sixty (60) days of being invoiced for same. The base rates applicable to all
calls for firefighter services to nonresidents of the city and those properties
located outside of the corporate limits may not exceed the reasonable cost of
providing those services and may not, in any event, exceed two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) per hour per vehicle, plus seventy dollars ($70.00) per hour
per firefighter. The time shall be computed from initial alarm through to
return to station or other formal clearance of the call. No charge shall be
made for services for which the total charge would be less than fifty dollars
($50.00).
An additional charge may be levied to reimburse the city of Charleston for
extraordinary expenses of materials used in rendering the services. Nothing in
this section shall impact any agreement entered into by the city of Charleston
and persons, businesses, and other entities that are nonresidents of the
municipality. This section shall not impact services rendered through mutual
aid, which shall be determined by the fire chief. Nonresidents will be charged
at the discretion of the fire chief. Nothing in this section shall require the
city of Charleston to supply any firefighting services to property located
outside the corporate limits of the municipality. (Ord. 16-O-22, 6-7-2016)
1-8B-19: REIMBURSEMENT FOR SPECIALIZED RESCUE SERVICES:
Any person responsible for or liable for any specialized rescue services
provided by the city of Charleston fire department shall reimburse the city of
Charleston for reasonable costs and charges incurred in connection with any
such specialized rescue services within sixty (60) days after such action is
rendered by the city of Charleston or any other agency rendering mutual aid.
The total amount collected may not exceed the reasonable cost of providing
those specialized rescue services and may not, in any event, exceed one hundred
twenty five dollars ($125.00) per hour per vehicle and thirty five dollars
($35.00) per hour per firefighter. The fee may be charged to any of the
following parties:
   A.   The owner of the property on which the specialized rescue services
occurred;
   B.   Any person involved in an activity that caused or contributed to the
emergency;
   C.   An individual who is rescued during the emergency and his or her
employer if the person was acting in furtherance of the employer's interests;
   D.   In cases involving the recovery of property, any person having control
or custody of the property at the time of the emergency.
For the purposes of this section, the term "specialized rescue services"
includes, but is not limited to, structural collapse, tactical rescue, high
angle rescue, underwater rescue and recovery, confined space rescue, below
grade rescue, and trench rescue. (Ord. 16-O-22, 6-7-2016)
ARTICLE C. ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8C-1: Division Of Accounts And Finances
1-8C-1: DIVISION OF ACCOUNTS AND FINANCES:
   A.   Supervisor: The city manager shall be the supervisor of the division of
accounts and finances and shall have supervision over all accounts and
financial matters of the city; all records relating to accounts and finances;
the auditing of all accounts and records; the inspection of all accounts and
records in any office or division of the city; the timely preparation of
reports on budgets and all bills, accounts, payrolls, demands, claims or
failure to pay; the collection of all claims, demands license fees, inspection
forfeitures, rentals or money due or payable to the city except as otherwise
provided by law; the development of the community and any other related grants
or plans; economic development or redevelopment; and the provisions of bonds by
city employees. (Ord. 98-O-1, 1-20-1998)
   B.   Officers And Employees: The city clerk, city comptroller and any of
their subordinate employees shall be assigned to the division of accounts and
finance. (Ord. 98-O-1, 1-20-1998; amd. Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
ARTICLE D. DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
SECTION:
1-8D-1: Department Created
1-8D-2: Community Development Director
1-8D-3: City Planner
1-8D-3-1: Assistant Planner
1-8D-3-2: GIS Coordinator
1-8D-4: Compliance Inspector
1-8D-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the Community Development Department, an executive
office of the city, and the positions of community development director, city
planner, assistant planner, GIS coordinator, building code official, plumbing
inspector, electrical inspector, and compliance inspector.
   A.   Division Of Building And Development Services: The community
development director, or their designee is the supervisor of the division of
building and development services and shall have supervision over the building,
zoning, property maintenance, inspections, grant administration, TIF district
administration, and the city revolving loan funds, and shall be responsible for
planning and for the maintenance, modifications and alterations of the city
plan as adopted by the city council and shall further maintain the status of
action items in other planning and economic development projects. The community
development director, or their designee shall be the supervisor and control the
utilization of the upper and lower reservoirs and the island tract subdivision.
(Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8D-2: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
The community development director shall be appointed by the city manager and
shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The community development
director is considered a department director with the responsibility of
directing the activities of a department within the city. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-
2025)
1-8D-3: CITY PLANNER:
The city planner shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at the
pleasure of the city manager. The city planner shall report to and assist the
community development director. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8D-3-1:   ASSISTANT PLANNER:
The assistant planner shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at
the pleasure of the city manager. The assistant planner shall report to the
city planner. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8D-3-2:   GIS COORDINATOR:
There is hereby appointed the position of GIS coordinator within the community
development department. The GIS coordinator shall be appointed by the city
manager and shall report to the community development director or their
designee. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8D-4: BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL:
The building code official shall be appointed by the city manager and shall
serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The building code official shall
report to and assist the community development director. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-
2025)
ARTICLE E. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-8E-1: Department Created
1-8E-2: Director Of Public Works
1-8E-3: Assistant Director Of Public Works
1-8E-4: Public Works Operations Engineer
1-8E-5: Engineering Technician
1-8E-6: Waste Water Treatment Superintendent
1-8E-7: Water Treatment Superintendent
1-8E-8: Superintendent Of Parks And Facilities Maintenance
1-8E-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the Department of Public Works, an executive office of
the city, and the position of director of public works, assistant director of
public works, public works operation engineering, engineering technician, waste
water treatment superintendent, water treatment plant superintendent and
superintendent of parks and facilities maintenance.
   A.   Division Of Streets And Fleet Management: The director of public works
shall be the supervisor of the division of streets and fleet management and
shall have supervision over maintenance and improvements of the public streets
and alleys, including parking lots, traffic control, pavement, curbs and
gutters, sidewalks and bridges, except when repairs are paid by special
assessment; any public improvements funded in whole or in part out of money
received from the state as a share of the Motor Fuel Tax; and the management
and maintenance of all city vehicles and equipment. The public works operations
engineer, and any subordinate employees shall be assigned to the division of
streets and fleet management.
   B.   Division Of Public Health And Safety: The director of public works
shall be the supervisor of the division of public health and safety and shall
have supervision over the operation, maintenance and improvement of the public
water supply and wastewater facilities, including the water treatment plant,
water storage facilities, water distribution system, the wastewater treatment
plant, sanitary sewer system, storm sewer systems, drainage facilities, the
upper reservoir with regard to water quality control and maintenance and the
enforcement of laws and ordinances as they relate to the treatment of water or
wastewater. The superintendent of the water treatment plant, the superintendent
of the wastewater treatment plant, the public works operations engineer, and
any of their subordinate employees shall be assigned to the division of public
health and safety. (Ord. 98-O-1, 1-20-1998; amd. Ord. 00-O-38, 8-15-2000; Ord.
17-O-26, 7-5-2017; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8E-2: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: 
There is hereby created the office of director of public works, an executive
office of the city. The director of public works shall be appointed and serve
at the pleasure and discretion of the city manager. The purpose of this
position is to lead and oversee the activities and operations of a full-service
public works department including; streets, utility, water, waste water, and
engineering. The director of public works reports to the city manager and shall
serve at the pleasure of the city manager. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8E-3: ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The assistant director of public works shall be appointed by the city manager
and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The assistant director of
public works shall report to assist the director of public works. (Ord. 2025-O-
5, 2-18-2025)
1-8E-4: PUBLIC WORKS OPERATIONS ENGINEER:
The public works operations engineer shall be appointed by the city manager and
shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The public works operations
engineer shall report to and assist public works director, or their designee.
(Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8E-5: ENGINEERING TECHNICIAN:
The engineering technician shall be appointed by the city manager and shall
serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The engineering technician shall
report to and assist the director of public works, or their designee. (Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8E-6: WASTE WATER TREATMENT SUPERINTENDENT:
The waste water treatment superintendent shall be appointed by the city manager
and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The waste water treatment
superintendent shall report to the director of public works, or their designee.
(Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8E-7: WATER TREATMENT SUPERINTENDENT:
The water treatment superintendent shall be appointed by the city manager and
shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The water treatment
superintendent shall report to the director of public works, or their designee.
(Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8E-8: SUPERINTENDENT OF PARKS AND FACILITIES MAINTENANCE: 
The superintendent of parks and facilities maintenance shall be appointed by
the city manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The
superintendent of parks and facilities maintenance shall report to the director
of public works, or their designee, and assist the director of parks and
recreation. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE F. WATER DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8F-1: Department Established
1-8F-2: Policies
1-8F-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
A department of the City government is hereby established to be called Water
Department. (Ord. 89-O-1, 1-17-1989; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8F-2: POLICIES:
   A.   The Water Department of the City is hereby authorized and enabled to
promulgate and maintain Water Department policies, subject to the approval of
the City Manager. Said policies shall be created for the purpose of the
efficient operation of the Water Department. The Water Department shall be
prohibited from instituting any rule or policy which creates a cost to the
customer without the express consent of the City Council.
   B.   The Comptroller shall maintain the rules and policies of the Water
Department for the City. (Ord. 06-O-18, 4-18-2006; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
ARTICLE G. DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION
SECTION:
1-8G-1: Department Created
1-8G-2: Director Of Parks And Recreation
1-8G-3: Recreation Business Manager
1-8G-4: Recreation Athletic Supervisor
1-8G-5: Recreation Supervisor
1-8G-6: Special Events And Tourism Supervisor
1-8G-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the Department of Parks and Recreation, an executive
office of the city, and the position of director of parks and recreation,
recreation business manager, recreation athletic supervisor, recreation
supervisor and special events and tourism supervisor.
   A.   Division Of Recreation And Programs: The director of parks and
recreation shall be the supervisor of the division of recreation and programs
and shall have the supervision over recreation programs and activities.
Officers And Employees: The recreation supervisor and any subordinate employees
shall be assigned to the division of recreation and programs.
   B.   Division Of Parks And Maintenance: The director of public works shall
be the supervisor of the division of parks and maintenance and shall have
supervision over the maintenance and improvements of the public parks,
greenways, bike/pedestrian trails, landscaped rights-of-way and public
buildings. Officers And Employees: The superintendent of parks and facilities
maintenance, parks foreman and any subordinate employees shall be assigned to
the division of parks and maintenance and they shall assist the director of
public works, or their designee, and the director of parks and recreation.
   C.   Division Of Athletics And Facilities: The director of parks and
recreation shall be the supervisor of the division of athletics and facilities
and shall have supervision over athletic programs and activities. Officers And
Employees: The recreation athletic supervisor and any subordinate employees
shall be assigned to the division of athletics and facilities. (Ord. 2025-O-5,
2-18-2025)
1-8G-2: DIRECTOR OF PARKS AND RECREATION:
There is hereby created the office of director of parks and recreation, an
executive office of the city. The parks and recreation director shall be
appointed and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. (Ord. 2025-O-5,
2-18-2025)
1-8G-3: RECREATION BUSINESS MANAGER:
The recreation business manager shall be appointed by the city manager and
shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The recreation business
manager shall report to the director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 2025-O-5,
2-18-2025)
1-8G-4: RECREATION ATHLETIC SUPERVISOR:
The recreation athletic supervisor shall be appointed by the city manager and
serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The recreation athletic supervisor
shall report to the director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-
2025)
1-8G-5: RECREATION SUPERVISOR:
The recreation supervisor shall be appointed by the city manager and serve at
the pleasure of the city manager. The recreation supervisor shall report to the
director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8G-6: SPECIAL EVENTS AND TOURISM SUPERVISOR:
The special events and tourism supervisor shall be appointed by the city
manager and serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The special events and
tourism supervisor shall report to the director of parks and recreation. (Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE H. ADMINISTRATIVE CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-8H-1: Purpose
1-8H-2: Definitions
1-8H-3: Nonexclusivity
1-8H-4: Code Hearing Department; Establishment; Jurisdiction
1-8H-5: Code Hearing Department; Organization
1-8H-6: Compensation Of Code Hearing Department Personnel
1-8H-7: Commencement Of Hearings
1-8H-8: Hearing Procedures
1-8H-9: Enforcement Of Judgment
1-8H-10: Alternative Enforcement Of Judgment
1-8H-11: Motor Vehicle Violations; Citations
1-8H-12: Determination Of Liability; Motor Vehicle Citations
1-8H-13: Lessor Of Vehicle; Liability
1-8H-14: Immobilization Program
1-8H-15: Driver's License Suspension
1-8H-16: Building Code Violations
1-8H-17: Penalties
1-8H-18: Settlement Of Violations
1-8H-19: Severability
1-8H-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide for a fair and efficient system of
enforcement of City ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through the administrative adjudication of violations of such City
ordinances and by establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority
and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-
7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the words described below shall have the
meanings ascribed to them herein unless the context in which such terms are
used requires otherwise.
BUILDING CODE: Any City ordinance, law, Housing or Building Code or zoning
ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire
prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable
to structures within the geographical limits of the City of Charleston or any
City ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal
of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the
abatement of nuisances from private property.
CITY OFFICIAL: All full time police officers as well as any other officer,
agent, or employee of the City of Charleston authorized to enforce the City
Code.
CODE: Any City ordinance, law, rule, regulation or code, except such ordinances
for which the potential penalty described therein includes a period of
incarceration, any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense
that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and any
reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
COMPLAINT: A formal written accusation against a person or entity such as a
ticket or notice of violation for a violation of the City Code.
DEFAULT: A failure to appear for a scheduled hearing or legal proceeding.
EMERGENCY SITUATIONS: Those situations that reasonably constitute threats to
the public interests, safety or welfare.
HEARING OFFICER: A person appointed by the Mayor with the advice of, and
consent of, the City Council to preside over administrative hearings, as set
forth in this article.
NONEMERGENCY SITUATION: Any situation that does not reasonably constitute a
threat to the public interests, safety or welfare.
OWNER: A. For the purpose of a violation relating to real property, the person
to whom the County Collector sent the last ascertainable tax bill; and
   B.   For the purpose of a violation relating to motor vehicles, the person
to whom the motor vehicle is registered, as provided by the records of the
Secretary of State of Illinois. Any person so described herein may present
clear and convincing evidence to overcome the presumption that such person is
the owner of the property and/or motor vehicle for which the person received a
notice of violation.
PETITIONER: The person or entity making a City Code violation allegation
initiating the administrative adjudication hearing process.
PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE: The bare minimum of evidence needed to bring a case
before a hearing officer.
RESPONDENT: A person or entity who is accused of a violation. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-
7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-3: NONEXCLUSIVITY:
The provisions of this article shall not preclude the City from using other
methods or proceedings to enforce the City Code, including, but not limited to,
the institution of any action in the Circuit Court of Coles County, Illinois,
or any administrative proceeding. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26,
7-5-2017)
1-8H-4: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; ESTABLISHMENT; JURISDICTION:
   A.   65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-1 et seq., "Code Hearing
Departments", 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., "Building Code Violations" and 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 "Administrative Adjudication of Violations of
Traffic Regulations Concerning the Standing, Parking or Condition of Vehicles",
as from time to time amended, are hereby adopted in their entirety and any
person charged with the violation of a Municipal ordinance may be prosecuted
under and in accordance with the provisions herein.
   B.   There is hereby established a Code Hearing Department as an independent
agency of the City, which is authorized to provide for and operate a system of
administrative adjudication, as more fully described herein, which shall have
jurisdiction over the adjudication and enforcement of any violation of the City
Code, including, but not limited to, parking and vehicle registration
violations, Housing, Building and Zoning Code violations, and engineering and
health safety violations, but excluding ordinances for which the potential
penalty described therein includes a period of incarceration, any offense under
the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic regulation
governing the movement of vehicles, and any reportable offense under section 6-
204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26,
7-5-2017)
1-8H-5: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT; ORGANIZATION:
The Code Hearing Department shall be comprised of a Hearing Officer, a Code
Administrator, any designated member of law enforcement, and any other duly
appointed person or persons deemed necessary for the efficient administration
of the Code Hearing Department, with the following powers and authority:
   A.   Hearing Officer: All adjudicatory hearings shall be presided over by a
Hearing Officer.
      1.   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication hearings, the
Hearing Officer shall have successfully completed a formal training program
which includes the following:
         a.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
adjudication hearings that they will conduct and preside over;
         b.   Orientation to each subject area of the Code for which they may
adjudicate a violation;
         c.   Observation of administrative adjudication hearings; and
         d.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
In addition a Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State of Illinois for at least three (3) years. A Hearing Officer may not
be an inspector or law enforcement officer employed by the City.
      2.   Hearing Officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to:
         a.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of an ordinance violation;
         b.   Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony or tangible items at an administrative adjudication hearing, upon the
request of the parties or their representatives;
         c.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the administrative
adjudication hearings, including all exhibits and evidence introduced at the
hearing;
         d.   Issue a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
administrative adjudication hearing, of whether a Code violation occurred or
exists. The Hearing Officer's determination shall be in writing and shall
include written findings of fact and law, a decision, and an order including
the fine, penalty or other action with which the respondent must comply. The
findings, decision and order must allow a reviewing court to determine whether
the decision of the Hearing Officer was arbitrary and capricious; and
         e.   Impose penalties consistent with the applicable Code provisions
and assess costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation. The
Hearing Officer shall have the authority to increase or decrease the fines set
forth in the Code where evidence of aggravating or mitigating circumstances is
presented. In no event shall the Hearing Officer have authority to: 1) impose a
penalty of incarceration, or 2) impose a fine in excess of seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). The maximum monetary fine under this subsection A2e shall be
exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs incurred by the City to secure
compliance with the Code and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the
collection of any tax imposed and collected by the City.
   B.   Code Administrator: The Code Administrator shall either be an employee
of the City appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council, or an independent contractor or agency contracted by the City to
perform such duties as enumerated herein. The Code Administrator is hereby
authorized, empowered and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of all
Code violations as may be permitted by law and directed by ordinance;
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required under
this article or as may reasonably be required to carry out the purpose of this
article;
      3.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of liability or to coordinate with the Finance Department for
such purpose;
      4.   Certify copies of final determinations of all Code violations
adjudicated pursuant to this article, and any factual reports verifying the
final determination of any violation which were issued in accordance with this
article or the laws of the State of Illinois, including 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3 (standing, parking or conditions of vehicles) as from time
to time amended;
      5.   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
article and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5 (failure to pay
fines - suspension);
      6.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably necessary for the
efficient operation and maintenance of the system of administrative
adjudication hereby established; and
      7.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection
agencies that may be retained by the City or by requesting the City Attorney to
act on behalf of the City in filing complaints in the Coles County Circuit
Court, seeking judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuing all
postjudgment remedies available under current law.
   C.   Automation: The Code Administrator is hereby further authorized,
empowered and directed to operate and maintain a computer program for the
system of administrative adjudication hereby established, on a day to day
basis, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Inputting of violation notice information;
      2.   Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;
      3.   Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;
      4.   Issuing payment receipts;
      5.   Issuing succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final
determinations of liability, issuing notices of impending immobilization,
issuing notices of impoundment, and issuing notices of impending driver's
license suspension as may be required, in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle
Code. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude the Code Administrator
from including one (1) or more of the above notices in the same notice report;
and
      6.   Keeping accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative adjudication hearing, pleas entered and fines and other
penalties assessed and paid.
   D.   Security: The City may choose to provide security for administrative
adjudication hearings, in order to maintain hearing room decorum and perform
such other duties or acts as may be reasonably required and as directed by the
Hearing Officer or the Code Administrator. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord.
17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-6: COMPENSATION OF CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL:
Authorization for compensation for each of the positions stated in section
1-8H-5 of this article shall be made by the City Council through the annual
budget or appropriation process. Compensation shall be determined by the City
Council within approved budget or appropriation limitations. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-
7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-7: COMMENCEMENT OF HEARINGS:
   A.   Institution Of A Hearing: A proceeding before a Hearing Officer shall
be instituted upon the filing with the Code Administrator of a written sworn
pleading, violation notice, complaint or citation by any authorized official of
the City, including law enforcement officers, Code Enforcement Officers, and
such other employees as authorized.
In the event a complaint causing the initiation of a hearing is filed by a
tenant or occupant of a dwelling who is not also the owner thereof, no action
for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or other
similar proceeding, whether it be civil or criminal, shall be threatened or
instituted against such tenant or occupant solely because such tenant or
occupant files such complaint or agrees to testify or present tangible evidence
at an administrative adjudication hearing. The foregoing sentence shall not
apply if the owner proves by a preponderance of the evidence that such tenant
or occupant is the proximate cause of the violation for which the hearing is
commenced.
   B.   Service Of Notice Of Hearing: Respondents shall be served with a copy
of the written sworn pleading, violation notice, complaint or citation along
with a notice of hearing in a manner reasonably calculated to give them actual
notice of the proceeding instituted against them, by one (1) of the following
means:
      1.   Personal service upon a party or its authorized agent;
      2.   Service by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's
last known address;
      3.   Service by first class mail, postage prepaid, at the party's last
known address; or
      4.   If the party's last known address cannot be ascertained after a
diligent search, by posting a copy of the sworn pleading, complaint or citation
in a conspicuous place upon the property or motor vehicle where the violation
is found when the party is the owner of the property or motor vehicle; and
      5.   Any notice presented by first class or certified mail, or by
posting, shall be deemed served three (3) days after the deposit of such notice
in the U.S. mail or the posting of such notice.
   C.   Contents Of Notice Of Hearing: Notices of hearing shall include:
      1.   The name and address of the party alleged to have violated the
ordinance, if known;
      2.   The date, time and place of the violation;
      3.   The type and nature of the ordinance violation to be adjudicated,
including a reference to the appropriate section of the Code, and the potential
fines which may result from a finding of liability. And, with respect to Code
violations related to the standing, parking or condition of a vehicle, a
summary of the information contained on the citation as set forth in subsection
1-8H-11B of this article;
      4.   Vehicle make and state registration number;
      5.   With respect to Code violations related to the standing, parking or
condition of a vehicle, the means by which the respondent may waive the right
to a hearing and pay the applicable fine for the alleged violation, and that
payment of the indicated fine, and of any applicable penalty for late payment,
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation;
      6.   A section entitled, "Notice of Hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation may appear at
an administrative adjudicatory hearing to contest the validity of the violation
notice on the date and at the time and place as specified in the notice of
hearing;
      7.   The date, time and location of the administrative adjudicatory
hearing, if applicable, which hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30)
nor more than forty (40) days after the date of the complaint in nonemergency
situations. In emergency situations the hearing date shall not be less than
three (3) nor more than seven (7) days after the date of the complaint;
      8.   The fine and penalty for the violation of the ordinance, if
applicable, the administrative hearing fee, and the fine and any penalty which
may be assessed for late payment;
      9.   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to
be held;
      10.   Statement that the penalties for a failure to appear at the hearing
will result in a default judgment being entered against the respondent and a
final determination of liability for the cited violation and penalties
indicated as well as costs of the administrative hearing as provided for;
      11.   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the City with the judgment being
enforceable at the Circuit Court. In addition, a statement with respect to Code
violations related to the standing, parking or condition of a vehicle, the
notices shall state that vehicle immobilization and driver's license suspension
may be imposed if fines and penalties are not paid in full;
      12.   The signature and identification of the person issuing the sworn
pleading, violation notice, complaint or citation, which signature shall act as
a certification of the accuracy of all information contained within the
complaint;
      13.   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, the person
issuing the sworn pleading, violation notice, complaint or citation shall sign
an affidavit attesting to the correctness of all violation notices and
complaints produced by the device while under his/her control;
      14.   Any witnesses or complainants who may be called to testify for the
City who are not employees or officers thereof; and
      15.   Statement setting forth applicability of and providing for payment
and waiver of an administrative adjudicatory hearing.
   D.   Scheduling And Docketing Of Hearings: Administrative adjudication
hearings shall be scheduled and docketed by the Code Administrator not less
than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the notice of hearing is
served on the respondent in nonemergency situations. In emergency situations
the hearing date shall not be less than three (3) nor more than seven (7) days
after the date the notice of hearing is served on the respondent. (Ord. 16-O-
23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-8: HEARING PROCEDURES:
   A.   Rights: Parties shall be provided with an opportunity for a hearing
before or during which they may exercise any or all of the following rights:
      1.   Be represented by counsel, at their own expense. Respondents shall
not be entitled to have an attorney appointed to represent them;
      2.   Present and cross examine witnesses; and
      3.   Request the Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas to direct the
attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant
tangible evidence.
   B.   Rules Of Evidence Shall Not Govern: The formal and technical rules of
evidence shall not apply in an administrative adjudication hearing authorized
under this article. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is
the type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in the conduct of
their affairs.
   C.   Standard Of Proof: Administrative adjudication hearings are civil in
nature. The City shall bear the standard of proof to prove by a preponderance
of the evidence the occurrence or existence of a violation of the Code. A
sworn, written pleading, complaint or citation shall constitute a prima facie
evidence of the violation.
   D.   Recording: All administrative adjudication hearings conducted pursuant
to this article shall be recorded.
   E.   Defenses: It shall be a defense to a Code violation charged under this
article if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent or representative proves
by a preponderance of the evidence that:
      1.   The Code violation alleged in the notice did not in fact exist at
the time of the citation, pleading or complaint; and
      2.   The Code violation alleged in the notice occurred before the owner
became the owner of the real or personal property. Notwithstanding the
foregoing sentence, any existing order to correct a Code violation and/or
sanctions imposed by the City as a result of a finding of a Code violation
under this article shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the
property, so that a finding of a Code violation against one owner cannot be
avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of the property takes the same subject to the
findings, decision and order of a Hearing Officer under this article.
   F.   Continuances: No continuances shall be authorized by a Hearing Officer
for any administrative adjudication hearing commenced under this article except
in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of
the respondent or owner. Any continuance authorized by the Hearing Officer
shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. Lack of preparation shall not be
grounds for a continuance.
   G.   Default: If on the date set for hearing the respondent or his/her
attorney fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may find the respondent in
default and shall proceed.
   H.   Contents Of Final Determination Of Liability: A final determination of
liability as determined by the Hearing Officer shall be provided to the parties
following the conclusion of an administrative hearing by personally providing
such or, in the case of a default judgment, by mailing within five (5) business
days of the date the order is issued and shall contain, but not be limited to,
the following information and warnings:
      1.   A decision and order stating whether a Code violation exists;
      2.   A statement of any penalties or sanctions imposed which penalties or
sanctions debts are due and owing the City;
      3.   A statement of any finding of costs imposed if a Code violation is
found to exist, which costs shall be debts due and owing the City;
      4.   A statement of any sanctions imposed including, but not limited to,
orders to abate, injunctions, orders to cease and desist, orders to perform
community service and other appropriate orders as determined by the Hearing
Officer;
      5.   A warning that failure to comply with any orders to abate, cease and
desist, perform community service or other appropriate order and/or pay the
fine and any penalty due and owing the City within the time specified may
result in proceeding with collection and enforcement procedures in the same
manner as a judgment entered by any court of competent jurisdiction; and
      6.   Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or
ordinance.
   I.   Final Determination Of Liability: A final determination of liability
shall occur following the failure to pay the fine or penalty or comply with
other imposed sanctions after the Hearing Officer's determination of liability
and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative review
procedures hereinafter set forth. Where a person fails to appear at the
administrative hearing to contest the alleged violation on the date and at the
time and place specified in a prior served or mailed notice, the Hearing
Officer's determination of liability shall become final either upon a denial of
a timely petition to set aside that determination or upon the expiration of the
period for filing a petition without a filing having been made. Failure by any
respondent to pay or mail payment of the fine for any violation of this City
Code within thirty five (35) days of the issuance of the final determination of
liability will automatically subject the respondent to a penalty for late
payment. The penalty for late payment shall be the amount set forth in section
1-8H-17, "Penalties", of this article. Failure to pay or mail payment of the
fine may result in the fine being referred to a collection agency and will
automatically subject the respondent to an additional administrative fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   J.   Judicial Review: Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a Code
violation does or does not exist shall constitute a final determination for
purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law, 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., or
as hereinafter amended. Any person filing for judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law shall be subject to the assessment costs for the
preparation and certification of the record of proceedings before the Hearing
Officer. Such cost shall be assessed as one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the
first page of the transcript and twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each page
thereafter. Any failure to pay such fee shall subject the party seeking review
to the provisions of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-109, including
dismissal of the complaint on motion of the City. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd.
Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-9: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a Code violation does or
does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. The findings, decision and
order of the Hearing Officer shall constitute a final determination for
purposes of judicial review and shall be subject to a review in the Circuit
Court of Coles County, Illinois, and the provisions of the Administrative
Review Law and all amendments and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted
pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern every action for the
judicial review of the final findings, decision and order of a Hearing Officer
under this article. The plaintiff in the administrative review proceeding shall
pay to the City of Charleston the costs of preparing and certifying the record
of proceedings before the Hearing Officer. The failure to make that payment
shall relieve the City of the necessity of filing the answer required by 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-108 (Illinois Administrative Review Law) and
shall be authority for the entry of an order by the court, on motion thereof by
the City or any other respondent, dismissing the complaint. Any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction or cost imposed,
remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial
review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Law are a debt due
and owing the City and may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
   B.   Failure of the respondent to pay such fine or penalty after the
exhaustion of or the failure to exhaust judicial review procedures under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may result in the City filing a petition in
the Circuit Court of Coles County to have reduced to judgment any unpaid fine
or penalty with costs, and, if applicable: 1) the immobilization of the
person's vehicle for failure to pay fines or penalties for five (5) or more
parking violations and 2) the suspension of the person's driver's license for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more parking violations.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall prevent the City of Charleston from
consolidating multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such
a proceeding.
   D.   Upon commencement of an action to enforce, the City shall file a
certified copy of the findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied
by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings,
decision and order, was issued in accordance with this Code. Service of the
summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by the Code of
Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the court is
satisfied that the findings, decision and order were entered in accordance with
the requirements of this section and the applicable ordinance and that the
respondent had an opportunity for a hearing and for judicial review as provided
for herein: 1) the court shall render a judgment in favor of the City and
against the respondent for the relief indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced
in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and 2) the
court may also issue such other orders and injunction as are requested by the
City to enforce the order of the Hearing Officer. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd.
Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-10: ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
   A.   In place of a proceeding under section
1-8H-9 of this article, after expiration of the period in which judicial review
under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final
determination of a Code violation other than a Building Code violation, unless
stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings, decision, and order
of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   B.   In any case in which a respondent has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering a respondent to correct a Code violation other than a Building Code
violation, or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a Code
violation other than a Building Code violation, any expenses incurred by the
City to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney fees,
court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, after
they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a Hearing Officer, shall
be a debt due and owing the City and may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a Hearing Officer pursuant
to this subsection, the City shall provide notice to the respondent that states
that the respondent shall appear at a hearing before the Administrative Hearing
Officer to determine whether the respondent has failed to comply with the
judgment. The notice shall set the date for such a hearing, which shall not be
less than seven (7) days from the date that notice is served. If notice is
served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to run on the date that
the notice was deposited in the mail.
   C.   Upon being recorded in the manner required by article XII of the Code
of Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed
on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the respondent in the amount
of any debt due and owing the Municipality under this section. The lien may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   D.   A Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set
a new hearing date, upon a petition filed within twenty one (21) days after the
issuance of the order of default, if the Hearing Officer determines that the
petitioner's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time
if the petitioner establishes that the City did not provide proper service of
process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this section, the Hearing
Officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has
been recorded for any debt due and owing the City as a result of the vacated
default judgment. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-11: MOTOR VEHICLE VIOLATIONS; CITATIONS:
   A.   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the
Code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking, stopping or standing, the
owner shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and subject to the
penalty thereof.
   B.   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of any provision of the
Code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking, stopping or standing, any
law enforcement officer, traffic control aide, other designated member of law
enforcement, parking enforcement aide or other person designated by the Code
Administrator observing such violation may issue a parking violation notice,
and serve the notice on the owner of the vehicle by handing it to the operator
of the vehicle, if he is present, or by affixing it to the vehicle in a
conspicuous place. The issuer of the notice shall specify on the notice his
identification number, the particular parking regulation allegedly violated,
the make and state registration number of the cited vehicle, and the place,
date and time and nature of the alleged violation and shall certify the
correctness of the specified information by signing his name as provided in
section 11-208.3 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-208.3, as amended. The foregoing shall not relieve the Code Administrator
from the duties set forth in section
1-8H-7 of this article with respect to scheduling a hearing on such alleged
violation and providing notice thereof.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the
vehicle or his designee, to remove from a vehicle a parking violation notice
affixed pursuant to this article.
   D.   The Code Administrator shall distribute parking violation notices to
parking enforcement aides, other persons authorized to issue parking violation
notices, and law enforcement for issuance pursuant to these provisions. All
parking enforcement aides, other persons authorized to issue parking violation
notices, and law enforcement must retain a receipt for every notice issued.
   E.   The Code Administrator shall compile and maintain complete and accurate
records relating to all parking violation notices issued and the dispositions
thereof, whether by payment of the fine or by final determination of the
Hearing Officer. In addition, the Code Administrator shall make certified
reports to the Secretary of State pursuant to section 6-306.5 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-12: DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY; MOTOR VEHICLE CITATIONS:
   A.   Final Determination: Where a respondent either fails to pay the
indicated fine prior to the hearing or fails to appear at a hearing, a final
determination of parking violation liability shall be entered in the amount of
the fine indicated on the notice of violation. Failure to pay the fine within
thirty five (35) business days of a final determination of parking violation
liability will result in the imposition of a late payment penalty pursuant to
subsection B of this section. Upon the occurrence of a final determination of
parking violation liability and after expiration of the period in which
judicial review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought any
unpaid fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the City.
   B.   Late Payment: Failure by any respondent to pay or mail payment of the
fine for a parking violation within thirty five (35) days of the issuance of
the final determination of liability will automatically subject the respondent
to a penalty for late payment. The penalty for late payment shall be the amount
set forth in section
1-8H-17, "Penalties", of this article. Failure to pay or mail payment of the
fine after a sixty (60) day period commencing on the issuance of the final
determination of liability will result in the fine being referred to a
collection agency and will automatically subject the respondent to an
additional administrative fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   C.   Defenses: A person charged with a parking violation may contest the
charge through an administrative adjudication hearing limited to one (1) or
more of the following grounds with appropriate evidence to support:
      1.   That the respondent was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
at the time of the violation;
      2.   That the cited vehicle or its state registration plates were stolen
at the time the violation occurred;
      3.   That the relevant signs prohibiting or restricting parking, if
necessary, were missing or obscured;
      4.   That the relevant parking meter was inoperable or malfunctioned
through no fault of the respondent;
      5.   That the facts alleged in the parking violation notice are
inconsistent or do not support a finding that the specified regulation was
violated. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-13: LESSOR OF VEHICLE; LIABILITY:
In accordance with section 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, no person who
is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement shall be
liable for a violation for any standing or parking regulation of this Code
involving such vehicle during the period of the lease if upon the receipt of a
notice of violation he shall, within sixty (60) days thereafter, provide to the
Code Administrator the name and address of the lessee. Upon receipt of a
lessor's notification of the name and address of his lessee, pursuant to
section 11-1305 or 11-1306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the Code Administrator
shall cause a notice of violation to be sent to the lessee as provided herein.
If the lessor fails to provide the Code Administrator with the name and address
of the lessee within sixty (60) days of receiving notice, the lessor shall be
liable for the full amount of the violation and late penalties, and a final
determination will be issued. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-
2017)
1-8H-14: IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM:
   A.   The Code Administrator is hereby authorized to direct and supervise a
Program of Vehicle Immobilization for the purpose of enforcing the parking
regulations of the Code. The Program of Vehicle Immobilization shall provide
for immobilizing of any eligible vehicle, as defined in subsection B of this
section, by placement of a restraint in such a manner as to prevent its
operation.
If the eligible vehicle is parked or left in violation of any provision of the
Traffic Code for which such vehicle is subject to an immediate tow, or in any
place where it constitutes an obstruction or hazard, or where it impedes City
workers during such operations as snow removal, the Code Administrator may
cause the eligible vehicle immediately to be towed to a vehicle pound or
relocated to a legal parking place and there restrained.
   B.   When the registered owner of a vehicle has accumulated five (5) or more
final determinations of parking violation liability for which the fines and
penalties, if applicable, have not been paid in full, the Code Administrator
shall cause a notice of impending vehicle immobilization to be sent as
prescribed in this article.
The notice of impending vehicle immobilization shall state the name and address
of the registered owner, the state registration number of the vehicle or
vehicles registered to such owner, and the serial numbers of parking violation
notices which have resulted in final determination of liability for which the
fines or penalties remain unpaid. Failure to pay the fines and penalties owed
within thirty five (35) days from the date of the notice will result in the
inclusion of the state registration number of the vehicle of such owner on an
immobilization list. A person may challenge the validity of the notice of
impending vehicle immobilization by requesting a hearing and appearing in
person to submit evidence which would conclusively disprove eligibility. Such
hearing shall not be a forum to readjudicate the findings of fact and law
issued by the Hearing Officer. Upon a request for a hearing, the Code
Administrator shall schedule the hearing for the next regular hearing date.
Documentary evidence which would conclusively disprove liability shall be based
on the following grounds:
      1.   That all fines and penalties for the parking violations cited in the
notice have been paid in full; or
      2.   That the registered owner has not accumulated five (5) or more final
determinations of parking violation liability which were unpaid at the time the
notice of impending vehicle immobilization was issued.
   C.   Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed
to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle
is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its
damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal or damage to
the immobilizing restraint is a violation of sections 16-1 and 21-1 of the
Illinois Criminal Code. The notice shall also provide information specifying
how release of the immobilizing restraint may be had, and how the registered
owner may obtain an immobilization hearing. If the restraint has not been
released within twenty four (24) hours of its placement, the restraint shall be
released and the vehicle towed and impounded.
   D.   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person may
secure the release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing and
storage fees provided in subsection G of this section, and all fines and
penalties remaining due on each final determination of parking violation
liability issued to such person.
   E.   The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a hearing
to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing and
impoundment was erroneous, if the owner files a written request for a hearing
with the Code Administrator within fourteen (14) days after immobilization or
fourteen (14) days of the date of the notice sent pursuant to subsection F of
this section, whichever is later. Such hearing shall not be a forum to
readjudicate the findings of fact and law issued by the Hearing Officer. The
determination of the Hearing Officer regarding the validity of the
immobilization shall become final for the purpose of judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law of Illinois upon issuance. The owner shall be limited
to the same defenses prescribed in subsection B of this section.
   F.   Within ten (10) days after a vehicle has been impounded, a notice of
impoundment shall be sent by first class mail, to the address of the registered
owner as listed with the Secretary of State. The notice shall state that the
owner has the right to request a postimmobilization and posttowing hearing as
provided in subsection E of this section, and that if the vehicle is not
claimed within sixty (60) days from the date of the notice, the vehicle may be
sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with section 4-208 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code.
   G.   The fee for immobilization shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). In
addition, a fee for towing subsequent to the immobilization and a storage fee
for every twenty four (24) hour period the vehicle is retained shall be
assessed. No fees shall be assessed for any immobilization or tow which has
been determined to be erroneous.
   H.   It shall be unlawful to relocate any vehicle restrained by an
immobilization device without the approval of the Code Administrator or his
designee. The registered owner of the immobilized vehicle and any person who
relocates an immobilized vehicle in violation of this subsection shall each be
subject to a penalty of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such
violation. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-15: DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
   A.   When a person has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
pursuant to this article on ten (10) or more parking violations, the Code
Administrator shall cause a notice of impending driver's license suspension to
be sent in the form as required by the Secretary of State. The notice shall
state that failure to pay the amount owing within forty five (45) days of the
date of the notice will result in the City notifying the Secretary of State
that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings pursuant
to section 6-306.5 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   B.   If a person sent a notice pursuant to subsection A of this section
fails to pay the amount owing within the time stated on the notice, the Code
Administrator may file with the Secretary of State, a certified report, in
accordance with section 6-306.5(c) of the Illinois Vehicle Code, that the
person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings. The Code
Administrator shall assess a twenty dollar ($20.00) filing fee against the
person named in the certified report to reimburse the City for the expense of
preparing and filing the certified report with the Secretary of State.
   C.   A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to subsection B of
this section may, within twenty one (21) days of the date of the notice sent by
the Secretary of State pursuant to section 6-306.5(b) of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, file with the Code Administrator a written statement and supporting
documentation to challenge the report; provided, however, the grounds for such
challenge shall be limited to: 1) the person not having been the owner or
lessee of the vehicle or vehicles receiving ten (10) or more parking violation
notices on the date or dates such notices were issued; 2) the person having
already paid the fine and penalty for the ten (10) or more violations indicated
on the report; or 3) the person not having accumulated ten (10) or more final
determinations of parking violation liability. The Code Administrator shall
send notice of the decision on the challenge to the report after the receipt
thereof.
   D.   If a person named in a certified report has paid the previously
reported fine or penalty or if the report is determined by the Code
Administrator to be in error, the Code Administrator shall notify the Secretary
of State in accordance with section 6-306.5(d) of the Illinois Vehicle Code. A
certified copy of such notification shall be given, upon request and at no
charge, to the person named therein.
   E.   An administrative hearing to contest an impending suspension or
suspension may be had upon filing a written request with the Secretary of
State. Such hearing shall not be a forum to readjudicate the findings of fact
and law issued by the Hearing Officer. The filing fee for this hearing shall be
twenty dollars ($20.00) to be paid at the time the request is made. The City
shall reimburse the Secretary of State for all reasonable costs incurred by the
Secretary as a result of filing a certified report, including, but not limited
to, the costs of providing the required notice and the costs incurred by the
Secretary at any hearing conducted with respect to the report and any appeal
from such a hearing. In the event the owner is found eligible for suspension,
such owner shall reimburse the City for all of the foregoing costs. (Ord. 16-O-
23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-16: BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Building Code Violation Reports: When a Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee finds a Building Code violation while inspecting a structure, he shall
note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form,
indicating:
      1.   The name and address of the structure owner;
      2.   A citation to the specific Building Code provision or provisions
alleged to have been violated, including the maximum penalty;
      3.   A description of the circumstances present that constitute the
alleged violation;
      4.   The date and time the violation was observed;
      5.   The names of witnesses to the violation; and
      6.   The address of the structure where the violation is observed.
The violation report form shall be forwarded by the Code Enforcement Officer,
or his designee, to the Code Hearing Department where a docket number shall be
stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank
spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be
less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is
reported by the building inspector.
One (1) copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of
the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one (1)
copy of the report form shall be returned to the Code Enforcement Officer so
that he may prepare evidence of the Code violation for presentation at the
hearing on the date indicated, and one (1) copy of the report form shall be
served by first class mail on the owner of the structure, along with a summons
commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. If the name of the owner of the
structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner cannot be made by
mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing a copy of the
violation report form on the front door of the structure where the violation is
found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled.
   B.   Defenses To Building Code Violations: It shall be a defense to a
Building Code violation charged if the owner, his attorney, or any other agent
or representative proves to the Hearing Officer's satisfaction that:
      1.   The Building Code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact
exist, or at the time of the hearing, the violation has been remedied or
removed;
      2.   The Building Code violation has been caused by the current property
occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the
dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations;
      3.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the
owner or his agent to all or part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting
the Building Code violation.
   C.   Sanctions Applicable To Owner; Property: The order to correct a
Building Code violation and the sanction imposed by the City as the result of a
finding of a Building Code violation under this article shall attach to the
property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a
Building Code violation against one (1) owner cannot be avoided by conveying or
transferring the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner
of property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a Hearing
Officer under this article.
      1.   Any transfers or conveyances of properties subject to an order to
correct a Code violation shall be reported by the respondent to the Code
Administrator or their designee within one (1) business day of the transfer or
conveyance. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this Code and be
subject to a minimum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for every day the violation of
failing to report occurs.
      2.   A mortgagee in possession of a property, the beneficial owners of
real property held in trust, and any person, business, partnership, corporation
or other entity who contracts with the Federal government or any of its
agencies, including, without limitation, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct City of Charleston Health
and Safety Code violations.
   D.   Hearing: At the hearing, a Hearing Officer shall preside and shall hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of
a Code violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a determination on the basis of the
evidence presented at the hearing whether or not a Building Code violation
exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as a
"findings, decision and order". The findings, decision and order shall include
the Hearing Officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a Code
violation exists based upon the findings of fact, and an order, ordering the
owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case, in the event a violation
is not proved. If a Code violation is proved, the order may also impose the
sanctions that are provided in the Building Code for the violation proved. A
copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the owner within
five (5) days after they are issued; service shall be in the same manner as the
report form and summons are served pursuant to subsection A of this section.
(Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-17: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person found liable of a violation of any section of this article
shall be fined in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided for in this Code.
   B.   If a Code violation is proved and the respondent is ordered to pay the
costs of the administrative adjudication proceeding, the costs shall be ordered
to be paid by the respondent, including, but not limited to, costs for Hearing
Officer, file management, document automation and recordkeeping, recording
costs, costs of peer courts or panels, hearing security, prosecutor fees and
other related costs. The costs shall become an amount due and owing to the City
and shall be part of the order issued against the violator.
   C.   A respondent who fails to pay the original fine and costs after thirty
five (35) days of the issuance of the final determination of liability shall be
liable, if found guilty, for both the original fine and a late payment penalty.
The late payment penalty is cumulative and in addition to the original fine.
The late payment penalty will be stayed if a respondent files for
administrative review within thirty five (35) days after the entry of a final
determination of liability. The penalty for late payment shall be as set forth
on the following schedule:
LATE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
 
Original Fine         Late Payment Penalty
   $25.00 - $49.00 $50.00 - cumulative
   $50.00 - $99.00 $100.00
   $100.00 or great$200.00
 
   D.   The fine, penalties, and costs may be assigned to a collection agency
ninety (90) days after the issuance of the final determination of liability.
Fines and fees referred to a collection agency will automatically subject the
respondent to an additional administrative fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00),
to offset the cost of assigning the fine to a collection agency for processing
on the City's behalf. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-18: SETTLEMENT OF VIOLATIONS:
   A.   A person accused of violating a section of this City Code prosecuted
through administrative adjudication may offer to settle the case by an amount
set forth in the sworn pleading, violation notice, complaint or citation,
within the time and in the manner set forth in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Payments in settlement of violations set forth in this City Code shall
be made on or before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last business day, prior
to the hearing date. A payment shall be considered made if the payment is
actually received by the City's Comptroller's Office, or such other place as
designated for receipt of fines, on or before five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the
last business day, prior to the hearing date. Payments shall be made by cash or
certified check, money order, or cashier's check made payable to the City of
Charleston, or such other forms of tender as the Comptroller's Office shall
specify.
   C.   The City Attorney or his or her designee may, at his or her discretion,
elect to reject any such fine as settlement of any violations set forth prior
to the date the written sworn pleading, violation notice, complaint or citation
which charges a person with such violation is filed with the Code
Administrator. In addition, if a violation proximately causes actual out of
pocket expenses for loss to the victim or victims of said violation, the City
Attorney or his or her designee may elect to accept payment of restitution to
the victim or victims of the said violation in addition to payment of the fine
set forth, as settlement of a violation prior to and in lieu of filing a
complaint for the same.
   D.   Peace officers who have issued a City Code violation and notice of
hearing with the Code Hearing Department to a person for an offense under this
Code shall deliver the original copies of the City Code violation and notice of
hearing to the Code Administrator.
   E.   If a respondent pays a fine pursuant to this section, and such payment
is not rejected under subsection C of this section, then the complaint charging
the respondent with the particular violation shall not be filed by the City in
either the Circuit Court or with the Administrative Code Department, or if
filed, shall be dismissed with no administrative costs assessed.
   F.   Respondents issued a City Code violation and notice of hearing with the
Administrative Code Department for these offenses must appear at the
administrative adjudicatory hearing, unless otherwise notified by the Code
Hearing Department. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-2017)
1-8H-19: SEVERABILITY:
It is declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and words of this Code and article
are severable. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word
is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the lawful judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, its unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining sections,
subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code and article,
since the sections or parts of sections would have been enacted by the City
Council without and irrespective of any unconstitutional or otherwise invalid
section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word being incorporated
into this Code and article. (Ord. 16-O-23, 6-7-2016; amd. Ord. 17-O-26, 7-5-
2017)
ARTICLE I. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES AND PAYROLL
SECTION:
1-8I-1: Department Created
1-8I-2: Director Of Human Resources And Payroll
1-8I-1:    DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the Department of Human Resources and Payroll, an
executive office of the city, and the positions of director of human resources
and payroll, human resources generalist, and payroll administrator. (Ord. 2025-
O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8I-2:    DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES AND PAYROLL:
The director of human resources and payroll shall be appointed by the city
manager and serves at the pleasure of the city manager. The director of human
resources and payroll shall report to the city manager, or their designee, and
assist the deputy city manager(s). (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
ARTICLE J. DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
SECTION:
1-8J-1:    Department Created
1-8J-2:    Joint Information Technology Director
1-8J-3:    Information Services Director
1-8J-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created the Department of Information Technology, an executive
office of the city, and the position of joint information technology director,
information services director and information services support specialist.
(Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8J-2: JOINT INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DIRECTOR:
   A.   Appointment; Term; Compensation: The joint information technology (IT)
director shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at the pleasure
of the city manager. For such services rendered, the joint information
technology director shall be paid a salary provided by the city council.
   B.   The purpose of this position is to perform all functions related to
support the work of the City of Charleston and Coles County employees. The
joint IT director reports to the city manager and serves at the pleasure of the
city manager. The joint IT director is a position that has job duties and
responsibilities that overlap between the City of Charleston and Coles County.
Work on behalf of the City of Charleston is performed under the general
direction of the city manager.
Through the merging of resources to purchase key infrastructure pieces, the
City of Charleston and Coles County are joined together such that what affects
one agency invariably affects the other. To help maintain stability in this
infrastructure, a Joint IT Director position has been created. This position
will oversee the management of all shared information technology resources that
have been purchased by or directly benefit both agencies. The objects managed
include hardware and software currently in service as well as future expansion
and technology growth. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
1-8J-3: INFORMATION SERVICES DIRECTOR:
The information services director shall be appointed by the city manager and
serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The information services director
shall report to the city manager, or their designee, and assist the deputy city
manager(s). (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL HANDBOOK
SECTION:
1-9-1: Adoption Of Handbook
1-9-1: ADOPTION OF HANDBOOK:
The City of Charleston Personnel Handbook of May 16, 2023, is hereby adopted by
reference and on file in the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 17-O-23, 6-6-2017; amd.
Ord. 19-O-39, 12-17-2019; Ord. 20-O-18, 5-5-2020; Ord. 20-O-28, 10-6-2020; Ord.
2023-O-20, - -2023; Ord. 2024-O-1, 1-2-2024; Ord. 2024-O-2, 1-2-2024)
CHAPTER 10
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-10-1: State Regulations Adopted
1-10-2: Definitions
1-10-3: Interpretation
1-10-4: Prohibited Acts
1-10-5: Penalties
1-10-6: Amendments
1-10-7: Unconstitutionality Of Provisions
1-10-1: STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The regulations of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/5-15 and 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 430/10-10 through 430/10-40 of the state officials and
employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/1-1 et seq. (hereinafter
referred to as the "act" in this chapter), are hereby adopted by reference and
made applicable to the officers and employees of the city to the extent
required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5. (Ord. 04-O-19, 5-18-2004)
1-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c). (Ord. 04-O-
19, 5-18-2004)
1-10-3: INTERPRETATION:
This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this chapter, however, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a). (Ord. 04-O-19, 5-18-2004)
1-10-4: PROHIBITED ACTS:
   A.   Gifts:
      1.   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is
hereby prohibited.
      2.   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
an officer or employee of the city under the act is hereby prohibited.
   B.   Political Activities: The participation in political activities
prohibited under the act, by any officer or employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited. (Ord. 04-O-19, 5-18-2004)
1-10-5: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act. (Ord. 04-O-19, 5-18-2004)
1-10-6: AMENDMENTS:
Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date hereof
shall be incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to
the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to prohibited
political activities. However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional
for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by
reference without formal action by the city council. (Ord. 04-O-19, 5-18-2004)
1-10-7: UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this chapter shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals or
rehearings. This chapter shall be deemed repealed without further action by the
city council if the act is found unconstitutional by the Illinois supreme
court.
   B.   If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional
but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not
address the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act, as adopted by
this chapter, shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
chapter relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the city council. (Ord. 04-O-19, 5-18-2004)
CHAPTER 11
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION:
1-11-1: Fiscal Year
1-11-2: Official Depositories
1-11-3: Datum Plane
1-11-4: Budget
1-11-5: Contracts And Purchasing
1-11-6: Access To Public Records
1-11-7: Administrative Hearings To Determine Eligibility Under The Public
Safety Employee Benefits Act
1-11-7-1: Purpose
1-11-7-2: Administrative Composition
1-11-7-3: Procedure
1-11-1: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the City shall commence on May 1 and end on April 30 of the
following year. (Ord. 84-O-9, 5-8-1984)
1-11-2: OFFICIAL DEPOSITORIES:
The following or their successors are hereby designated as depositories for the
funds and monies of the City in custody of the City Comptroller:
   Bank of America
   Casey State Bank
   First Federal Savings and Loan
   Edward Jones
   Financial Northeastern Companies
   First Financial Bank
   First Mid-Illinois Bank and Trust
   First Neighbor Bank
   Illinois Metropolitan Investment Fund
   Northern Trust Company
   Peoples Bank and Trust
   Prairie State Bank and Trust
   Raymond James
   The Illinois Funds
(Ord. 09-O-57, 11-3-2009; amd. Ord. 2024-O-34, 9-3-2024)
1-11-3: DATUM PLANE:
The bench mark, being a brass plate on the north face of the County Courthouse,
west of the north doors, established by the U.S. Geological Survey and marked
Y-176-1956 and being 685.642 feet above sea level, shall be and the same is
hereby adopted as the datum plane from which any and all levels shall be
hereafter taken, and from which grades hereafter shall be established, and to
which all levels and grades shall hereafter be referred as the base or datum
for all City levels. (Ord. 84-O-9, 5-8-1984)
1-11-4: BUDGET:
The City shall prepare and revise an annual budget in accordance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10. Any revision of the
adopted budget shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of approval by the
Council. (Ord. 85-O-29, 6-18-1985)
1-11-5: CONTRACTS AND PURCHASING:
   A.   Cost Estimates; Specifications:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all contracts, of
whatever character, pertaining to public improvement, or the maintenance of the
public property of the Municipality involving an outlay of twenty five thousand
dollars ($25,000.00) or more, shall be based upon cost estimates and
specifications to be approved by the Council. When cost estimates exceed twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), contracts shall be awarded by procedures
specified by subsection B of this section. This subsection A applies to
expenditures which shall be payable out of the Governmental, Enterprise and
Internal Service Funds of the Municipality or any special funds under the
control of any Board of Managers, Board of Trustees or Directors appointed by
general law or ordinances of the Municipality.
      2.   "Public improvement, or the maintenance of the public property" for
the purposes of this section means any permanent improvement upon real property
owned by the Municipality, or maintenance of any real property owned by the
Municipality.
   B.   Procurement Procedures: Any work or other public improvement which is
not paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation,
when the expense thereof will exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00),
shall be procured as follows:
      1.   If a construction contract:
         a.   By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after
advertising for bids, in the manner provided by subsection C of this section,
except that any construction contract may be entered into by the proper
officers without advertising for bids, if authorized by a vote of four (4) of
the five (5) Council members elected; or
         b.   If authorized by a vote of four (4) of the five (5) Council
members elected, the City Manager and/or Director of Public Works may
superintend and cause to be carried out the construction of the work or other
public improvement by employing exclusively for the performance of all manual
labor thereon, laborers and artisans whom the City shall pay by the day or
hour, but all material of the value of twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) and upward used in the construction of the work or other public
improvement shall be purchased by contract let to lowest responsible bidder in
the manner prescribed by subsection C of this section.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided by this subsection B, supplies,
equipment and services needed by the Municipality valued at twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) and upward shall generally be procured by
contract let to the lowest responsive and responsible bidder after advertising
for bids. Supplies, equipment and services (other than professional services as
defined below) that are required by the Municipality may be procured without
advertising for bids upon a finding that it is in the best interest of the
Municipality, if authorized by a vote of four (4) of the five (5) Council
members elected.
      3.   A contract for architectural, engineering or land surveying services
shall be awarded in accordance with the Local Government Professional Services
Selection Act 1 .
      4.   Subject to the limitations imposed by subsections D and E of this
section, the City Manager and division directors have authority to approve
procurements valued less than twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) without
advertising for competitive bids.
      5.   Breaking up procurements into smaller increments to avoid threshold
amounts on advertising and bidding requirements is prohibited.
      6.   Nothing in this subsection B shall apply to any contract by the
Municipality with the United States of America, the State of Illinois or any
political subdivision of the State. Contracts with these entities may be
entered into by the proper officers without advertising for bids, if authorized
by a vote of three (3) of the five (5) Council members elected.
      7.   Where procedures applicable to expenditure of grant funds are
prescribed by rules of the State or Federal government or procedures applicable
to the expenditure of Motor Fuel Tax funds are prescribed by the Illinois
Department of Transportation that may be more prescriptive than procedures
defined in this subsection B, the most prescriptive procedures shall control.
      8.   Professional services, including without limitation, contracts for
the services of individuals possessing a high degree of professional skill
whether the ability or fitness of the individual plays an important part, shall
not be subject to the competitive bidding requirements set forth herein (though
fee may be a basis for selection).
   C.   Advertising For Bids:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, the City Clerk
shall advertise procurement contracts for bid at least once in at least one
newspaper of general circulation within the Municipality. Such notice shall
contain a statement of the nature, character and extent of the procurement,
referring to specifications on file, at the City Clerk's Office, and the time
and place of the bid opening.
      2.   The right to reject any or all bids received and the right to award
the procurement to the bidder determined most advantageous to the Municipality
shall be contained in the bidding specifications and published with the
advertisement for bids.
      3.   Bids may be advertised in other forms of vendor communication
devoted to such services and/or sent to vendors who have registered for
providing services and/or commodities to the Municipality at the discretion of
departmental directors.
      4.   Advertising of procurements shall not be required when services and
commodities are acquired pursuant to joint purchasing agreements with other
entities that advertise and seek competitive bids on behalf of the
Municipality.
   D.   Change Orders: Any change order in excess of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) must be approved by the Council. Change orders less than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be approved by the City Manager or Director
of Public Works.
   E.   Purchasing Authority: To standardize rules and procedures governing
procurement by City personnel, the following will apply as a matter of policy:
      1.   Cover Sheets: Cover sheets will be required for all invoices
submitted for payment that are not required to have a purchase order.
      2.   Submission To Comptroller: The following individuals shall have the
authority to submit cover sheets and invoices directly to the Comptroller or
his designee directly for payment: City Manager, division directors, assistant
directors, assistant and deputy chiefs, superintendents, Park and Recreation
supervisory staff.
      3.   Purchase Orders: Purchase orders are required for all invoices
submitted for payment that exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) except
materials or supplies purchased through prior bids or contracts. Purchase
orders shall, as necessary, include the statutory notice of the possible
application of the Prevailing Wage Act to the contract.
      4.   Quote Forms: Quote forms are required and individuals must obtain a
minimum of two (2) quotes for purchases that require a purchase order unless a
single source vendor is used and/or the purchase is in conjunction with a
previously let and approved contract. Single source vendor quote forms must
include explanation and any attachments.
      5.   Purchasing Authority:
Level 1: The following individuals have the authority to approve purchase
orders below ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) that have been specifically
identified and approved by the City Council through a bid award or an approved
contract: City Manager, division directors, superintendents, assistant chiefs
and assistant directors.
Level 2: The following individuals have the authority to approve purchase
orders in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) that have been
specifically identified and approved by the City Council through bid award or
an approved contract: City Manager and division directors.
Level 3: All other purchase orders, including items that have not been
specifically identified and approved by the City Council through the annual
budget, bid award, or an approved contract in excess of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or those items that shall (after the purchase) place the particular
line item or budget at a deficit level shall require the approval of the City
Manager. The Director of Public Works shall also have this authority for those
expenditures that fall directly under his supervision within the Division of
Public Works.
      6.   Pay Estimates: Pay estimates showing the value of work completed to
date, the value of work paid previously, and the value of work to be held in
retainage may be used in lieu of a purchase order for all capital improvement
projects that have previously been approved by the City Council via a bid award
or approved contract. The City Manager and division directors have the
authority to approve and submit pay estimates. (Ord. 17-O-30, 9-19-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 510/0.01, et seq.
1-11-6: ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS:
The policy governing access to public records under the Freedom of Information
Act, attached to ordinance 10-O-2 as exhibit A, as amended from time to time,
is hereby adopted and approved for use by the City of Charleston. (Ord. 10-O-2,
2-16-2010)
1-11-7: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS TO DETERMINE ELIGIBILITY UNDER THE PUBLIC
SAFETY EMPLOYEE BENEFITS ACT:
1-11-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section
1-11-7 is to provide a fair and efficient method of determining the eligibility
of an employee for the benefits enumerated under the Public Safety Employee
Benefits Act 1  through the process of an administrative hearing. All benefits
provided to employees pursuant to the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act (Act)
will be consistent with the Act. (Ord. 18-O-13, 5-1-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
1-11-7-2: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The system of the administrative hearing shall be comprised of a Hearing
Officer whose power and authority and limitations are as follows:
   A.   Power Of The Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall have all of the
powers granted to him under common law relative to the conduct of an
administrative hearing including the power to:
      1.   Preside over all City hearings involving the Public Safety Employee
Benefits Act 1 ;
      2.   Administer oaths;
      3.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act 2 ;
      4.   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the production
of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
      5.   Rule upon objections in the admissibility of evidence;
      6.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all exhibits
in evidence introduced at the hearing;
      7.   Issue a determination based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, the determination of which shall be in writing and shall include a
written finding of fact, decision and order;
      8.   If the determination is that the applicant is eligible for PSEBA
benefits, issue a finding as to the extent of the reduction, if any, of PSEBA
benefits resulting from the existence of health insurance benefits payable from
any other source.
   B.   Hearing Officer: The Mayor with the consent of the City Council is
hereby authorized to appoint a person to hold the position of a Hearing Officer
for each and every individual hearing that shall come before this City. In
making said selection, the Mayor shall consider all pertinent information
including, at a minimum:
      1.   The candidate's ability to comply with the job description as set
forth herein;
      2.   Background and performance data made available to the Mayor on file
with the City or otherwise obtained by the City;
      3.   The candidate must be an attorney licensed to practice law in the
State of Illinois for at least three (3) years and have knowledge of and
experience in employment and labor law, general civil procedure, the rules of
evidence, and administrative practice.
   C.   Appointment Of A PSEBA Claims Administrator: The City Clerk is hereby
appointed as PSEBA Claims Administrator, who shall be responsible for
scheduling and making all necessary arrangements for the holding of hearings
under this administrative procedure. The duties of the PSEBA Claims
Administrator include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Receiving and filing applications for PSEBA benefits;
      2.   Receiving and filing all documents required by this section to
accompany such claims;
      3.   Reviewing applications for completeness and returning incomplete
applications to the applicant;
      4.   Upon receipt of a complete application, scheduling hearings in
accordance with the availability of the applicant, his or her counsel, counsel
for the City, and the Hearing Officer; and posting and publishing a Notice of
Hearing in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 120/1;
      5.   At the direction of the Hearing Officer, posting and publishing
required amended notices of hearing in the event that any hearing date should
be continued to a later date;
      6.   Arranging for a court reporter to prepare a transcription of the
hearing;
      7.   Receiving and filing the determination of the Hearing Officer and
any order, ruling, or intermediate or supplemental determination of the Hearing
Officer;
      8.   Responding to requests for information or subpoenas relating to an
application for PSEBA benefits or a hearing thereon; and
      9.   Preparation of the record of any application and hearing thereon for
purposes of an appeal pursuant to a common law writ of certiorari. (Ord. 18-O-
13, 5-1-2018)
 
Notes
1 2. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
2 3. 820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.
1-11-7-3: PROCEDURE:
   A.   Application For PSEBA Benefits: A PSEBA benefit application form
prepared by the City shall be the standard form required for PSEBA benefit
applicants to use in requesting benefits under PSEBA. The form shall be
completed and executed by the requesting applicant and delivered to the PSEBA
Claims Administrator. Information required by the form shall include:
      1.   The full particulars of the employee's claim for benefits, including
the date, time, place, and nature of the injury giving rise to the claim for
benefits;
      2.   The names of any witnesses to the injury and the circumstances under
which it occurred, together with any other factual circumstances surrounding
the incident(s) alleged to have occasioned the injury;
      3.   The names, ages, and relationship to the applicant of legal
dependents for whom PSEBA benefits may be claimed; and
      4.   Information relating to the existence of health insurance benefits
payable from any other source, which information must be current as of the date
of application.
The application also must be accompanied by:
      1.   The written decision of any public safety pension board determining
or declaring the injury to have been incurred in the applicant's line of duty
as a public safety employee of the City of Charleston;
      2.   A signed medical authorization release authorizing the collection
and production by voluntary agreement or subpoena, of information, including
protected medical information, relating to the injury and the incident giving
rise to the injury; and
      3.   If the applicant is seeking reimbursement for health insurance
premium payments or out-of-pocket payments for PSEBA-related health insurance
coverage or medical expenses, copies of all payment records or receipts for
payments made by the applicant.
   B.   Application Review: The PSEBA Claims Administrator shall review the
application for completeness. If incomplete, the PSEBA Claims Administrator
shall return the application to the applicant for completion in accordance with
the requirements of section
1-11-7-2 of this chapter. If complete, the PSEBA Claims Administrator shall
forward the completed application to the Hearing Officer and, after determining
the availability of the parties, shall give notice concerning the holding of a
hearing on the application. No hearing on the application shall be held until
the application is complete.
   C.   Administrative Hearing: The conduct of the administrative hearing shall
be as follows:
      1.   Upon receipt of a completed application, the PSEBA Claims
Administrator shall arrange for the posting and publishing of a Notice of
Hearing in accordance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 120/1, et seq., notifying the parties and the public of the date,
time, and place of a hearing to be held on the application.
      2.   The parties to the hearing, who may be represented by counsel, shall
be the applicant and the City of Charleston. Both the applicant and the City of
Charleston are necessary parties to the hearing.
      3.   Upon motion by a party or determination upon consultation with the
parties by the Hearing Officer, the initial hearing date or any subsequent date
for the hearing may be reset by the Hearing Officer to mutually convenient
dates and times.
      4.   Hearings shall be held on the date and time and at the place
specified in the Notice of Hearing, as originally set or reset and posted and
published in accordance with law.
      5.   All hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter whose
presence at the hearing has been arranged by the PSEBA Claims Administrator at
the direction of the Hearing Officer, and a transcript of all proceedings shall
be made and preserved.
      6.   The applicant and the City may examine and cross-examine witnesses,
introduce exhibits, and request orders or subpoenas compelling the appearance
of relevant witnesses or the production of relevant documents.
      7.   It shall be the applicant's obligation at the hearing to present
into evidence any and all documents, including medical records that were
presented to any public safety pension board that considered the applicant's
claim for a duty-related pension. All other medical records, health insurance
records (including records relating to health insurance or self-insurance
coverage of the applicant as a dependent), employment records, military
records, accident reports, witness statements, injury reports (including any or
all injury reports prepared or submitted by the applicant, whether or not in
conjunction with the injury giving rise to the claim for PSEBA benefits),
police reports, workers' compensation claims, reports and records, and records
establishing dependency status (including marriage and birth certificates) that
are relevant to the applicant's claim for PSEBA benefits may be admissible at
the hearing as determined by the Hearing Officer and shall be obtainable by any
party requesting such records in pre-hearing discovery, subject to the
requirements of applicable law.
      8.   The applicant shall have the obligation and burden of proof to
establish that the applicant is eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA
benefits. The standard of proof in all hearings shall be by the preponderance
of the evidence.
      9.   Upon conclusion of the hearing, the parties may make closing
arguments on the record or, if either party so requests, may submit post-
hearing briefs in support of their positions, which briefs may contain
appropriate citations to legal authority.
      10.   The determination by the Hearing Officer as to whether the
applicant has sustained his or her burden of proof and is eligible for benefits
under PSEBA shall be in writing, shall include findings of fact and conclusions
of law, and shall be consistent with PSEBA. If the Hearing Officer determines
that the applicant is eligible for benefits under PSEBA, the determination
shall include a finding as to the extent of the reduction, if any, of PSEBA
benefits resulting from the existence of health insurance benefits payable from
any other source.
      11.   Such determination shall constitute a final determination for the
purpose of appeal pursuant to a common law writ of certiorari. (Ord. 18-O-13,
5-1-2018)
CHAPTER 12
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN
SECTION:
1-12-1: Plan Adopted
1-12-1: PLAN ADOPTED:
The city of Charleston affirmative action plan is hereby adopted by reference
and as may be amended from time to time, and is on file in the city clerk's
office. (Ord. 15-O-2, 1-6-2015)
CHAPTER 13
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
SECTION:
1-13-1: Purpose And Intent
1-13-2: Definition Of Sexual Harassment
1-13-3: Retaliation Is Prohibited
1-13-4: Reporting Procedure
1-13-5: Complaints Against Non-Employees And Third Parties
1-13-6: Responsibility Of Supervisors And Witnesses
1-13-7: Investigation
1-13-8: False And Frivolous Complaints
1-13-9: Responsive Action
1-13-10: Sexual Harassment Prevention Training
1-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The City of Charleston ("City") is committed to a work environment in which all
individuals are treated with respect and dignity. Each individual has the right
to work in a professional atmosphere that prohibits discriminatory practices,
including sexual harassment. Therefore, the City expects that all relationships
among persons in the workplace, including relationships with members of the
public, will be business-like and free of bias, prejudice and harassment.
It is the responsibility of each and every employee, officer, official, member,
agent, volunteer, and vendor of the City as well as anyone using the City's
facilities, to refrain from sexual harassment. The City will not tolerate
sexual harassment of or by any of its employees and elected officials. Actions,
words, jokes, or comments based on an individual's sex, sexual identity or
orientation, civil union partnership, or any other form of sex discrimination
or harassment will not be tolerated.
This policy should not, and may not, be used as a basis for excluding or
separating individuals of a particular gender, sexual orientation, civil union
partnership, or any other protected characteristic, from participating in
business or work-related social activities or discussions in order to avoid
allegations of harassment. The law and policies of the City prohibit disparate
treatment based on race, religion, age, national origin, sex, sexual identity
or orientation, civil union partnership, or any other protected characteristic,
with regard to terms, conditions, privileges and prerequisites of employment.
The prohibition against sexual harassment, discrimination and retaliation are
intended to complement and further these policies, not to form the basis of an
exception to them.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-2: DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT:
Sexual harassment means any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual
favors or any conduct of a sexual nature when:
   A.   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment;
   B.   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used as
the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
   C.   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile, or
offensive working environment. For purposes of this definition, the phrase
"working environment" is not limited to a physical location an employee is
assigned to perform his or her duties and does not require an employment
relationship.
Sexual harassment may include a range of subtle and not so subtle behaviors and
may involve individuals of the same or different gender. Depending on the
circumstances, these behaviors may include, but are not limited to: unwanted
sexual advances or requests for sexual favors; sexual jokes and innuendo;
verbal abuse of a sexual nature; commentary about an individual's body, sexual
prowess or sexual deficiencies; leering; catcalls or touching; insulting or
obscene comments or gestures; display or circulation in the workplace of
sexually suggestive objects or pictures (including through e-mail, text
messages or other workplace communications); and other physical, verbal or
visual conduct of a sexual nature.
Sexual harassment against employees, independent contractors, elected
officials, members of the public, and anyone else in the workplace is expressly
prohibited. Moreover, sexual harassment is expressly prohibited in any work-
related setting outside the workplace, such as during business trips,
professional conferences, business meetings and business-related and/or the
City sponsored social events.
Any employee who engages in practices or conduct constituting sexual harassment
shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including discharge. Any
official of the City who engages in practices or conduct constituting sexual
harassment shall be subject to appropriate remedial action, up to and including
removal from office.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-3: RETALIATION IS PROHIBITED:
The City prohibits retaliation against any individual who reports sexual
harassment, participates in an investigation of such reports, or files a charge
of sexual harassment. Retaliation against an individual for reporting sexual
harassment, for participating in an investigation of a claim of sexual
harassment, or for filing a charge of sexual harassment is a serious violation
of this policy and, like sexual harassment itself, will result in disciplinary
action, up to and including termination or removal from office against the
retaliator.
Should you be subjected to retaliation for reporting sexual harassment,
participating in the investigation of any such report, or for filing a charge
of sexual harassment with the Illinois Department of Human Rights or any other
federal, state, or local governmental agency with jurisdiction over such a
charge, you have the right to file a charge with the Illinois Department of
Human Rights at the James R. Thompson Center, 100 West Randolph Street, Suite
10-100, Chicago, Illinois 60601, (312) 814-6200, or filing a civil action
against the retaliator under the Illinois Whistleblower Act. You also may have
recourse under the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-4: REPORTING PROCEDURE:
The City strongly urges the reporting of all incidents of sexual harassment or
retaliation, regardless of the offender's identity or position. Early reporting
and intervention have proven to be essential to the resolution of actual or
perceived incidents of harassment. Therefore, while no fixed reporting period
has been established, the City strongly urges the prompt reporting of
complaints or concerns so that rapid and constructive action can be taken.
The availability of this reporting procedure does not preclude individuals who
believe they are being subjected to sexual harassment from promptly advising
the offender that his or her behavior is unwelcome and requesting that it be
discontinued.
If you experience or witness sexual harassment, you should deal with the
incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by reporting the incident(s) to
your immediate supervisor, your department head, and/or the City Manager. If
the City Manager is the subject of the complaint, then the employee should
report directly to the Mayor. You should also document or record each incident
(what was said or done, by whom, the date, time and place, and any witnesses to
the incident). Written records such as letters, notes, memos, e-mails, and
telephone messages can strengthen documentation. It is not necessary that the
harassment be directed at you to make a complaint. Following are steps you can
take in the reporting process:
   A.   Direct Communication With The Offender: If you experience or witness
sexual harassment, you should directly and clearly express your objection to
the offending person(s) regardless of whether the behavior is directed at you.
If you are the harassed employee, you should clearly state that the conduct is
unwelcome and the offending behavior must stop. However, you are not required
to directly confront the person who is the source of your report, question, or
complaint before notifying any of those individuals listed below.   The initial
message may be oral or written, but documentation of the notice should be made.
If subsequent messages are needed, they should be put in writing.
   B.   Report To Supervisory And Administrative Personnel: At the same time,
direct communication is undertaken, or in the event you feel threatened or
intimidated by the offending person, you should promptly report the offending
behavior to your immediate supervisor, department head or the City Manager. If
you feel uncomfortable doing so, or if your immediate supervisor and/or
department head is the source of the problem, condones the problem or ignores
the problem, report directly to the City Manager. If the City Manager is the
source of the problem, condones the problem, or ignores the problem, you should
contact the Mayor.
   C.   Report To City Manager/Mayor: An employee may also report incidents of
harassment or discrimination directly to the City Manager. The City Manager or
his or her designee will promptly investigate the facts and take corrective
action when an allegation is determined to be valid. If your complaint alleges
harassment by the City Manager, or if the City Manager condones the problem or
ignores the problem, you should immediately report the incident or incidents in
writing directly to the Mayor. An investigation will be conducted and
appropriate action will be taken when an allegation is determined to be valid.
At no time will personnel involved in the alleged harassment conduct the
investigation.
   D.   You have the right at any time to contact the Illinois Department of
Human Rights (IDHR) at the address and/or telephone number listed above, about
filing a formal complaint. Thereafter, depending upon the results of the IDHR's
investigation and the time required to complete the investigation, the IDHR may
file a complaint with the Illinois Human Rights Commission (HRC), located at
100 W. Randolph St., Ste. 5-100, (312) 814-6269, or you may have the right to
file a complaint on your own behalf either in circuit court or directly with
the HRC.
   E.   In addition to the methods of reporting included above, any elected
official, employee, non-employee, or patron may file a sexual harassment
complaint with the attorney for the City of Charleston. This complaint will be
promptly reviewed and investigated privately. A written report will then be
submitted to the City Council including findings of fact and a determination of
whether the complaint is founded. If the complaint is founded the City Council
shall determine the appropriate remedy. Pursuant to the protections set forth
in this policy and Illinois law, no retaliation may be taken against any person
who files a complaint. Complaints may also be filed with the Illinois Human
Rights Department, the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,
the United States Department of Justice, and other federal or state agencies.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-5: COMPLAINTS AGAINST NON-EMPLOYEES AND THIRD PARTIES:
If you make a complaint alleging sexual harassment against an agent, vendor,
supplier, contractor, volunteer or person using the City programs or
facilities, the City Manager will investigate the incident(s) and determine the
appropriate action, if any. The City will make reasonable efforts to protect
you from further contact with such persons.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-6: RESPONSIBILITY OF SUPERVISORS AND WITNESSES:
Any supervisor who becomes aware of any possible sexual or other harassment or
discrimination of or by any employee should immediately advise the City
Manager, who will investigate the conduct and resolve the matter as soon as
possible. All employees are encouraged to report incidents of harassment,
regardless of who the offender may be or whether or not you are the intended
victim.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-7: INVESTIGATION:
Any reported allegations of sexual harassment will be investigated promptly.
The City will make every reasonable effort to conduct an investigation in a
responsible and confidential manner. However, it is impossible to guarantee
absolute confidentiality. The investigation may include individual interviews
with the parties involved, and where necessary, with individuals who may have
observed the alleged conduct or may have other relevant knowledge. The City
serves notice that third parties, including attorneys for the City, may be used
to investigate claims of sexual harassment.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-8: FALSE AND FRIVOLOUS COMPLAINTS:
Given the seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false and
frivolous charge of harassment is a major offense that can itself result in
disciplinary action, up to and including discharge, or, in the case of an
officer, suspension or removal from an elected or appointed position. False and
frivolous complaints are those accusations with respect to which the accuser is
using a harassment complaint to accomplish an end other than stopping the
harassment. The term does not refer to charges made in good faith that cannot
be proved.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-9: RESPONSIVE ACTION:
Subject to legal guidelines, the City will make the initial determination as to
whether sexual harassment has occurred based on a review of the facts and
circumstances of each situation. Misconduct constituting sexual harassment or
retaliation will be dealt with appropriately. Responsive action may include,
for example, training, referral to counseling and/or disciplinary action such
as warning, reprimand, withholding of a promotion or pay increase, reassignment
or demotion, temporary suspension without pay, termination, or, in the case of
an officer, removal from an elected or appointed position, as the City believes
appropriate under the circumstances.
(Ord. 18-O-2, 1-2-2018, eff. 1-2-2018; amd. Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
1-13-10: SEXUAL HARASSMENT PREVENTION TRAINING:
Sexual harassment prevention training shall be provided at least once a year to
all employees.
(Ord. 20-O-27, 10-6-2020)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
SECTION:
2-1-1: Establishment
2-1-2: Coles County Emergency Management Agency
2-1-3: Appropriation, Levy Of Taxes
2-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
The Emergency Services and Disaster Agency created by the City to prevent,
minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from a natural or
manmade disaster, major emergencies, enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile
action in accordance with the "Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act" 1  is
no longer established. The City does not maintain its own emergency services
and disaster agency. (Ord. 18-O-24, 8-7-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
2-1-2: COLES COUNTY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY:
The Coles County Emergency Management Agency, hereinafter referred to as EMA,
established and maintained by Coles County, Illinois, serves the entire Coles
County and is the agency responsible for emergency management within the City's
corporate limits. (Ord. 18-O-24, 8-7-2018)
2-1-3: APPROPRIATION, LEVY OF TAXES:
The City Council may make an appropriation for EMA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy, in addition, for EMA purposes only, a tax not
exceeding five cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed
value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by
the "Illinois EMA Act"; however, that amount collectible under such levy shall
in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. (Ord. 18-O-24, 8-7-
2018)
CHAPTER 2
PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-2-1: Board Created; Membership; Appointment; Term
2-2-2: Organization
2-2-3: Powers And Duties
2-2-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory board consisting of
five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of
the council. The members shall hold office for five (5) year staggered terms.
(Ord. 00-O-38, 8-15-2000)
2-2-2: ORGANIZATION:
The members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall organize by
election of one of its members as chairperson. The board shall meet at least
monthly. (Ord. 00-O-38, 8-15-2000)
2-2-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The parks and recreation advisory board shall serve as an advisory
board, making recommendations to the city council for the following items:
      1.   Park master planning.
      2.   Budget and financial planning.
      3.   Policies related to the use of the parks and recreational
facilities.
      4.   Fee structures.
      5.   Capital improvements.
      6.   Other matters as directed by the city council.
   B.   The advisory board shall have the authority to develop and implement
recreational activities and programs without council approval, provided such
activities and programs are financially feasible. The board shall forward a
summary of the recreational programs offered at least once each quarter to the
city council for informational purposes. (Ord. 00-O-38, 8-15-2000)
CHAPTER 3
TREE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-3-1: Commission Created; Duties
2-3-2: Membership; Term
2-3-1: COMMISSION CREATED; DUTIES:
The Charleston tree commission is hereby established with the following
functions and duties:
   A.   The tree commission shall appoint a chairperson, meet and adopt rules
of procedure for regular and special meetings as deemed necessary by the
commission.
   B.   The tree commission shall advise and consult the city council on any
and all matters pertaining to trees located within the city. Said advice and
recommendation shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Recommending modifications or creation of new ordinances regulating
and protecting trees;
      2.   Drafting policy concerning the selection, planting, maintenance and
removal of city trees;
      3.   The establishment of educational and informational programs for the
purpose of increasing public awareness of city trees; and
      4.   Developing a program for optimizing the tree, shrub and other plant
resources within the city. (Ord. 93-O-24, 4-20-1993; amd. Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-
1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
2-3-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERM:
The Charleston tree commission shall consist of nine (9) members, said members
being appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council, with said
terms being for three (3) years. It is the intent that the terms of four (4)
members shall commence in one calendar year and the terms of five (5) members
shall commence the following calendar year. (Ord. 96-O-25, 5-7-1996; amd. Ord.
96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL OCCUPATION TAXES
ARTICLE A. NON-HOME RULE RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX; NON-HOME RULE SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-1A-1: Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
3-1A-2: Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax Imposed
3-1A-3: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
3-1A-4: Limitation On Use Of Proceeds
3-1A-5: Qualified Exemption Of Aviation Fuel From Both Taxes
3-1A-1: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state’s government, at retail in
this municipality at the rate of one-percent (1.00%) of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this Ordinance is in
effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the
provisions of Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
1.3). (Ord. 2025-O-9, 4-1-2025)
3-1A-2: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of
service. The rate of this tax shall be one-percent (1%) of the selling price of
all tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen, either in the
form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate, as an
incident to such sale. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4). (Ord. 2025-O-9, 4-1-2025)
3-1A-3: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-O-9, 4-1-
2025)
3-1A-4: LIMITATION ON USE OF PROCEEDS:
The City shall only expend the proceeds generated from any tax imposed by
virtue of this Ordinance on: (a) expenditures related to public infrastructure
including, but not limited to, “municipal roads and streets, access roads,
bridges, and sidewalks; waste disposal systems; and water and sewer line
extensions, water distribution and purification facilities, storm water
drainage and retention facilities, and sewage treatment facilities[;]” (b)
efforts to “reduce the levy for real estate taxes or avoid an increase in the
levy for real estate taxes that would otherwise have been required” by the
City; or (c) any other or further permitted uses under Section 8-11-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1) as may now or hereafter be
authorized therein. (Ord. 2025-O-9, 4-1-2025)
3-1A-5: QUALIFIED EXEMPTION OF AVIATION FUEL FROM BOTH TAXES:
No provision of this Ordinance shall be interpreted to impose any tax on
aviation fuel, as defined in Section 3 of the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (35
ILCS 120/3), unless the proceeds of said tax are expended for airport-related
purposes, as that term is defined in Section 6z-20.2 of the State Finance Act
(30 ILCS 105/6z-20.2), and said expenditures are made in compliance with the
certification requirements for airport-related purposes under Section 2-22 of
the Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-22). (Ord. 2025-O-9, 4-1-2025)
ARTICLE B. RESERVED
ARTICLE C. UTILITIES TAX
SECTION:
3-1C-1: Definitions
3-1C-2: Tax Imposed
3-1C-3: Exemptions
3-1C-4: Tax Is Additional
3-1C-5: Tax Return; Payment Of Tax
3-1C-6: Erroneous Payments
3-1C-7: Recovery Of Tax Due
3-1C-8: Penalty
3-1C-9: Effective Date
3-1C-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages, or
for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity for use
or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be, except for that
consideration received from the city; and for all services rendered in
connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise,
including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and
for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages without any
deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied,
the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses
whatsoever.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of person
to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of
services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in
connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in
turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include
such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of
messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to
other persons, for the transmission of messages. (Ord. 86-O-23, 5-20-1986)
3-1C-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   A.   Persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity, at the rate of three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from such
business originating within the corporate limits of the city.
   B.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing,
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the city,
and not for resale, at the rate of three percent (3%) of the gross receipts
therefrom.
   C.   1. Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing, or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate
limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of three percent (3%) of
the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 86-O-23, 5-20-1986)
      2.   a. If subject to deregulation under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes,
the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at
retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the city at the
following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each purchase:
Number Of Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed Per Month Cents Per Kilowatt Hour
Number Of Kilowatt Hours Used Or Consumed Per Month Cents Per Kilowatt Hour
First   2,000                                    0.284
Next   48,000                                    0.186
Next   50,000                                    0.168
Next   400,000                                   0.163
Next   500,000                                   0.158
Next   2,000,000                                 0.149
Next   2,000,000                                 0.147
Next   5,000,000                                 0.144
Next   10,000,000                                0.142
All electricity used or consumed in excess of       0.140
20,000,000
 
         b.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, the rates set
forth in subsection C2a of this section shall be effective on August 1, 1999,
for residential customers, and on the earlier of the last bill issued prior to
December 31, 2000, or the date of the first bill issued pursuant to 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104 for nonresidential customers.
         c.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-2, subsection C1
of this section shall specifically remain in effect until July 31, 1999, for
receipts attributable to residential customers, and the earlier of through the
last bill issued prior to December 31, 2000, or the date of the first bill
issued pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/16-104 for receipts
attributable to nonresidential customers.
         d.   The provisions of this subsection C1 shall not be effective until
August 1, 1999.
         e.   The tax authorized by this article shall be collected from the
purchaser by the person maintaining a place of business in the state who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and,
if unpaid, is recoverable in the same manner as the original charge for
delivering the electricity. Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this
article and any such tax collected by a person delivering electricity shall
constitute a debt owed to the city by such person delivering the electricity.
Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by
adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to such gross charge an
amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person
delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the city upon request. If a person delivering electricity fails to collect
the tax from the purchasers, then the purchaser shall be required to pay the
tax directly to the city in the manner prescribed by the city. Persons
delivering electricity who file returns pursuant to this subsection C2 shall,
at the time of filing such return, pay the city the amount of the tax collected
pursuant to this article.
         f.   In the event that public act 90-561 is declared unconstitutional,
or if the provisions of this subsection C2 are voided by court action, the
provisions of subsection C1 shall remain in effect in all respects as if it had
never been amended by this subsection C2, and any amounts paid to the city by
any person delivering electricity pursuant to this subsection C2 shall be
deemed to have been paid pursuant to the gross receipts utility tax as it
existed prior to the effective date of this subsection C2.
         g.   If not subject to deregulation under 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, persons such as Coles Moultrie Electric Cooperative engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use
or consumption within the corporate limits of the city, and not for resale, at
a rate of three percent (3%) of the gross receipts therefrom. (Ord. 99-O-6, 2-
2-1999)
3-1C-3: EXEMPTIONS:
No tax is imposed by this article with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by
the state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged
in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to
taxation under the provisions of this article for such transactions as are or
may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the municipal retailers'
occupation tax act authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1. (Ord.
86-O-23, 5-20-1986)
3-1C-4: TAX IS ADDITIONAL:
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money or value of products or
services furnished to the city by the taxpayer as compensation for the use of
its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and maintenance
therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other equipment used
in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 86-O-23, 5-20-1986)
3-1C-5: TAX RETURN; PAYMENT OF TAX:
   A.   On or before August 1, 1986, each taxpayer shall make a return to the
city treasurer for the month of July 1986, stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require. (Ord. 86-O-23, 5-20-1986)
   B.   On or before the last day of each and every month thereafter, each
taxpayer shall make a like return to the city comptroller for a corresponding
period.
   C.   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the city comptroller the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided, that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he
so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. 86-O-23, 5-20-1986; amd. Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
   D.   Provided however, that in the event that the tax for any given one
month is less than five dollars ($5.00) per month, the taxpayer making the
return shall file his return to the city comptroller and include payment to the
city comptroller on a semiannual basis. Said semiannual return shall continue
until such time that the amount of taxes remitted to the city on said
semiannual basis exceed seventy five dollars ($75.00). Thereafter, the taxpayer
shall return to a monthly return and remittance. (Ord. 95-O-26, 5-16-1995; amd.
Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
3-1C-6: ERRONEOUS PAYMENTS:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this article, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this article from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. (Ord. 86-O-23, 5-
20-1986)
3-1C-7: RECOVERY OF TAX DUE:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this article
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after due date of such amount.
(Ord. 86-O-23, 5-20-1986)
3-1C-8: PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and, in
addition, shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord.
86-O-23, 5-20-1986)
3-1C-9: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall take effect after publication, and the tax provided for
herein shall be based on the "gross receipts", as defined in section
3-1C-1 of this article, actually paid to the taxpayer for services billed on or
after July 1, 1986. (Ord. 86-O-23, 5-20-1986)
ARTICLE D. RENTAL TAX
SECTION:
3-1D-1: Tax Imposed
3-1D-2: Tax Return
3-1D-3: Payment Of Tax
3-1D-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of renting or
leasing tangible personal property to the users thereof at the rate of one-half
of one percent (0.5%) of the gross receipts from such renting or leasing made
in the course of such business while this article is in effect, in accordance
with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6. (Ord. 65-O-28,
8-17-1965)
3-1D-2: TAX RETURN:
Every person engaged in such business in the city shall file with the state
department of revenue the return in the manner as required by section 5 of the
"leasing occupation tax act" as adopted by the 74th general assembly. (Ord. 65-
O-28, 8-17-1965)
3-1D-3: PAYMENT OF TAX:
At the time such return is filed, there shall be paid to the state department
of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
renting or leasing tangible personal property during the preceding month. (Ord.
65-O-28, 8-17-1965)
ARTICLE E. AUTOMOBILE RENTING TAXES
SECTION:
3-1E-1: Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
3-1E-2: Automobile Renting Use Tax
3-1E-1: AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of renting automobiles in this city at the rate of one percent (1%) of
the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while
this section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-7.
   B.   Tax Return: Every such person engaged in such business in the city
shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
state department of revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of "an act in relation
to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property to purchasers for use or consumption", approved June 29, 1933, as
amended.
   C.   Payment Of Tax: At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid
to the state department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account
of the renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. 82-O-1, 3-2-
1982)
3-1E-2: AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in the
city an automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is
titled or registered with an agency of the state government in the city at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while this
section is in effect, in accordance with provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/8-11-8.
   B.   Tax Return: Every such person engaged in such business in the city
shall file, on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the
state department of revenue required by sections 2 and 3 of "an act in relation
to a tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property to purchasers for use or consumption", approved June 29, 1933, as
amended.
   C.   Scope Of Tax: The tax provided for in this section shall be collected
from the persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is
given as being in the city. (Ord. 82-O-2, 3-2-1982)
ARTICLE F. HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
SECTION:
3-1F-1: Definitions
3-1F-2: Tax Levied And Imposed; Collection
3-1F-3: Tax Return; Payment Of Tax
3-1F-4: Books And Records; Inspections
3-1F-5: Disposition And Use Of Revenues
3-1F-6: Enforcement
3-1F-7: Rules And Regulations
3-1F-8: Penalties
3-1F-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions are used herein, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
HOTEL ROOM OR MOTEL ROOM: A room within a structure kept, used or maintained
as, or advertised or held out to the public to be, in an inn, motel, hotel,
apartment, lodging house, dormitory or place where sleeping, rooming, office,
conference or exhibition accommodations are furnished for lease or rent,
whether with or without meals. One room offered for rental with or without an
adjoining bath shall be considered as a single "hotel or motel room". The
number of hotel or motel rooms within a suite shall be computed on the basis of
those rooms utilized for the purpose of sleeping.
OWNER: Any person or persons having a sufficient proprietary interest in
conducting the operation of a hotel or motel room or receiving the
consideration for the rental of such hotel or motel room so as to entitle such
person or persons to all or a portion of the net receipts thereof.
PERSON: Any natural person, trustee, court appointed representative, syndicate,
association, partnership, firm, club, company, corporation, business trust,
institution, agent, government corporation, municipal corporation, district or
other political subdivision, contractor, supplier, vendor, vendee, operator,
user or owner, or any officers, agents, employees or other representative
acting either for himself or for any other person in any capacity, or any other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties. The masculine,
feminine, singular or plural is included in any circumstance. (Ord. 85-O-43, 8-
20-1985)
3-1F-2: TAX LEVIED AND IMPOSED; COLLECTION:
   A.   Tax Imposed; Exemptions: There is hereby levied and imposed upon the
use and privilege of renting a hotel or motel room within the city a tax of
five percent (5%) of the rental or leasing charge for each such hotel and motel
room rented for each twenty four (24) hour period or any portion thereof;
provided, however, that the tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any person
to rent a hotel or motel room for more than seven (7) consecutive days or to a
person who works and lives in the same hotel or motel.
   B.   Responsibility For Payment: The ultimate incident of and liability for
payment of said tax shall be borne by the person who seeks the privilege of
occupying any such hotel or motel room, said person hereinafter referred to as
"renter".
   C.   Tax Is Additional: The tax herein levied shall be paid in addition to
any and all other taxes and charges. It shall be the duty of the owner, manager
or operator of every hotel or motel to act as trustee for and on account of the
city, and to secure said tax from the renter of the hotel or motel room, and
pay over to the city clerk said tax under procedures prescribed by the city
clerk or as otherwise provided in this article.
   D.   Collection Of Tax: Every person required to collect the tax levied by
this article shall secure said tax from the renter at the time he collects
rental payment for the hotel or motel room. Upon the invoice receipt or other
statement or memorandum of the rent given to the renter at the time of payment,
the amount due under the tax provided in this article shall be stated
separately on said document. (Ord. 85-O-43, 8-20-1985)
3-1F-3: TAX RETURN; PAYMENT OF TAX:
   A.   The owner or owners of each hotel or motel within the city shall file
tax returns showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel and motel
room during each monthly period commencing on September 1, 1985, and continuing
on the first day of every month thereafter on forms prescribed by the city
clerk. The return shall be due on or before the thirtieth day of the calendar
month succeeding the end of the monthly filing period.
   B.   The first taxing period for the purpose of this article shall commence
September 1, 1985, and the tax return and payment for such period shall be due
on or before October 30, 1985. Thereafter reporting periods and tax payments
shall be in accordance with the provisions of this article. At the time of
filing said tax returns, the owner shall pay to the city clerk all taxes due
for the period to which the tax return applies.
   C.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate
of one percent (1%) per thirty (30) day period, or portion thereof, from the
day of delinquency, shall be added and collected. (Ord. 85-O-43, 8-20-1985)
3-1F-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS; INSPECTIONS:
The city clerk, or any person certified as his or her deputy or representative,
may enter the premises of any hotel or motel for inspection and examination of
books and records in order to effectuate the proper administration of this
article and to assure the enforcement of the collection of the tax imposed. It
shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or interfere with the city
clerk or his duly authorized deputy or representative in the discharge of his
duties and the performance of this article. It shall be the duty of every owner
to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the city clerk or his
deputy or authorized representative shall, at all times, have access, which
records shall include a daily sheet showing:
   A.   The number of hotel or motel rooms rented during the twenty four (24)
hour period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel rooms where such
shall occur; and
   B.   The actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected for the date in
question. (Ord. 85-O-43, 8-20-1985)
3-1F-5: DISPOSITION AND USE OF REVENUES:
   A.   Disposition Of Tax And Fines: All proceeds resulting from the
imposition of the tax under this article, including penalties, shall be paid
into the treasury of the city and shall be credited to and deposited in the
corporate fund of the city.
   B.   Use Of Receipts: The amounts collected by the city pursuant to this
article shall be expended by the city solely to promote tourism, conventions,
and other special events within the city or otherwise to attract nonresidents
to visit the city. (Ord. 85-O-43, 8-20-1985)
3-1F-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Delinquent Taxes; Remedy: Whenever any person shall fail to pay any tax
as herein provided, the corporation counsel shall, upon request of the city
clerk, bring or cause to be brought any action to enforce the payment of said
tax on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction.
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Licenses; Suspension Of City Services;
Appeals: If the mayor, after hearing held by him, shall find that any person
has wilfully avoided payment of the tax imposed by this article, he may suspend
or revoke all city licenses held by such tax evader or may suspend any or all
services provided by the city. The owner, manager, or operator of the hotel or
motel shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing to be held not less
than five (5) days after notice of the time and place of the hearing, addressed
to him at his last known place of business. (Ord. 85-O-43, 8-20-1985)
3-1F-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city clerk may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of this article concerning enforcement and application of this
article. The term "rules and regulations" includes, but is not limited to, case
by case determination of whether or not the tax imposed by this article
applies. (Ord. 85-O-43, 8-20-1985)
3-1F-8: PENALTIES:
The purpose of imposing the following penalties is to ensure the integrity of
the collection process established pursuant to this article:
   A.   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting, neglecting
or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this article, except when otherwise specifically provided,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the
first offense, and not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second and each subsequent offense in
any one hundred eighty (180) day period.
   B.   Repeated offenses in excess of three (3) within any one hundred eighty
(180) day period may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in
the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months.
   C.   A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day
upon which said person shall continue any such violation, or permit any such
violation to exist after notification thereof. (Ord. 85-O-43, 8-20-1985)
ARTICLE G. MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-1G-1: Tax Levied And Imposed; Collection
3-1G-1: TAX LEVIED AND IMPOSED; COLLECTION:
   A.   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling cannabis at retail at the rate of three percent (3%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
article is in effect. This Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax shall
not be applicable to the sales of cannabis purchased under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act. The imposition of this tax is in
accordance with and subject to the provisions of section 8-11-23 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-23).
   B.   Persons subject to any tax imposed under this article may reimburse
themselves for their tax liability hereunder by separately stating this tax as
an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with any state tax that such sellers are required to collect.
   C.   Collection of Tax: The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that
may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall
have full power to administer and enforce this article; to collect all taxes
and penalties due hereunder; to dispose of taxes and penalties so collected in
the manner provided by law; and to determine all rights to credit memoranda
arising on account of the erroneous payment of tax or penalty under this
article. (Ord. 20- O-05, 3-3-2020)
ARTICLE H. MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX; MUNICIPAL GROCERY
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-1H-1: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
3-1H-2: Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
3-1H-3: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
3-1H-1: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of one-percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
Ordinance is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord. 2025-O-10, 4-1-2025)
3-1H-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be one-percent (1%) of the gross receipts from such grocery
sales made in the course of such business while this Ordinance is in effect.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord.
2025-O-10, 4-1-2025)
3-1H-3: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-O-
10, 4-1-2025)
CHAPTER 2
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
3-2-3: Fee Imposed
3-2-4: Collection, Enforcement And Administration Of Fee
3-2-5: Compliance With Other Laws
3-2-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
3-2-7: Waiver Of Fee
3-2-8: Effective Date Of Fee
3-2-9: Penalties
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the city of
Charleston, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in
money, whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services,
and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any
deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the
materials used, labor or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In
case credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when
paid. "Gross charges" for private line service shall include charges imposed at
each channel point within the city of Charleston, charges for the channel
mileage between each channel point within the city of Charleston, and charges
for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within the city
of Charleston. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   A.   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made under:
1) the fee imposed by this chapter; 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act 1 ;
3) amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code; 4)
the tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act 2 ; 5) 911 surcharges;
or 6) the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
   B.   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the city
of Charleston;
   C.   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of data
or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or information
intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes, but is not
limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing equipment,
tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the usage of
computers under a time sharing agreement;
   D.   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   E.   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
public utilities act 3  to the extent of such exemption and during the period
of time specified by the city of Charleston;
   F.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   G.   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which "gross charges" are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   H.   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications
devices; or
   I.   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the city of Charleston.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any municipal street, alley, water or public right of way
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements
wherein the city of Charleston has acquired the right and authority to locate
or permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications
facilities. "Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal city
of Charleston property that is not specifically described in the previous
sentence and shall not include city of Charleston buildings and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this state.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for his use or consumption and not
for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air to ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone services,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter services, computer
exchange services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as defined in this section. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city of
Charleston through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following), as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:
   A.   Any telecommunications retailer; and
   B.   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making "sales of telecommunications at
retail", as defined in this section. The city of Charleston may, in its
discretion, upon application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby
imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of business within this state,
who, to the satisfaction of the city of Charleston, furnishes adequate security
to ensure collection and payment of the fee. When so authorized, it shall be
the duty of such retailer to pay the fee upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a
retailer maintaining a place of business within the city of Charleston.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
telecommunications act of 1996 (public law 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)(7),
as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and
paging services. (Ord. 97-O-54, 12-16-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/9-221 or 5/9-222.
2 2. 220 ILCS 5/9-222.
3 1. 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1.
3-2-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   A.   Every "telecommunications provider", as defined in section
3-2-1 of this chapter, shall register with the city within thirty (30) days
after the effective date hereof or becoming a telecommunications provider,
whichever is later, on a form to be provided by the city; provided, however,
that any telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to
subsection
3-2-4C of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this section.
   B.   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the city
pursuant to subsection A of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
3-2-4C of this chapter, as the case may be, to the city within thirty (30) days
from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by
the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return
on file with the city. (Ord. 97-O-54, 12-16-1997)
3-2-3: FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   A city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%)
of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the city for telecommunications originating or received in the
city.
   B.   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all public
rights of way within the city by telecommunications retailers. Imposition of
the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter does not,
however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or imposition of any
fees otherwise authorized by law.
   C.   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as set forth in
section
3-2-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 97-O-54, 12-16-1997)
3-2-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEE:
   A.   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   B.   Unless otherwise approved by the city manager, the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
city not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which
a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%)
of the city infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself
for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   C.   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure maintenance fee to the city
shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the city
manager, which shall contain such information as the city manager may
reasonably require.
   D.   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant to
this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under subsection A
of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   E.   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee has
been paid that was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as a
result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this chapter from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the city manager may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the city within the applicable statutory
period of limitations; and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by
the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   F.   Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax
act.
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code.
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code.
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the public utilities act.
   G.   The city shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to the city by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city, plus five percent (5%)
of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs
incurred by the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed five
percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit.
Said sum shall be paid to the city within twenty one (21) days after the date
of issuance of an invoice for same.
   H.   The city manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further
or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
chapter consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time,
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant
to section
3-2-2 of this chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 97-O-54, 12-16-1997)
3-2-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   A.   Generally applicable taxes; and
   B.   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or repair
of the public rights of way, including standards relating to freestanding
towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as provided; and
   C.   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   D.   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning uses
or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord. 97-O-54,
12-16-1997)
3-2-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the city entered into before the effective date hereof regarding
the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according to and for their
stated terms except for any fees, charges or other compensation to the extent
waived. (Ord. 97-O-54, 12-16-1997)
3-2-7: WAIVER OF FEE:
The city hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation that may
accrue after the effective date of the waiver to the city by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing city franchise, license,
or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the time the
city imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This waiver
shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure maintenance fee
provided for in this chapter is subject to being lawfully imposed on the
telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer
from the customer. The city clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer
with whom the city has a franchise. (Ord. 97-O-54, 12-16-1997)
3-2-8: EFFECTIVE DATE OF FEE:
The city infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this chapter shall
become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not less than ninety
(90) days after the city provides written notice by certified mail to each
telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing franchise,
license, or similar agreement, that the city waives all compensation under such
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement during such time as the fee
is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted
to the city. The infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges
billed on or after the effective date as established in the preceding sentence.
(Ord. 97-O-54, 12-16-1997)
3-2-9: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects
or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to fine in accordance with section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 97-O-54, 12-16-1997)
ARTICLE A. CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Definitions
3-2A-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-2A-3: Applicable Principles
3-2A-4: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-2A-5: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-2A-6: Late Fees/Payments
3-2A-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the city.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the purchaser
is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      4.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      5.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      6.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a city for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 07-O-66, 12-18-2007)
3-2A-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   C.   Notice To The City: The holder shall notify the city at least ten (10)
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the city.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the city. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt of
the ordinance adopting this article by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
article shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-401(b)(6) to the city.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 07-O-66, 12-18-2007)
3-2A-3: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this article shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 07-O-66, 12-18-2007)
3-2A-4: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the city, including any tax that is
or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city's simplified
municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 07-O-66, 12-18-
2007)
3-2A-5: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The city will notify the holder of the requirements
it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to an
audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers
in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to recompute
any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operator terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the local
government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the municipality's submission of an invoice
for the sum. (Ord. 07-O-66, 12-18-2007)
3-2A-6: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this municipality pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill
of rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 07-O-66, 12-18-
2007)
ARTICLE B. CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-2B-2: Enforcement
3-2B-3: Penalties
3-2B-4: Customer Credits
3-2B-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   A.   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the city's boundaries.
   B.   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this article shall be
incorporated into this article by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this article by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord. 07-O-67, 12-18-
2007)
3-2B-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of the
customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
city. (Ord. 07-O-67, 12-18-2007)
3-2B-3: PENALTIES:
The city, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(r)(1), does
hereby provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the cable
and video protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the
penalties provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a
competitively neutral basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five
thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
   A.   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   B.   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice of any
alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least thirty
(30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material
breach.
   C.   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 07-O-67, 12-18-2007)
3-2B-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations. Those
credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/70-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for
the next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of
the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the
credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord.
07-O-67, 12-18-2007)
CHAPTER 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Local Liquor Control Officials
3-3-3: License And Compliance Required; Failure To Obtain License
3-3-4: Ineligibility For License
3-3-5: Application For License
3-3-6: Bond Requirements
3-3-7: Issuance Of License
3-3-8: Payment And Disposition Of Fees
3-3-9: Term Of License; Expiration; Renewals
3-3-10: Change Of Location; Transfer Of License
3-3-11: Classification Of Licenses; Fees
3-3-12: Number Of Licenses
3-3-13: Restrictions On And Conditions Of License
3-3-14: Hours Of Sales
3-3-15: Location And Premises Requirements
3-3-16: Underage Persons
3-3-17: Bulk Sales
3-3-18: Keg Sales
3-3-19: Offenses By General Public
3-3-20: Revocation Or Suspension Of License; Fine Imposed
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the words and phrases used in this
chapter are defined as follows:
ALCOHOL: The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified
or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes synthetic ethyl
alcohol. The term "alcohol" does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and
containing an alcohol concentration of five-tenths of one percent (0.5%) or
greater, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt, and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
BOWLING ALLEY: Every establishment or building, or part of an establishment or
building, as the case may be, wherein the game of bowling, played with
composition balls and ten (10) wooden pins, is played and has a minimum of
twenty (20) bowling lanes.
BULK ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes beer sold in a keg or other container requiring
a tapper or other mechanical device for beverage removal and containing two (2)
gallons of beer or more, or a quantity in excess of two (2) cases of "beer", as
defined in this section, to any one individual at any one time.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of the State, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or
space in a building, of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided, that such "club" files with the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner at the time of its application for a license under this
chapter one copy of a list of names and residences of its members, and
similarly files, within ten (10) days of the election of any additional member,
his name and address; and provided further, that its affairs and management are
conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen
by the members at their annual meeting and that no member or any officer,
agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in
the form of salary and other compensation, any profits from the distribution or
sale of alcoholic liquor to the club or the members of the club or its guests
introduced by members beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed and
voted at any annual meeting by the members or by its board of directors or
other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
CONTINUAL AND UNINTERRUPTED: Every licensed establishment must be open to the
public for business in full compliance with all laws and regulations for at
least an average of ten (10) hours per calendar week as measured across any
twelve (12) consecutive week period.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail market offering a limited supply and selection of
food items, groceries, and/or convenience items, and must offer the sale of
gasoline with operational gasoline and fuel sales/pumps for public consumption.
DRUGSTORE: Every establishment or building or part thereof where the majority
of retail sales within said store are prescription or nonprescription drugs.
GROCERY STORE: A full service market which sells all components of grocery and
household needs to its customers, said products including, but not being
limited to, produce, dairy products, eggs, canned goods, meat, frozen goods,
household cleaners, paper products and breads. A convenience store which offers
a limited availability of food items shall not be considered a "grocery store"
for the purposes of this definition.
HOTEL: Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed
and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and
guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five (25)
or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings in connection therewith, and such building or buildings,
structure or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and
dining room equipment and capacity.
LICENSEE: Any person, corporation, partnership or club holding a license under
the terms and provisions of this chapter and includes the principal,
proprietor, agent, servant, or employee of said licensee.
LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER: The Mayor of the City of Charleston, a
municipal corporation.
MINOR: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead or
other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, club or association not incorporated.
RESIDENT: Any person living in the City of Charleston as his or her home.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and
regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAILER: A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, for a
consideration and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
SELL AT RETAIL AND SALE AT RETAIL: Sales for use or consumption and not for
resale in any form.
SPIRITS: Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin, or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
TO SELL: Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to sell.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of "alcohol" or "spirits", as defined in this
section. (Ord. 19-O-1, 1-2-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-O-4, 2-21-2023; Ord. 2024-O-26,
6-18-2024)
3-3-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL OFFICIALS:
   A.   Local Liquor Control Commissioner:
      1.   Mayor Serve As: The Mayor shall be the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration in his jurisdiction
of the provisions of this chapter, or any provision of this Code. However, the
Mayor may appoint a person or persons to assist him in the exercise of the
powers and performances of the duties herein provided for such Local Liquor
Control Commissioner. (Ord. 79-O-30, 7-3-1979)
      2.   Powers And Duties: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have
the following powers, functions and duties with respect to licenses: (Ord. 59-
O-10, 3-25-1959)
         a.   Grant Or Suspend Licenses; Impose Fines: To grant or suspend for
not more than thirty (30) days or revoke for cause all licenses issued for
premises within the City. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may further, in
addition thereof or in lieu thereof, levy a fine on any licensee for violation
of the provisions of this Code. Said fine and suspension shall not be less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and/or a minimum three (3) day suspension
for the first offense within a twelve (12) month period; a minimum five hundred
dollar ($500.00) fine and/or a minimum seven (7) day suspension for a second
violation within a twelve (12) month period; and a minimum one thousand dollar
($1,000.00) fine and/or a minimum one month (30 day) suspension for a third
violation within a twelve (12) month period. Said "twelve (12) month period"
shall be defined as beginning upon the date of the first violation for the
purposes of imposition of a fine and/or suspension. (Ord. 14-O-4, 3-18-2014)
         b.   Inspect Premises: To enter or to authorize any law enforcement
officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine
whether any of the provisions of this chapter have been or are being violated
and at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection
therewith.
         c.   Receive Complaints: To receive complaint from any citizen within
his jurisdiction that any of the provisions of this Code have been or are being
violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959)
         d.   Collect Fees: To receive local license fees and pay the same
forthwith to the Comptroller. (Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959; amd. Ord. 03-O-38, 12-
16-2003)
         e.   Call For Hearing Before Liquor Control Advisory Commission: Upon
filing of an application, the Mayor may convene the Liquor Control Advisory
Commission to conduct a hearing thereon before said commission. Notice of said
hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation
within the City not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than seven (7) days
prior to the hearing date. Defects in the giving of such notices provided for
in this subsection A2e shall not be grounds for challenge to any decision to
issue or not to issue a liquor license. The City Clerk, upon receipt of an
application for liquor license, shall send notice of such application to the
building official, Fire and Police Departments of the City and the Health
Department of Coles County. Said departments shall inspect the premises or
plans for premises sought to be licensed and report their findings to the
Liquor Control Commissioner. If a hearing is convened to consider an
application for a liquor license the Liquor Control Advisory Commission shall
receive such evidence as it may deem necessary to make a factual determination
that the application complies with the provisions of this chapter. An
application or applications received for a given category of license, in
addition to all other provisions of this chapter and Illinois State Statutes,
shall be ranked or otherwise evaluated by the Liquor Control Commissioner in
terms of the desirability based on the following criteria:
            (1)   Whether most of the establishment's anticipated gross revenue
will be from the sale of alcohol or other sources.
            (2)   The character and nature of the proposed establishment.
            (3)   The general design, layout and contents of the proposed
establishment.
            (4)   Whether the proposed establishment complies with the nature
and intent of the category of license applied for.
            (5)   The location of the proposed establishment and the probable
impact of a liquor establishment at the location upon the surrounding
neighborhood or the City as a whole.
            (6)   The probable demand for the proposed liquor establishment in
the City.
            (7)   The financial responsibility of the applicant.
            (8)   Whether the applicant, or (if the applicant is a partnership
or corporation) whether any partner, officer or director of the applicant has
ever held a liquor license and his or her performance as a licensee.
            (9)   The date of application for a license shall not be considered
as a factor in the ranking of applications.
            (10)   Whether the applicant intends to furnish live entertainment
in the establishment, and if so, the nature of such entertainment.
            (11)   Whether a current City liquor license had been issued for
the premises sought to be licensed in the application.
            (12)   Whether the premises complies with all pertinent Health,
Building, Zoning and Fire Safety Codes applicable within the City. (Ord. 14-O-
4, 3-18-2014)
         f.   Examination Of License Applicant Or Licensee: The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall have the right to examine, or cause to be examined,
under oath, any applicant for a local license or for renewal thereof, or any
licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension has been served in the
manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined the books
and records of any such applicant or licensee, and to hear testimony and take
proof for his information in the performance of his duties. For the purpose of
obtaining any of the information desired by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner under this subsection A2f, he may authorize his agent to act in
his behalf. (Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959)
   B.   Local Liquor Control Advisory Commission: There is hereby established a
Local Liquor Control Advisory Commission. Said commission shall consist of five
(5) members appointed by the Mayor. Said members shall serve for a period
concurrent with the term of Office of the Mayor. Vacancies shall be filled for
the unexpired term only. The Mayor shall act as Chairperson of said commission
and may appoint Vice Chairpersons to serve in his absence. (Ord. 19-O-1, 1-2-
2019)
3-3-3: LICENSE AND COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; FAILURE TO OBTAIN LICENSE:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, either by himself, herself, or
agent, or any person acting as an agent, barkeeper, clerk or servant of
another, to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor without first
having obtained a license so to do as hereinafter provided, and it shall
likewise be unlawful for any such person to sell or offer for sale any
alcoholic liquor in violation of the terms and conditions of such license.
(Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959)
   B.   Any individual who violates this chapter by the sale, or offers of
sale, at retail any alcoholic liquor, without having first obtained a license
shall be fined in an amount not to be less than three hundred fifty dollars
($350.00). (Ord. 91-O-16, 6-4-1991)
3-3-4: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person that has not designated a resident of the City to receive any
and all notices and communications on its behalf. (Ord. 19-O-1, 1-2-2019)
   B.   A person not of legal age, or under any legal disability.
   C.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   D.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal law or
under the laws of the State.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   G.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   H.   A person, partnership, LLC, or corporation whose license issued under
this chapter has been revoked for cause.
   I.   A person, partnership, LLC, or corporation who at the time of
application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible
for such license upon a first application.
   J.   A partnership, LLC, or corporation unless its place of business is
conducted by a manager or agent and said manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of a person licensed as a sole proprietor.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of a
person licensed as a sole proprietor.
   L.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor after
the effective date hereof, or shall have forfeited his bond by failure to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
   M.   A person, partnership, LLC, or corporation who does not own the
premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for
the full period for which the license is to be issued.
   N.   Any law enforcing public official, any Mayor, or member of the City
Council or commission, and no such official shall be interested in any way,
either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of
alcoholic liquor.
   O.   Any person, partnership, LLC, or corporation not eligible for a State
retail liquor dealer's license.
   P.   Any person, partnership, LLC, or corporation whose principal business
in the premises described in the application is the sale at retail or wholesale
of dry goods.
   Q.   Any person, partnership, LLC, or corporation who fails to furnish or
furnishes false information or who fails to make or falsely makes statements
required in the application for license as set forth in this chapter.
   R.   No person, individually or as a partner or shareholder in any
corporation, shall own any interest in more than five (5) licenses issued
hereunder. (Ord. 18-O-32, 11-6-2018)
3-3-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Application for license shall be made in writing to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, signed by the applicant, if an individual; by all
parties, if a partnership; or by a duly authorized officer thereof, if a club
or corporation; verified by affidavit, and shall be submitted and filed with
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
issuance of any license, and shall contain the following information and
statements:
      1.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or a club,
the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors; and if a majority in interest of
the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name
and address of such person.
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
      3.   The character of business of the applicant, and in case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
      4.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
      5.   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made.
      6.   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license, and that the licensee owns said
premises or has a lease thereon for the full term for which the license is
requested. In the event the applicant has a lease for the premises, a
photostatic copy of the lease shall be attached to the application.
      7.   Whether applicant has made similar application for a similar other
license on premises other than described in this application and the
disposition of such application.
      8.   That applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
this chapter, the laws of the State, or this Code.
      9.   Whether a previous license by any state, or subdivision thereof, or
by the Federal government has been revoked, and the reasons therefor.
      10.   Length of time the applicant has resided in the City, prior to the
submission of the application.
      11.   That the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State or
of the United States, or any ordinance of the City, in the conduct of his place
of business. (Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959)
      12.   That applicant will testify under oath to all competent, relevant
and material questions propounded to him in any hearing conducted by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner or by his designated representative, either before
or after the issuance of a license to him and that his failure to so testify
shall be sufficient reason for the refusal to issue any such license to him or
for the suspension or revocation of any license which has been issued to him.
      13.   Responses to all questions asked of applicant on forms provided by
the City to the applicant.
      14.   A certified check in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to
the City as reimbursement to the City for the cost of processing the
application, whether granted or not granted. (Ord. 79-O-34, 7-3-1979)
      15.   That the applicant shall be wholly responsible and shall prepay to
the City Clerk any and all costs associated with criminal background checks
actually paid to other law enforcement agencies. Said amount shall be prepaid
and shall be set by the City Clerk based upon actual costs. Said costs shall
not be reimbursable and shall be due and owing regardless of whether said
license is granted or not granted. (Ord. 96-O-8, 2-6-1996)
   B.   If the Local Liquor Control Commissioner finds that any change in the
applicant's plan is necessary to comply with the requirements of City
ordinance, or State liquor control requirements, the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may make such change a condition of the granting of a license, and
the failure of the applicant at any time to adhere to or perform such condition
shall be grounds for revocation of the applicant's license. (Ord. 79-O-40, 7-3-
1979)
3-3-6: BOND REQUIREMENTS:
Each person desiring a liquor license shall execute a penal bond in the sum of
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) with a solvent surety company licensed to do
business in the State, to be approved by the City Attorney. Said bond shall be
filed with the Mayor at the same time the application is presented and upon
renewal of the application, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful
observance by the licensee of the provisions of this chapter and the laws of
the State and of the United States Of America applying to the sale and
possession of intoxicating liquor and shall be further conditioned upon the
payment of any judgment for damages and cost that may be recovered against such
license in accordance with 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-21. (Ord. 79-O-
32, 7-3-1979)
3-3-7: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
Subject to the limitations and restrictions herein set forth and all other
lawful limitations and restrictions, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may,
from time to time, grant licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor to
any person, or any Illinois corporation, or any company, association or
partnership qualified to receive such license; provided, however, that an
application is made to him in writing; and, provided further, that any and all
persons furnish sufficient evidence to satisfy the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner that he or she or they are persons of good moral character, have
never been convicted of a felony, and have never possessed a license to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor that was revoked by either the City or State
authorities. (Ord. 19-O-1, 1-2-2019)
3-3-8: PAYMENT AND DISPOSITION OF FEES:
   A.   Payment: All license fees must be paid in one installment. Said
installment must be paid prior to the effective date of the liquor license.
(Ord. 93-O-47, 10-19-1993)
   B.   Disposition Of Fees: All such fees shall be paid to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner at the time application is made and shall be forthwith
turned over to the Comptroller. In event the license applied for is denied, the
fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the fee
shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall
have been designated by the Council by proper action thereof. (Ord. 59-O-10, 3-
25-1959; amd. Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
3-3-9: TERM OF LICENSE; EXPIRATION; RENEWALS:
   A.   Term: A license shall be purely personal privilege, good for not to
exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked.
   B.   Expiration Of License: If such license expires, the holder must reapply
for a new license as provided by this chapter. A license shall expire according
to its terms and shall also expire if the operation of the licensed
establishment is not uninterrupted and continuous as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter.
   C.   Renewal Of License: Any license holder may renew his license at the
expiration thereof, provided he is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which renewal license is sought is suitable for such use. All
applications for the renewal of a license shall be made in writing to the Mayor
not later than December 15 of each year. If the information and statements
contained in the original application have not changed, in lieu of an
application for renewal, a licensee may file with the Mayor not later than
December 16 of each year, an affidavit stating that such facts and statements
have not changed. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the
Liquor Commissioner may ask for additional information from any applicant
seeking renewal. (Ord. 15-O-4, 1-20-2015)
3-3-10: CHANGE OF LOCATION; TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   A.   Change Of Location: A license issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be good for a period of not to exceed the end of the calendar
year following its issuance, unless sooner revoked as herein provided, and
shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the
application and license and only under the conditions and restrictions imposed
in this chapter on the particular class of license described therein. The
location described in the license and application may be changed only upon a
written permit to make such change issued by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and only then if the proposed new location is a proper one for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the provisions of this Code, including,
but not limited to, this chapter, and the laws of the State of Illinois.
   B.   Assignment Of License:
      1.   A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
subject to attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be subject to
being hypothecated or encumbered. Such license shall not descend by the laws of
testate or intestate devolution, but shall cease upon the death of the
licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any
deceased licensee and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when
such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of
the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of the license, but no longer than six (6) months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. Upon the death of a licensee, if the
executor or administrator does not continue the business under such license,
there shall be a refund made of that portion of the license fee paid for any
period in which the executor or administrator may not operate.
      2.   There shall be no refund of any license fee paid hereunder except as
above provided, but any licensee hereunder shall have and be given the right to
a renewal or reissue of such license at the same place upon compliance with the
provisions of this chapter now in force, or which may hereafter be enacted,
governing the issuance of such licenses, and such licensee may assign or convey
the right to a renewal or reissue thereof to another qualified and eligible
person in accordance with the procedure hereinafter set forth, who, upon full
compliance with the provisions of this chapter then in force in the City
governing the issuance of such licenses, shall be entitled to a renewal or
reissue of such license in his, their, or its own name and which holder of a
license, in turn, may assign or convey such right to renewal or reissue of such
license upon the same terms and conditions as the original owner thereof could
do hereunder; provided, however, that the privilege of renewal and reissue
provided in this subsection shall apply only so long as the license in each
case shall have been kept in force continually and uninterruptedly in the name
of the licensee or his successor in interest, in compliance with all applicable
laws and regulations, nothing herein provided shall be deemed to restrict the
right of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to revoke any such assignment of
license and require further proceedings.
      3.   If an assignment is contemplated, the putative assignee shall submit
an application for a liquor license as if such assignee were applying for a new
license. If qualified and eligible, the Liquor Commissioner may permit the
assignment in the exercise of his/her discretion. All such permitted
assignments shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and approved by formal
action of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and the Local Liquor
Commissioner shall keep, or cause to be kept, a true and complete record of all
such assignments. Upon the filing of any such assignment, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall endorse thereon the time of filing, and upon
compliance by the assignee with all the laws then in force pertaining to the
qualifications of an applicant for such license and the surrender of the old
license for cancellation, there shall (unless the old license shall have been
revoked and not thereafter restored) be issued to the assignee named in such
assignment, a license for the same place as that specified in the old license,
in lieu of the one so surrendered for the unexpired portion of the period
covered by the license so surrendered; upon condition, however, that such new
license shall be issued only upon the payment of a fee to the issuing officer
of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 15-O-4, 1-20-2015)
3-3-11: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES; FEES:
All licenses shall be classified as follows:
   A.   Class A License: Class A licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor at retail on the premises specified, for consumption on or off said
premises. Off premises sales shall be secondary to on premises sales and shall
not, for any thirty (30) day period, exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total
sales of alcoholic beverages for said licensed establishment. The annual fee
for such license shall be one thousand four hundred dollars ($1,400.00).
   B.   Class B License: Class B licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor by a "club", as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, for consumption only on the premises where sold. A Class
B license shall be issued only to a club. To obtain a club license, the
applicant must have the qualifications as provided by the laws of the State and
this Code relating to alcoholic liquor. The annual fee for such license shall
be one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00).
   C.   Class C License: Class C licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor at retail on the premises specified for consumption on said premises.
The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand two hundred fifty dollars
($1,250.00).
   D.   Class D License: Effective January 1, 2019, all existing Class D
licenses shall be renewed as Class C licenses provided the license holder meets
all criteria for such renewal.
   E.   Class E License:
      1.   Class E licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor only
for consumption off the premises. A "drugstore" and/or "grocery store", as
defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, may be allocated a Class E license, provided:
         a.   All displays of alcoholic liquor shall be conducted in a
partitioned area so as to be screened completely from view within the remainder
of the store premises.
         b.   A maximum of two (2) entrance/exits with a maximum width of eight
feet (8') is provided to the liquor display area for customer ingress/egress.
         c.   That the privilege to sell alcoholic beverages granted pursuant
to a Class E license to a "grocery store", as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, shall be limited to the sale of beer and/or wine only.
      2.   That Class E licenses shall authorize the distribution of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on premises provided that said consumption on premises
is limited to consumption of sample quantities only, said consumption being for
the purposes of marketing and advertising certain alcoholic products on sale
within said licensed establishment.
All other requirements and restrictions contained in this chapter shall be
applicable.
      3.   The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand four hundred
dollars ($1,400.00).
   F.   Special Use Permit License:
      1.   A special use permit license hereby authorizes a retailer to
transfer beer and wine from an existing licensed retail premises to a
designated site for a specific event; provided, that said sales meet the
following criteria:
         a.   The special use permit license is valid for up to two (2)
consecutive days and shall not exceed the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. to
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight. The special use permit license is valid for
those specific hours specified by the Liquor Commissioner on a specified date.
The particular hours for any given permit may be as few as two (2) hours and as
many as fourteen (14) hours.
         b.   No more than one special use permit license may be issued for any
given day.
         c.   The event for which the special use permit license is issued must
be open to the public.
         d.   Access to the area designated for the special use permit license
will be restricted to those twenty one (21) years of age or older.
         e.   Alcohol dispensed within the designated area must be consumed in
that area and may not be removed from the designated area.
         f.   No more than three (3) special use permit licenses may be granted
in any twelve (12) month period, and no applicant shall receive more than one
special use permit license in any twelve (12) month period.
         g.   In addition to the three (3) special use permit licenses that may
be granted to the public, as provided in subsection F1f of this section, the
City of Charleston shall be permitted special use permit licenses for its
exclusive use. The special use permit licenses granted to the City of
Charleston do not count toward the three (3) available to the public.
      2.   The fee for such license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   G.   Hotel/Motel License:
      1.   For the purposes of this hotel/motel license a "hotel/motel" shall
be defined as every building or other structure kept, used, maintained,
advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually
served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to
travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential in which
twenty five (25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such
guests and having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to
such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in
the same buildings or building in connection therewith, and such buildings or
building, structures or structure being provided with adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
      2.   A hotel/motel license hereby authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquor
only for consumption on premises, provided however, that the premises plan
defined for a hotel license shall include all guestrooms located within the
hotel/motel, and all areas open to the public.
      3.   The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand two hundred
dollars ($1,200.00).
   H.   County Fair Special Use Permit License:
      1.   A special use permit license hereby authorizes an existing City of
Charleston licensed retailer selected and sponsored by the County Fair Board to
transfer beer and wine from an existing licensed retail premises to the County
Fairgrounds for no more than four (4) days of the Coles County Fair provided
that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The special use permit license shall not exceed the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) P.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight.
         b.   The license is valid only during days when the fair is open to
the public.
         c.   The selected retailer and the County Fair Board provide the
required insurance coverage in favor of the City and hold the City harmless
from any and all claims, suits, expenses, demands and costs arising out of or
related to the sale of alcohol at the Coles County Fair.
         d.   Access to the area designated for alcohol sales and consumption
will be restricted to those twenty one (21) years of age or older.
         e.   Alcohol dispensed within the designated area must be consumed in
that area and may not be removed from the designated area.
      2.   The fee for such license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   I.   Brew Pub License:
      1.   A brew pub license may be issued to any person who qualifies to hold
a "brew pub" or "craft brewer" license from the State of Illinois and that is
also selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. A brew pub
licensed pursuant to this section is permitted to manufacture malt liquors or
fermented malt beverages upon its licensed premises. Malt liquors or fermented
malt beverages manufactured by a brew pub licensee on the licensed premises may
be:
         a.   Furnished for consumption on the premises;
         b.   Sold to independent wholesalers for distribution to licensed
retailers in accordance with State law;
         c.   Sold to the public in sealed containers for off-premises
consumption.
      2.   Every person selling alcoholic beverages pursuant to this section
shall purchase alcoholic beverages, other than those that are manufactured at
the licensed brew pub, from a wholesaler licensed by the State of Illinois. The
brew pub licensee shall retain evidence of each purchase of malt, vinous, and
spirituous liquors from a licensed wholesaler.
      3.   It shall be a condition of a brew pub licensee's right to sell
alcohol for consumption on the premises that at least fifteen percent (15%) of
the gross sales of food and alcohol of the business be attributable to the sale
of food. The licensee shall provide sufficient records of the sales revenues to
the City to support this requirement. These records shall be submitted prior to
the annual renewal of the brew pub license.
      4.   The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand four hundred
dollars ($1,400.00).
   J.   Lake Charleston Pavilion Special Use Permit License:
      1.   A special use permit license hereby authorizes a retailer to
transfer beer and wine from an existing licensed retail premises to the Lake
Charleston Pavilion for a specific event; provided, that said sales meet the
following criteria:
         a.   The special use permit license is valid for those specific hours
specified by the Liquor Commissioner on a specified date. The hours of the
permit shall not be earlier than one o'clock (1:00) P.M. and shall not be later
than nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. The particular hours for any given permit may be
as few as two (2) hours and as many as eight (8) hours.
         b.   Alcohol dispensed within the Lake Charleston Pavilion must be
consumed in the pavilion and may not be removed from the pavilion area.
         c.   The licensed retailer shall be responsible for compliance with
all laws concerning consumption and possession of alcohol served under the
authority of the special use permit.
         d.   The permit holder shall hold the City of Charleston harmless from
any and all claims arising out of or related to the permit and its associated
activities and the licensed retailer shall name the City of Charleston as an
additional named insured for claims arising out of or related to the special
use permit.
      2.   The fee for such license shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   K.   Class K Special Event License:
      1.   A Class K Special Event license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on property
owned by the City in connection with any festival, banquet, picnic, bazaar,
fair, or similar special event.
      2.   A Class K license fee is one-hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00)
for each event. For purposes of this section, an event may cover multiple days
as long as it is at the same location and for the same purpose and is submitted
under one special event license application.
      3.   A Class K licensee may sell and serve alcoholic liquor for a special
event during the following hours:
 
Day                     Hours
Sunday                  10:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m.
Monday through Thursday For each day: 10:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 10:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.
Exception: Any Class K special event that takes place outside of an enclosed
building shall cease the sale of alcoholic liquor at 9:00 p.m. of the same day
upon which sales commenced.
 
      4.   A Class K license shall require proof of dram shop (liquor
liability) insurance on behalf of the City in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
      5.   The Class K license also requires an approved rental agreement with
the City and all rental fees are in addition to the fee required under this
Chapter. The licensee, in addition to the dram shop insurance, must have
general liability and/or umbrella coverage naming the City as an additional
insured for no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) if less than five
hundred (500) persons are expected to be in attendance or two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) if more than five hundred (500) persons are expected to be in
attendance. There is no ability to obtain a Class K license without the prior
approval of a rental agreement for use of City property for the event.
      6.   If the sale of alcoholic liquor is to be conducted outside of an
enclosed building, the following requirements must be met:
         a.   Adequate lighting must be maintained at all times such that law
enforcement personnel may visually identify patrons.
         b.   Sound amplification is allowed only if the event location is more
than five hundred (500) feet from any residentially zoned parcel, which shall
be measured from the nearest part of the event location premises to the nearest
part of any residentially zoned parcel. If sound amplification is allowed based
on this distance, such sound may not cause alarm or disturb the public peace
and quiet. If the amplified sound creates a nuisance, the sound amplification
must be adjusted or, where directed by law enforcement, cease immediately.
         c.   Security provided by Charleston police department and paid for by
licensee if the liquor commissioner or designee deems it necessary.
         d.   Only non-glass containers may be used.
      7.   A Class K licensee may provide live entertainment.
      8.   Minors may be allowed on the premises licensed as a Class K licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to possess or
consume alcohol at any time nor be allowed to be present at the service bar.
      9.   A Class K license application shall be received in the office of the
local liquor control commissioner not fewer than ten (10) business days prior
to the event and include the following information:
         a.   Full legal name of authorized representative of the sponsoring
entity (entities) or person(s).
         b.   Mailing address, email address and telephone number to be reached
during the hours of event;
         c.   Copy of government issued photo identification of authorized
representative of the organization referenced in subsection 9.a. above;
         d.   Type of event, location, date, and beginning and ending times.
      10.   Following issuance of a Class K Special Event liquor license by the
City, a licensee shall submit an Application for a State of Illinois Special
Event Retailer's Liquor License to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission and
obtain a state liquor license for the event.
   L.   Class L Special Event Hosted Bar License:
      1.   Class L Special Event Hosted Bar license shall be issued only for a
private event to be held on private property in a non-residential zoning
District by invitation to attendees and not open to the general public. For
purposes of this Chapter, an invitation to past, present and future customers
at a marketing event is not considered to be the general public. As the host of
a special event, the licensee may be an individual, corporation, limited
liability company or partnership who will be providing alcoholic liquor free of
charge to attendees of the event.
      2.   A Class L license fee is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each
event. For purposes of this section, an event may cover multiple days as long
as it is at the same location and for the same purpose and is submitted under
one special event license application.
      3.   A Class L licensee may serve alcoholic liquor at a special event
during the following hours:
 
Day                     Hours
Monday through Thursday For each day: 3:00 p.m. until 10:00 p.m.
Friday and Saturday     For each day: 10:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m.
 
      4.   A Class L licensee may provide live or recorded entertainment
including amplified sound during the same hours listed in section
3-3-11 L.3. above.
      5.   A Class L license shall require proof of dram shop (liquor
liability) insurance on behalf of the City in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
      6.   A Class L licensee shall only serve alcoholic liquor in non-glass
containers.
      7.   Minors may be allowed on premises licensed as a Class L licensee
pursuant to this chapter for purposes other than the purchase, possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor; however, no minor may be allowed to be present
at the service bar.
      8.   A Class L license application shall be received in the office of the
local liquor control commissioner not fewer than ten (10) business days prior
to the event and include the following information:
         a.   Full legal name of individual or authorized representative of
corporation, limited liability company or partnership;
         b.   Mailing address, email address and telephone number to be reached
during the hours of event;
         c.   Copy of government issued photo identification of individual,
authorized representative of corporation, limited liability company or
partnership members applying for the license;
         d.   Type of event, location, date, beginning and ending times.
      9.   A State of Illinois liquor license is not required following
issuance of a Class L Special Event Hosted Bar liquor license by the City if
the applicant will only be providing alcoholic liquor free of charge to
attendees of the event.
   M.   Class M License:
      1.   Class M licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption on or off said premises. A "convenience store", as defined in
section
3-3-1 of this chapter, may be allocated a Class M license, provided:
         a.   That the privilege to sell alcoholic beverages granted pursuant
to a Class M license to a "convenience store", as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, shall be limited to the sale of beer and/or wine only.
         b.   The retail items for off premises sales must be in packaged forms
and not to be consumed on the premises where sold.
         c.   Drive-thru sales of beer and/or wine for consumption on or off
premises is prohibited.
         d.   Alcohol consumed on premises shall be consumed in a designated
area partitioned from the remainder of the store premises. Alcohol shall not be
consumed outside of the designated area.
      2.   The principal business of the licensee shall be the retail sale of
food items, groceries, and/or convenience store items, and must offer the sale
of gasoline with operational gasoline and fuel sales/pumps for public
consumption.
      3.   All other requirements and restrictions contained in this chapter
shall be applicable.
      4.   The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand four hundred
dollars ($1,400.00). (Ord. 19-O-1, 1-2-2019; amd. Ord. 19-O-21, 5-21-2019; Ord.
20-O-6, 3-3-2020; Ord. 2023-O-4, 2-21-2023; Ord. 2024-O-26, 6-18-2024)
3-3-12: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
The total number of licenses issued and in force at any one time in any one
year shall not exceed the following:
Class A 4
Class B 4
Class C 16
Class D N/A
Class E 8
Class G 1
Class H 0
Class I 1
Class M 4
 
(Ord. 19-O-14, 4-2-2019; amd. Ord. 19-O-34, 10-1-2019; Ord. 2022-O-1, 1-4-2022;
Ord. 2022-O-23, 5-3-2022; Ord. 2023-O-4, 2-21-2023; Ord. 2023-O-8, 4-4-2023;
2023-O-11, 4-18-2023; Ord. 2023-O-27, 7-5-2023; Ord. 2023-O-28, 7-5-2023; 2023-
O-29, 8-1-2023; Ord. 2024-O-39, 11-5-2024; Ord. 2025-O-6, 3-4-2024; Ord. 2025-
O-19, 4-15-2025; Ord. 2025-O-25, 5-20-2025)
3-3-13: RESTRICTIONS ON AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Consumption On Premises: It shall be unlawful for anyone not having a
valid liquor license to sell or offer to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises where sold or to permit the same to be consumed on the premises
where sold. (Ord. 94-O-1, 2-1-1994, eff. 12-31-1994)
   B.   Posting License: Every licensee shall cause his license to be framed
and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord.
59-O-10, 3-25-1959)
   C.   Change Of Location; Expansion Of Premises: A liquor license shall
permit the sale of alcoholic beverages and sales as defined only on the
premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed
or expanded in terms of the total floor area of building only upon written
permit to make such change issued by the Liquor Commissioner. No change in
location may be made unless the proposed new location or expanded premises
meets all applicable City and State requirements for the proposed occupancy of
such premises. (Ord. 15-O-4, 1-20-2015)
   D.   Curb Service Prohibited: No curb service for the sale of alcoholic
liquor shall be carried on in connection with premises for which a license has
been granted for the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the
premises, either upon the public street or private property contiguous to such
premises so licensed. (Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959)
   E.   Employee Health Standards: It shall be unlawful to employ in any
premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is
afflicted with or who is a carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal
disease; and it shall be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or a
carrier of any such disease to work in or about any such premises or to engage
in any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor;
provided, the Commissioner of Public Safety may require such employee to submit
to a physical examination, at the expense of the City, by a duly licensed
physician named by such Commissioner, if such Commissioner suspects such
employee of being afflicted as herein set forth. (Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959; amd.
1991 Code)
   F.   Gambling Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or
allow anyone to play for money or other valuable thing any game with cards,
dice or checks, or with any other article, instrument or thing whatsoever,
which may be used for the purpose of playing or betting upon or winning or
losing money, or any other thing or article of value or to bet on any game
others may be playing, upon any premises licensed under this chapter; provided,
however, that specific gambling and games of chance including video gambling
shall be authorized in a licensed premises provided that said gambling has
previously been authorized by the State of Illinois and authorized by the City
of Charleston in a licensed premises.
      1.   Authorized Gambling Area: The gambling machines authorized by the
State of Illinois and authorized by the City of Charleston in licensed premises
shall be restricted to a gaming area that occupies a maximum of ten percent
(10%) or less of the licensed premises and is ancillary to the main occupancy
of the building or suite which the business occupies. The gaming area shall not
occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the business area of the story of the
building in which it is located in the licensed premises. (Ord. 19-O-9, 3-19-
2019; amd. Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
   G.   Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited:
      1.   No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent, or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic
liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to any
intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard,
spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental
treatment. No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor,
shall sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the
age of twenty one (21) years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony
or service.
      2.   Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, who violates this
subsection shall be fined in an amount not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00).
      3.   It shall be an affirmative defense for any licensee, officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee and shall
further negate the violation if it is found that any licensee, officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee
reasonably relied upon a fraudulent altered, defaced identification card or
identification card of another individual to obtain the purchase of alcohol. It
shall not, however, be an affirmative defense if the agent or employee
unreasonably accepted the fraudulent, altered, or defaced identification card,
or identification card of another individual, or knew the identification card
to be false or fraudulent.
      4.   Each licensee shall prominently display within the licensed premises
a warning to the general public that the sale, gift, or delivery of alcoholic
liquor to a person under the age of twenty one (21) years is prohibited, and
that any individual under the age of twenty one (21) years who shall be found
to be in possession of alcoholic liquor shall be fined an amount not less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 16-O-30, 8-2-2016)
   H.   Training Required: It shall be unlawful to sell or to offer for sale
alcoholic liquor unless all employees with responsibility for checking
identification, selling alcohol, dispensing alcohol, or serving alcohol have
passed an Alcohol Training Program approved by the State (e.g., BASSET) or by
the Local Liquor Commissioner. For purposes of this section, the training of an
employee must be successfully completed within sixty (60) days of that specific
employee beginning employment and the license holder shall maintain copies of
all certificates for all employees sufficient to prove the successful
completion of such training program for each employee. All original and renewal
applications for all classes of liquor licenses shall be accompanied with proof
of completion of the training for intervention procedures by all employees with
any responsibility for checking identification, selling alcohol, dispensing
alcohol, or serving alcohol. (Ord. 15-O-4, 1-20-2015)
   I.   Violations: Licensees shall not violate, allow or permit a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter, the rules or regulations established by
the Local Liquor Commissioner, the rules or regulations of the State
Commission, the law of the State of Illinois, or Federal law that pertains to
the sale of alcoholic liquor or to the public health, safety and welfare
generally. Any violation of any such statute, law, regulation or rule by a
licensee may be the subject of a disciplinary citation and hearing before the
Local Liquor Commissioner. (Ord. 17-O-4, 3-7-2017)
3-3-14: HOURS OF SALES:
   A.   The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises within the
corporate City limits of Charleston shall be limited to the following hours for
all license holders:
 
Monday    6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Tuesday
Tuesday   6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Wednesday
Wednesday 6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Thursday
Thursday  6:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M. Friday
Friday    6:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday  6:00 A.M. until 2:00 A.M. Sunday
Sunday    11:00 A.M. until 12:00 midnight
 
(Ord. 15-O-5, 1-20-2015; amd. Ord. 15-O-35, 7-21-2015; Ord. 15-O-43, 10-6-2015)
   B.   The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off premises within the
corporate City limits of Charleston shall be limited to the following hours for
all license holders:
 
Monday    6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Tuesday
Tuesday   6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Wednesday
Wednesday 6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Thursday
Thursday  6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Friday
Friday    6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Saturday
Saturday  6:00 A.M. until 1:00 A.M. Sunday
Sunday    11:00 A.M. until 12:00 midnight
 
   C.   The sale of alcoholic beverages by license holders shall be prohibited
at all other times. The City of Charleston may, at any time it deems to be in
the best interests of its residents, amend the approved hours of sales and no
rights or other expectations are vested in any license holder by the adoption
and publication of the current set of approved hours of sales.
   D.   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or admit to any premises
where alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours for which the sale of
liquor is prohibited; provided, however, that in the case of restaurants,
clubs, grocery stores, hotels and drugstores, such establishments may be kept
open during such other hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold, served or
consumed during such hours. (Ord. 15-O-5, 1-20-2015)
3-3-15: LOCATION AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Location Restrictions:
      1.   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school, home for aged or
indigent persons or for veterans, their wives or children, or any military or
naval station; provided, this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering
restaurant service, regular organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops or
other places where sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business
carried on, if such place of business so exempt shall have been established for
such purposes prior to the effective date hereof. (Ord. 79-O-40, 7-3-1979)
      2.   No person shall hereafter engage in the business as a retailer of
any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any undertaking
establishment or mortuary. The distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be
measured from building to building and not to property boundaries. (Ord. 16-O-
2, 2-2-2016)
      3.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor in any place where the conduct of such business is prohibited
under the terms and provisions of the city unified development code. (Ord. 59-
O-10, 3-25-1959; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Unobstructed View: In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption upon the premises is licensed (other than as a restaurant,
hotel, club or any bowling alley other than one situated on the first, or
ground floor), no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside
such premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth,
screen, partition, or other obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights or
lighting, shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed premises
which shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises from
the street, road or sidewalk, and said premises must be so located that there
shall be a full view of the entire interior of such premises from the street,
road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon the
premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light
or artificial white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises
shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed premises
required by the provisions of this subsection shall be wilfully obscured by the
licensee or by him wilfully suffered to be obscured or in any manner
obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the manner
provided in this chapter. In order to enforce the provisions of this
subsection, the local liquor control commissioner shall have the right to
require the filing with him of plans, drawings and photographs showing the
clearance of the view as above required.
   C.   Sanitary Premises: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor or for the storage of such alcoholic liquor for such sale shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with
the provisions regulating the condition of the premises used for the storage or
sale of food for human consumption. (Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959)
3-3-16: UNDERAGE PERSONS:
   A.   Frequenting Licensed Premises:
      1.   Definition: For the purposes of this subsection, "frequenting" shall
be defined as an individual being located within a licensed premises.
      2.   Prohibition; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any licensee to
permit or allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to frequent
any premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter, and it shall be
further unlawful for any individual under the age of twenty one (21) years of
age to frequent any premises licensed under the provisions of this chapter,
with the following exceptions:
         a.   Individuals under the age of twenty one (21) years may frequent
the dining room(s) or restaurant of any licensed establishments, provided said
individual is in the establishment to purchase prepared food within the dining
room(s) or restaurant area of such establishment.
         b.   Individuals under the age of twenty one (21) years may frequent
licensed establishments for the purpose of special events wherein the licensed
premises, or a portion thereof, are being used for the purposes of a "special
event", and general access to said portion of the premises is denied to the
general public; and further provided, that said individual or individuals under
the age of twenty one (21) years are with a parent or legal guardian.
         c.   Individuals under the age of twenty one (21) years may frequent
designated portions of the licensed premises; provided, that said designated
portion of the licensed premises serves no alcoholic beverages nor allows
consumption of any alcoholic beverages in said portion of that premises during
time of occupation by persons under the age of twenty one (21) years; and
further provided, that said portion of the licensed premises be segregated by
physical barricades from any portion or portions of the premises which serves
alcoholic beverages during times of frequenting by individuals under the age of
twenty one (21) years.
         d.   Employees of the establishment who are sixteen (16) years of age
or older and are in compliance with subsection B of this section.
      3.   Penalty: Any individual under the age of twenty one (21) years found
in violation of this subsection shall be fined in the amount not to be less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      4.   Affirmative Defense: It shall be an affirmative defense for any
licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such
licensee and shall further negate the violation if it is found that any
licensee, officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee of such
licensee reasonably relied upon a fraudulent, altered, or defaced
identification card, or identification card of another individual, to gain
entry into said licensed establishment. It shall not, however, be an
affirmative defense if the agent or employee unreasonably accepted the
fraudulent, altered, or defaced identification card, or identification card of
another individual, or knew the identification card to be false or fraudulent.
      5.   Warning Posted: All licensees shall prominently post a warning to
the general public that it shall be a violation of city ordinance for any
individual under the age of twenty one (21) years of age to be physically
present within a licensed liquor establishment, unless said liquor
establishment has a dining or restaurant area separated by a permanent wall
from any bar area, lounge or place of dispensing alcoholic beverages, and said
minor is either in the company of an adult or is allowed only to purchase
prepared food within said dining room or restaurant area or establishment. Said
warning prominently displayed shall also include that any individual found in
violation of this subsection shall be fined an amount not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 16-O-39, 12-6-2016)
   B.   Employment Of Persons Under Twenty One:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit or to employ any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age to serve alcoholic liquor,
except however, individuals eighteen (18) years of age and older may deliver
alcoholic beverages when said alcoholic beverages have been delivered to him or
her by a barperson twenty one (21) years of age or older in the containers to
be consumed by the consumer. The individual eighteen (18) years of age but less
than twenty one (21) years may then deliver said alcoholic beverages to the
patron and receive the money for the alcoholic liquors from the consumer. No
permitted or employed individuals under the age of eighteen (18) shall serve or
deliver alcoholic beverages. Individuals under the age of eighteen (18) may
hold employment positions that do not involve the serving, delivering, or
disposal of alcoholic beverages.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ or permit any person
under the age of sixteen (16) to act as his agent, clerk, servant, employee or
entertainer in or about any premises offering alcoholic liquor for sale. (Ord.
16-O-30, 8-2-2016)
   C.   Misrepresentation Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any person to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving
alcoholic liquor from a licensee.
   D.   Purchase Or Acceptance Of Gifts:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift or
delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of age, to purchase or
accept a gift of alcoholic liquor. Any individual found to be in violation of
this subsection D1 shall be fined an amount not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00).
      2.   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic
liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession. Any person found in
violation of this subsection D2 shall be fined in an amount not to be less than
two hundred dollars ($200.00).
      3.   If a licensee or his agents or employees believes or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibitive because of
the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or
delivery demand presentation of some form of positive identification,
containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
   E.   False Identification:
      1.   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card;
use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information.
      2.   No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this subsection. Whoever violates any
provisions of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than
three hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 92-O-10, 3-3-1992)
3-3-17: BULK SALES:
It shall be unlawful to purchase, sell, transfer, give or offer for sale at
retail "bulk alcoholic liquor", as defined in section
3-3-1 of this chapter, after the hour of ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. on any
day. There shall be imposed for a violation of this section a minimum fine of
one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 93-O-40, 9-7-1993)
3-3-18: KEG SALES:
   A.   Permit Attached To Keg; Required Information:
      1.   Kegs Purchased Inside City: All liquor licensees within the
corporate limits of the city shall, at the time of sale of any keg of beer or
container of beer in excess of two (2) gallons that requires a tapper or other
mechanical device for the removal of said alcohol, affix a permit in the form
provided by the city, and shall further obtain and record information to be
delivered to the police department for the city within twelve (12) hours of
issuing said permit; said information being provided upon a form provided by
the city, or facsimile of said form. Said information shall include the
following:
         a.   The name and permanent address of the individual or individuals
purchasing said keg or container.
         b.   The local address of said individual or individuals purchasing
alcoholic beverage, including a telephone number where the individual can be
reached.
         c.   The location and date in which said alcoholic beverage is
anticipated to be consumed.
         d.   The signature of said individual certifying the contents and
information given upon said form is true and correct.
         e.   The date said permit was issued.
         f.   Printed name and signature of individual issuing the permit.
      2.   Kegs Purchased Outside City: Any individual or individuals or
entities acquiring alcoholic beverages outside the corporate limits of the city
for the consumption within the city limits in keg form or other container as
described herein shall, prior to the commencement of consumption of said
alcohol, present themselves at the police department (Monday through Friday
between 8:00 A.M. and 5:00 P.M.) for the purposes of completing the form as set
forth in this subsection A and obtaining a permit from the police department.
      3.   Failure To Provide Information; Inaccurate Information: Any
individual or individuals or entities who cause information to be placed upon a
keg application and permit that is incorrect shall be in violation of this
section. Any individual found to have given incorrect information upon a keg
application and/or permit shall be fined in an amount not to be less than three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
      4.   Seller To Verify Information: Any person who sells a keg without
first receiving and verifying the accuracy of the information contained in the
keg permit shall be fined in an amount not less than three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00).
      5.   Owner Or Manager To Ensure Compliance: The owner or manager of any
establishment that sells kegs is responsible to ensure that his/her employees
comply with the provisions of this section. Failure to ensure compliance may
subject the owner or manager to a fine in an amount not less than three hundred
fifty dollars ($350.00).
   B.   Display Of Permit:
      1.   Any person possessing a keg or other container as described in this
section shall cause said permit to be prominently displayed and shall, upon
request of an officer of the police department or assisting agency, present
said container of alcoholic beverage to said officer displaying said permit.
      2.   Liquor licensees within the corporate limits of the city shall
promptly notify the police department upon receipt of a keg or other container
as described in this section that has had a permit removed therefrom.
   C.   Violations; Penalty: It shall be unlawful to withdraw any beer from a
keg, or other container in excess of two (2) gallons which requires mechanical
removal of said beer, without first having obtained and placed upon said
container the permit as described in subsection A of this section. It shall
further be unlawful to remove said permit from a keg or container. Any person
who violates this subsection shall be fined in an amount not less than three
hundred fifty dollars ($350.00). (Ord. 07-O-21, 4-17-2007)
3-3-19: OFFENSES BY GENERAL PUBLIC:
   A.   Peddling Liquor: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor within
the corporate limits of the city. (Ord. 59-O-10, 3-25-1959)
   B.   Possession In Motor Vehicle: No person shall transport, carry, possess
or have any alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle except in
the original package and with the seal unbroken. (Ord. 65-O-36, 11-2-1965)
   C.   Possession In Public: It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or
possess any alcoholic liquor, other than in the original package with the seal
unbroken, on any public street, parkway, alley, park, public or private school
grounds, parking lot of any commercial establishment, or on the premises of any
commercial establishment other than one licensed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, or any other place that is accessible to the general public,
except where such public possession has been authorized pursuant to the terms
of a liquor license.
   D.   Public Consumption: It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any
alcoholic liquor on any public street, parkway, alley, park, public or private
school grounds, parking lot of any commercial establishment, or on the premises
of any commercial establishment other than one licensed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, or any other place that is accessible to the
general public, except where such public consumption has been authorized
pursuant to the terms of a liquor license. (Ord. 16-O-2, 2-2-2016)
   E.   Facilitation Of Public Consumption:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a licensee holding a
valid and nonsuspended license, to allow or permit alcoholic beverages to be
consumed upon premises in his or her control except as follows:
         a.   If consumed in an individual's dwelling.
         b.   If consumed in a "commercial establishment", provided:
            (1)   The consumption of alcohol within said commercial
establishment shall not exceed three (3) separate events per calendar year and
each event shall not exceed a duration of more than eighteen (18) hours; and
            (2)   No consumable items incidental to the consumption of
beverages shall be sold at said facilities; and
            (3)   There shall be no cover or admission charge for entrance into
said facilities; and
            (4)   That individuals consuming alcohol within said premises shall
be present by invitation only.
         c.   For the purposes of defining "commercial establishment" herein, a
"commercial establishment" shall be deemed to be any building or premises that
are utilized for the production of income, including rental income, except a
"commercial establishment" shall not include residences or the premises
occupied by a 501(c)(3) organization so long as the 501(c)(3) organization is
in control of the consumption of the alcohol.
         d.   This subsection E shall not be construed to prevent possession of
alcoholic liquor for personal use in a commercial establishment where that
personal use is limited to occasional consumption by employees of the
establishment only.
         e.   This subsection E shall not be construed to prevent possession or
consumption of alcohol on the premises of the Coles County Council On Aging,
Inc., at the LifeSpan Center during private functions held by invitation only
and not open to the public and during functions held by individuals,
businesses, or organizations that have rented the premises and such functions
are under the control of the Coles County Council On Aging, Inc.
      2.   There shall be a minimum penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
for violation of this subsection E. (Ord. 15-O-40, 9-15-2015)
   F.   Possession Of Keg Without A Permit: It shall be unlawful to possess a
keg of beer or other container containing two (2) gallons or more of beer which
requires a tapper or mechanical device to withdraw said beer without having
displayed upon said keg or other container a permit as authorized and directed
by section
3-3-18 of this chapter. (Ord. 95-O-9, 3-7-1995)
3-3-20: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE; FINE IMPOSED:
   A.   Authority: The local liquor control commissioner may revoke or suspend
any license for the sale of alcoholic liquor at retail or, at his sole
discretion, he may impose a fine for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or for any violation of any state law pertaining to the sale of
alcoholic liquor. Such revocation or suspension or fine may be in addition to a
fine or penalty imposed for the violation. (Ord. 86-O-42, 11-4-1986)
   B.   Hearing: No license shall be revoked or suspended and no licensee shall
be fined, except after a public hearing held by the local liquor control
commissioner, with a three (3) day written notice to the licensee, affording
the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. All hearings and proceedings
shall be conducted in accordance with the Illinois dram shop act 1 . A record
of said proceedings shall be made. The local liquor control commissioner shall,
within five (5) days after such hearing, if he determines after such hearing
that the license should be revoked or suspended or that the licensee shall be
fined, give the reason or reasons for such determination in a written order.
The order shall set forth either the amount of the fine, period of suspension
or that the license has been revoked. The commissioner shall, within five (5)
days, serve a copy of said order upon the licensee. (Ord. 14-O-4, 3-18-2014)
   C.   Appeals: The licensee or other interested party shall have such rights
of appeal to the state liquor control commission as are provided for by the
Illinois dram shop act. Review by the state liquor control commission shall be
limited to a review of the official record from the local proceedings. Upon
appeal, the local liquor control commissioner shall file a certified copy of
the local record, including all exhibits, within five (5) days after notice of
such appeal, and only evidence from the record shall be considered on appeal by
the state liquor control commissioner. (Ord. 86-O-42, 11-4-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS.
CHAPTER 4
SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: Prohibited Solicitation
3-4-3: "No Knock" Registry
3-4-4: Commercial Door To Door Solicitation License Required
3-4-5: No License Required For Noncommercial Door To Door Solicitation
3-4-6: Door To Door Solicitation
3-4-7: Application For Commercial Door To Door Solicitation License
3-4-8: Denial Or Revocation Of A License
3-4-9: Penalty
3-4-10: Constitutional Rights
3-4-11: Highway Solicitation
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
DOOR TO DOOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Attempting to make personal contact with
any person at his residence, without prior invitation by or appointment with
the resident, for the primary purpose of:
   A.   Attempting to sell, for present or future delivery, any goods, wares or
merchandise, newspaper or magazine subscriptions, or any services to be
performed immediately or in the future, whether or not the person has, carries
or exposes a sample of such goods, wares or merchandise, and whether or not he
is collecting advance payments for such sales and services;
   B.   Seeking or attempting to obtain contributions of money or any other
thing of value for the benefit of any association, organization, corporation,
or program, excluding those defined under "door to door noncommercial
solicitation"; or
   C.   Personally delivering to the resident a handbill or flier advertising a
commercial event, activity, good, or service that is offered to the resident
for purchase at a location away from the residence or at a future time.
DOOR TO DOOR NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITATION: Attempting to make personal contact
with any person at his residence, without prior specific invitation by or
appointment with the resident, for the primary purpose of:
   A.   Seeking or asking for a gift or donation for a public entity or
nonprofit organization exempt from federal income tax under 26 USC 501(c);
   B.   Soliciting the sale of goods, wares or merchandise for present or
future delivery, or the sale of services to be performed immediately or in the
future, with the entire proceeds of such sale to be paid directly to, or used
exclusively for the benefit of, a public entity or nonprofit organization
exempt from federal income tax under 26 USC 501(c);
   C.   Personally delivering to the resident a handbill or flier advertising a
future not for profit event, activity, good or service;
   D.   Distribution of religious tracts and information on behalf of a
religious organization;
   E.   Door to door canvassing and pamphleteering as a vehicle for the
dissemination of ideas, or views or opinions by one engaged in political
activities as a candidate or on behalf of a candidate in a recognized federal,
state or local election, or on behalf of an issue on an upcoming ballot.
LICENSE: A document issued by the city clerk authorizing a commercial solicitor
to engage in door to door commercial solicitation.
PUBLIC ENTITY: The United States Of America, the state of Illinois, and any
county, municipality, school district, special district, and any other kind of
district, agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof organized
pursuant to law and any separate entity created by intergovernmental contract
or cooperation only between or among the federal, state, county, municipality,
school district, special district, and every other kind of district, agency,
instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof.
RESIDENCE: A private residence in the city, including, but not limited to,
condominium units and apartments, and shall include the yards, grounds or
hallways, thereof. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-4-2: PROHIBITED SOLICITATION:
   A.   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city that the occupant or
occupants of residences in the city shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their residence.
   B.   No person may engage in door to door commercial solicitation at any
residence without prior invitation from the occupant if the residence:
      1.   Is registered with the city's "no knock" registry for door to door
commercial solicitation; or
      2.   Prominently displays a notice stating "No Commercial Solicitors" or
"No Commercial Solicitation" on or near the main entrance or door to any
dwelling unit in the residence.
   C.   No person may engage in any door to door commercial or noncommercial
solicitation upon any residence without prior invitation from the occupant
thereof if the residence is:
      1.   Registered with the city's "no knock" registry for door to door
commercial and noncommercial solicitation; or
      2.   Prominently displays a notice stating "No Solicitors" or "No
Solicitation" on or near the main entrance or door to any dwelling unit in the
residence.
   D.   No person may engage in door to door commercial or noncommercial
solicitation at any residence after the owner or occupant asks the person to
leave the residence. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-4-3: "NO KNOCK" REGISTRY:
   A.   An occupant may prohibit door to door commercial and/or noncommercial
solicitation without prior invitation at his or her residence by registering
the residence with the city clerk's office.
   B.   The city clerk will maintain and publish a "no knock" registry on the
city's website, indicating those occupants prohibiting door to door commercial
and/or noncommercial solicitation at his or her residence. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-
2017)
3-4-4: COMMERCIAL DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in door to door commercial
solicitation at a residence without first obtaining a license issued by the
city clerk. Unless authorized or permitted pursuant to the terms and provisions
of this chapter, the practice of being in and upon private residential property
within the city by door to door commercial solicitors is a nuisance prohibited
and punishable as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-4-5: NO LICENSE REQUIRED FOR NONCOMMERCIAL DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION:
Persons engaged in noncommercial door to door solicitation are not required to
obtain a license. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-4-6: DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION:
   A.   Every person licensed pursuant to this chapter must at all times
possess and display their license in a conspicuous place while soliciting, and
shall produce the same whenever requested to do so by a police officer or other
person.
   B.   Not more than two (2) individuals will engage in door to door
commercial or noncommercial solicitation at any residence at the same time
without permission of the occupant. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-4-7: APPLICATION FOR COMMERCIAL DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION LICENSE:
   A.   Each person applying for a door to door commercial solicitation license
must make a written application on forms provided by the city with payment of
the license fees to the city of Charleston. The applicant shall state upon oath
or affirmation that the information contained in the application is truthful to
the best of his or her knowledge and belief.
   B.   The applicant must supply the following information and any such
additional information that the city may require upon the application form:
      1.   Applicant's true and correct name, and any former names or aliases;
      2.   Applicant's business address and business telephone number;
      3.   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and phone number
of the responsible person or entity;
      4.   The name, address, and phone number of the applicant's immediate
supervisor, if any;
      5.   Information regarding the applicant's business including, without
limitation, its legal status and proof of registration with, or a certificate
of good standing from the Illinois secretary of state;
      6.   Proof the applicant or the applicant's business has registered with
the Illinois department of revenue for the payment of sales tax;
      7.   A brief explanation of the nature and duration of the applicant's
proposed solicitation activity that requires a license under this chapter;
      8.   Whether the applicant's permit, license, or registration in
connection with soliciting has ever been revoked by any jurisdiction and an
explanation of the circumstances;
      9.   A complete list of all persons to be authorized to solicit under the
license;
      10.   For each person authorized to solicit under a license, the
following information:
         a.   Name, address, phone number and date of birth;
         b.   Proof of identification by submittal of any of the following that
bear a photograph of sufficient quality to identify the person:
            (1)   A valid U.S. driver's license or identification card issued
by any state;
            (2)   A valid United States uniformed service identification card;
            (3)   A valid U.S. passport; or
            (4)   U.S. citizenship and immigration services green card;
      11.   Any other information determined to be relevant by the city clerk;
and
      12.   A two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) application fee, plus a fifty
dollar ($50.00) per person license fee.
   C.   Within five (5) business days of the city clerk's receipt of a complete
application, the city clerk will issue a license for a term of one year, unless
the city clerk determines that the license application should be denied under
the criteria stated in section
3-4-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-4-8: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE:
   A.   The city clerk will send the applicant or licensee a "notice of denial"
or "notice of revocation" for a door to door commercial solicitation license by
first class mail, if the city clerk determines that the applicant or licensee:
      1.   Made any material misrepresentation or false statement in the
license application;
      2.   Failed to comply with applicable laws, including registration with
the Illinois department of revenue for the payment of sales tax;
      3.   Failed to conduct and/or supervise solicitation activities under the
license so as to reasonably ensure that such solicitation is in compliance with
the terms of the license and with the provisions of this chapter; or
      4.   Authorized, condoned, or knowingly tolerated any unlawful
solicitation or any solicitation conducted under the license in such a manner
as to constitute a nuisance, crime, fraud, trespass, or invasion of privacy.
   B.   Within five (5) business days of the "notice of denial" or "notice of
revocation", the applicant or licensee may submit a written request to the
mayor for a hearing to dispute the license denial or revocation.
   C.   Within five (5) business days of the applicant or licensee's request
for a hearing, the mayor will submit a "notice of hearing" to the applicant or
licensee by first class mail, not less than five (5) business days prior to the
date of the hearing. The "notice of hearing" will describe the city clerk's
grounds for denial or revocation of the license, and notify the applicant of
the time and place of the hearing, and their right to counsel, to submit
evidence, and to cross examine witnesses.
   D.   The mayor will deny the application or revoke the license:
      1.   In the absence of a timely request for hearing; or
      2.   Upon finding of grounds for denial or revocation of the license
based upon the preponderance of the evidence after a hearing. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-
18-2017)
3-4-9: PENALTY:
Notwithstanding any other remedies available to the city pursuant to this
chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense, to which court or adjudication costs may be added. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which the violation occurs or
continues to occur. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-4-10: CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or enforced to deprive any person
of any rights guaranteed under the constitutions of the state of Illinois or
the United States. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-4-11: HIGHWAY SOLICITATION:
Highway solicitation is governed by section
6-1-9 of this code. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
CHAPTER 5
COIN OPERATED DEVICES
SECTION:
3-5-1: License Required
3-5-2: General License Provisions
3-5-3: License Fee
3-5-4: Term Of License
3-5-5: Conduct Of Business
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall use, maintain or operate any coin operated phonograph, jukebox,
pinball machine, marble game, bagatelle, or other device designed for public
amusement or entertainment and placed in operation by the insertion of a coin
without first having obtained a license for said device. (Ord., 5-22-1945)
3-5-2: GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS:
Except as herein otherwise specifically provided, the manner of application,
payment, conditions, issuance and duration of said license shall be as provided
by the general licensing provisions of this code. (Ord., 5-22-1945)
3-5-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for the operation of said coin operated amusement devices shall
be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per year for each device. (Ord., 5-22-1945)
3-5-4: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued shall be dated as of July 1 of the year of issuance and
shall expire June 30 of the following year. (Ord., 5-22-1945)
3-5-5: CONDUCT OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Nuisance Conditions Prohibited: No coin operated amusement device shall
be operated in any manner which tends to disturb the public peace or create a
nuisance.
   B.   Gambling Prohibited: No coin operated amusement device is to be used
for gambling in any form for money or other valuable return. (Ord., 5-22-1945)
CHAPTER 6
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
3-6-1: Applicability Of Provisions
3-6-2: Definitions
3-6-3: License
3-6-4: License Application Requirements
3-6-5: Application Filing; Renewals
3-6-6: License Fees
3-6-7: License Revocation Or Suspension
3-6-8: Limitation On Number Of Video Gaming Licenses
3-6-9: Limitation On Number Of Video Gaming Terminals On Premises
3-6-10: Prohibition
3-6-11: Exceptions
3-6-12: Licensed Establishments
3-6-13: Seizure Of Unauthorized Gambling Devices And Gambling Funds
3-6-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall apply to
all video gaming as hereinafter defined, whether specifically licensed or
regulated under other provisions of this code or other ordinances, or not.
(Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
BOARD:                             The Illinois Gaming Board.
                                   As defined in section 18b-101 of the
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES:         Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18b-
                                   101.
                                   Any business licensed by the State of
                                   Illinois to have or operate a video
                                   gaming device in the City, including any
                                   licensed fraternal establishment,
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT:            licensed veterans establishment,
                                   licensed truck stop establishment and
                                   licensed large truck stop establishment
                                   as those terms are defined in the VGA,
                                   230 ILCS 40/5.
                                   The location where a qualified fraternal
LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT:  organization that derives its charter
                                   from a national fraternal organization
                                   regularly meets.
                                   A facility located within three (3) road
                                   miles from a freeway interchange, as
                                   measured in accordance with the
                                   Department of Transportation's rules
                                   regarding the criteria for the
                                   installation of business signs: (i) that
                                   is at least a three (3) acre facility
                                   with a convenience store; (ii) with
LICENSED LARGE TRUCK STOP          separate diesel islands for fueling
ESTABLISHMENT:                     commercial motor vehicles; (iii) that
                                   sells at retail more than fifty thousand
                                   (50,000) gallons of diesel or biodiesel
                                   fuel per month; and (iv) with parking
                                   spaces for commercial motor vehicles.
                                   The requirement of item (iii) of this
                                   definition may be met by showing that
                                   estimated future sales or past sales
                                   average at least fifty thousand (50,000)
                                   gallons per month.
                                   A facility (i) that is at least a three
                                   (3) acre facility with a convenience
                                   store; (ii) with separate diesel islands
                                   for fueling commercial motor vehicles;
                                   (iii) that sells at retail more than ten
                                   thousand (10,000) gallons of diesel or
LICENSED TRUCK STOP ESTABLISHMENT: biodiesel fuel per month; and (iv) with
                                   parking spaces for commercial motor
                                   vehicles. The requirement of item (iii)
                                   of this paragraph may be met by showing
                                   that estimated future sales or past
                                   sales average at least ten thousand
                                   (10,000) gallons per month.
                                   The location where a qualified veterans
LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT:   organization that derives its charter
                                   from a national veterans organization
                                   regularly meets.
                                   Any electronic video game machine that,
                                   upon insertion of cash, is available to
                                   play or simulate the play of a video
                                   game, including but not limited to,
                                   video poker, line up and blackjack, as
                                   authorized by the Board utilizing a
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL:             video display and microprocessors in
                                   which the player may receive free games
                                   or credits that can be redeemed for
                                   cash. The term does not include a
                                   machine that directly dispenses coins,
                                   cash or tokens or is for amusement
                                   purposes only. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
 
3-6-3: LICENSE:
   A.   No person, either as owner, lessee, manager, officer or agent, or in
any other capacity, shall operate or permit to be operated any video gaming
terminal, as defined herein, at any premises within the City without first
having obtained a video gaming license from the City. The license provided for
in this chapter shall permit a licensee to operate video gaming terminals at
the specified establishment.
   B.   No applicant, including any person, either as owner, lessee, manager,
officer or agent, shall be eligible for a video gaming license from the City,
nor shall an existing license holder be entitled to maintain a video gaming
license, unless each of the following requirements are met and continue to be
met:
      1.   The applicant holds the appropriate certificate or license from the
State of Illinois permitting video gaming and is in good standing with same;
      2.   The applicant is not in arrears in any tax, fee or bill due to the
City or State of Illinois; and
      3.   The applicant has completed and complies with all the application
requirements set forth in section
3-6-4 of this chapter and is not disqualified due to a felony, gambling
offense, or crime of moral turpitude.
   C.   The Mayor shall be the approving authority for all licenses. In the
event a licensee or prospective licensee disagrees with any action taken by the
Mayor, an appeal may be made directly to the City Council at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after written notice of the action from which an appeal is
made. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-4: LICENSE APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
The license applicant shall provide the following information to the City on a
form provided by the City:
   A.   The legal name of the establishment;
   B.   The business name of the establishment;
   C.   The address of the establishment where the video gaming terminals are
to be located;
   D.   The type of establishment, including whether it is classified as a
veteran, fraternal, regular truck stop, large truck stop or liquor
establishment and supporting documentation demonstrating the classification;
   E.   A floor plan, drawn to scale using a computer, detailing the overall
layout of the establishment, including the location and count of dining
seating, the location and count of video gaming terminals and seating for said
terminals, and other significant features of the establishment, including exit
locations, restrooms and other equipment. A high-resolution electronic copy of
the floor plan as well as a paper printed copy (no smaller than eleven inches
by seventeen inches (11" x 17") shall be submitted at the time of application;
hand-drawn floor plans and floor plans not including a scale will not be
accepted;
   F.   The business office address of the establishment if different from the
address of the establishment;
   G.   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company or trust, the
name and address of an agent authorized and designated to accept service on
behalf of the licensee;
   H.   A phone number for the establishment;
   I.   An e-mail address for the establishment;
   J.   The name and address of every person owning more than a five percent
(5%) share of the establishment;
   K.   The name, address, phone number and e-mail address of any terminal
operator or distributor proposed to own, service or maintain video gaming
terminals at the establishment;
   L.   A copy of the establishment's State of Illinois video gaming license;
   M.   In the case of a corporation, limited liability company or partnership,
a copy of the establishment's state certificate of good standing;
   N.   A statement as to the number of video gaming terminals which the
establishment proposes to have on its premises (not to exceed six (6) for all
establishments);
   O.   A statement that the establishment is not in arrears in any tax, fee or
bill due to the City or State of Illinois;
   P.   A statement that the establishment agrees to abide by all state and
federal laws and any local ordinance;
   Q.   A statement that no manager or owner with more than five percent (5%)
interest in the establishment has ever been convicted of a felony, a gambling
offense or a crime of moral turpitude. In the event that an establishment
cannot provide such statement, the establishment may apply for a certificate of
rehabilitation from the Mayor indicating that the individual who would
disqualify the establishment from obtaining the video gaming license has been
rehabilitated and is no longer a threat to violate the law. The Mayor may
consider the nature of the offense, the length of time since the offense, the
length of time since release from custody and other factors to determine if the
individual has been rehabilitated such that he or she is no longer likely to
commit another offense;
   R.   For renewal applications, a report or reports showing its gross annual
revenue for the previous calendar year by category of revenue generated and
showing the percentage of gaming revenue payable to the establishment as
compared to the total gross revenues of the establishment. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-
2022)
3-6-5: APPLICATION FILING; RENEWALS:
   A.   Applications shall be processed by the City Clerk on a first come,
first served basis. Every application shall be date and time stamped upon
filing. An application received in the mail shall be considered filed on the
date and time it is opened by the City Clerk's department.
   B.   Every video gaming license holder shall be required to file a renewal
application, which may contain the same or similar information as set forth in
section
3-6-4. Renewal applications shall be due on or before July 1 unless that day
falls on a holiday, in which case the application may be received by the Clerk
on the following business day. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-6: LICENSE FEES:
The fee for operation of a video gaming terminal shall be two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) per terminal annually. Said fees are not subject to proration
or refund and are due prior to issuance of the license. All licenses required
by this division shall be prominently displayed next to the video gaming
terminal. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-7: LICENSE REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
The Mayor, at any time, may notify any licensee under this division within five
(5) business days of any charge of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter in connection with the operation of any video gaming terminal. After a
hearing presided over by the Mayor, the Mayor may order the revocation of the
license upon a finding that the violation has occurred, and the license shall
thereupon be terminated. The licensee may appeal the revocation as prescribed
in subsection
 3-6-3C.
In the event of the revocation or denial of any license or registration under
this Section, such person shall not be issued any license provided for in this
chapter for one calendar year following the revocation or any appeal thereof.
(Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-8: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VIDEO GAMING LICENSES:
There shall be no more than twenty-six (26) establishments licensed to operate
video gaming terminals in the City at any given time. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022;
amd. Ord. 2024-O-4, 2-6-2024)
3-6-9: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS ON PREMISES:
There shall be no more than six (6) video gaming terminals allowed and permits
issued therefore under this chapter for each licensee at any one location,
other than a licensed large truck stop establishment.
There shall be no more than ten (10) video gaming terminals allowed and permits
issued therefore under this chapter for each licensee at any licensed large
truck stop establishment. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-10: PROHIBITION:
Except as otherwise excepted in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any
person to gamble within the corporate limits of the City, or for any person or
entity which owns, occupies or controls an establishment within the City to
knowingly permit others to gamble on the premises. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-11: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit or make unlawful the
following activities or forms of gambling: the keeping, possession, ownership,
use or playing of a video gaming terminal in a licensed establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed veterans
establishment, which is licensed by the Board to conduct or allow such specific
activities under the VGA, 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-12: LICENSED ESTABLISHMENTS:
Any business, liquor or food licensee within the corporate limits of the City
that allows gambling to occur on premises in violation of this section shall be
subject to having his/her/its license immediately revoked for a period of sixty
(60) days. Any business, liquor or food licensee within the corporate limits of
the City that allows gambling to occur on premises in violation of this chapter
a second time shall have his/her/its license permanently revoked and,
thereafter, barred from obtaining any business, liquor or food license within
the City. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
3-6-13: SEIZURE OF UNAUTHORIZED GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS:
Any gambling device which is not authorized by this chapter shall be subject to
immediate seizure and confiscation by the City. Any money or other thing of
value intrinsically related to acts of gambling not authorized by this chapter
shall be seized and forfeited as contraband. Disposition of such gambling
devices and funds seized or confiscated shall be made in accordance with the
law. (Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
CHAPTER 7
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definitions
3-7-2: Standards
3-7-3: License Required; Application
3-7-4: License Term And Fees
3-7-5: Other Required Permits And Licenses
3-7-6: Taxes To Be Current
3-7-7: Location
3-7-8: Sanitary Conditions
3-7-9: Compliance With Applicable Laws, Codes And Ordinances
3-7-10: Register Kept
3-7-11: Revocation Of License; Reinstatement
3-7-12: Violations; Penalties
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in this section:
ADULT: Any person over twelve (12) years of age.
APPROVED: Acceptable to the appropriate governmental agency.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A bed and breakfast (or B&B) establishment is
a small lodging establishment that offers overnight accommodation and
breakfast. Bed and breakfast establishments are private homes with five (5) or
fewer guestrooms. Bed and breakfast establishments are classified as either: a)
bed and breakfast home or b) bed and breakfast inn and as further defined in 50
Illinois Compiled Statutes 820/1 et seq.
CONTINENTAL BREAKFAST: Limited to only coffee, tea, juice and commercially
prepared sweet, baked goods.
GUESTROOM: A sleeping room intended to serve no more than two (2) transient
guests per night, and no more than two (2) children age twelve (12) years and
under.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: The Coles County health department.
NIGHT: From ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M., the following
morning.
OPERATOR: The owner of the bed and breakfast.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Person who is in charge of the premises at any time that the
bed and breakfast is in operation.
TRADITIONAL BREAKFAST: Breakfast or morning meal including, but not limited to,
eggs, pancakes, bacon, sausage, hams, fruits, cereals, etc.
TRANSIENT GUEST: A guest of the bed and breakfast establishment and who shall
remain as a guest of any one establishment for no more than ten (10)
consecutive nights. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-2: STANDARDS:
In all districts in which bed and breakfast inns or bed and breakfast homes are
approved, the following standards shall apply:
   A.   General Standards:
      1.   Cooking facilities are not permitted in individual guestrooms.
      2.   Parking provisions shall be in conformance with section
10-8-4 of this title.
      3.   The operator of a bed and breakfast establishment shall be present
on the premises during the night hours of operation.
   B.   Specific Standards: The following specific standards shall apply to bed
and breakfast establishments:
      1.   Bed And Breakfast Home: An operator occupied residence providing
accommodations for compensation, with no more than three (3) guestrooms, each
limited to no more than two (2) transient adult guests and no more than two (2)
children age twelve (12) years and under. Only breakfast may be served at a
"bed and breakfast home".
         a.   Bed and breakfast homes shall:
            (1)   Only serve food to overnight guests;
            (2)   Advertise as a bed and breakfast home, but not as a hotel,
motel or restaurant;
            (3)   Have a smoke detector and carbon monoxide detector, when
required by law, in working order in each sleeping room;
            (4)   Maintain a fire extinguisher in working order on each floor
which shall be tested and inspected annually and proof of inspection shall be
included with the application for license;
            (5)   Have the water tested annually by the local board of health,
if water is not received from a public water supply.
            (6)   Parking for a bed and breakfast home shall be one parking
space per guestroom, plus two (2) for owner's portion plus one per employee.
Parking shall be located on site and shall comply with the parking design
standards required for the zoning district where the bed and breakfast is
located.
            (7)   Bed and breakfast homes shall not be permitted to lease any
common area for social gatherings or purposes.
      2.   Bed And Breakfast Inn: A residence providing accommodations for
compensation, with no more than five (5) guestrooms, each limited to no more
than two (2) transient guests and no more than two (2) children age twelve (12)
years and under. Only breakfast may be served at a "bed and breakfast inn".
         a.   Bed and breakfast inns shall:
            (1)   Have a toilet and lavatory facilities for overnight guests,
but separate toilet and lavatory facilities are not required for each
guestroom;
            (2)   Have a smoke detector and carbon monoxide detector, when
required by law, in working order in each sleeping room;
            (3)   Maintain a fire extinguisher in working order on each floor
which shall be tested and inspected annually and proof of inspection shall be
included with the application for license;
            (4)   Have the water tested annually by the local board of health,
if water is not received from a public water supply.
            (5)   In the A, RE and nonresidential zoning districts, common
dining areas for bed and breakfast inns may be leased for social events or a
meeting/reception area, if the required off street parking is provided. Parking
for bed and breakfast inns in these zoning districts, shall be one per bedroom
plus one per two hundred (200) square feet of office, dining room, interior
common areas, and retail floor area. Parking shall be located on site and shall
comply with the parking design standards required for the zoning district where
the bed and breakfast is located.
            (6)   In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, bed and breakfast
inns shall not be permitted to lease any common area for social gatherings or
purposes. Parking for bed and breakfast inns in these zoning districts shall be
one parking space per guestroom, plus two (2) for owner's portion plus one per
employee. Parking shall be located on site and shall comply with the parking
design standards required for the zoning district where the bed and breakfast
is located.
            (7)   Bed and breakfast inns that are leased for social events or a
meeting/reception area shall have direct access to a paved major collector or
arterial street. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
An annual license shall be required to operate and maintain a bed and breakfast
establishment within the jurisdiction of the city. Application for such license
shall be submitted to the building official. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-4: LICENSE TERM AND FEES:
Licenses shall be issued for one year and shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight December 31 of each year. Yearly license fees shall be as follows:
 
Bed and breakfast homes $40.00
Bed and breakfast inn   50.00
 
(Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-5: OTHER REQUIRED PERMITS AND LICENSES:
   A.   Required Permits And Licenses: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a bed and breakfast establishment without first receiving:
      1.   A conditional use permit when required, from the city board of
zoning appeals and planning.
      2.   An occupancy permit, including maximum occupancy, from the city
building official and the fire chief.
      3.   The appropriate food service license from the Coles County health
department.
   B.   Documents Required For Approval:
      1.   A floor plan of the bed and breakfast shall be submitted to the
building official and the fire chief prior to issuance of an occupancy permit.
      2.   All plans and documentation by the health department regulations for
review of food service application and issuance of a food service license.
      3.   Plans for all remodeling to the building and zoning office through
the standard city building permit policy.
      4.   A statement of operating policies and methods including, but not
limited to:
         a.   Maximum number of guests at any one time.
         b.   Period of operation.
         c.   If breakfast will be served and what type (continental,
traditional or none).
         d.   Number of parking spaces and location, including a plan of layout
and location of all parking spaces.
         e.   Name, address and phone number of the operator/owner of the
property. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-6: TAXES TO BE CURRENT:
Bed and breakfast establishments are subject to all applicable federal, state
and local taxes including city hotel/motel taxes under chapter 1, article F of
this title. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-7: LOCATION:
Bed and breakfast establishments shall be located as allowed by title 10 of
this code. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-8: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Food: All food service within bed and breakfast establishments shall
conform to the Coles County food sanitation ordinance and be properly licensed
by the Coles County health department.
   B.   Linens And Toiletries: Each person who is provided accommodations shall
be provided individual soap and clean individual bath cloths and towels. Clean
bed linen in good repair shall be provided for each guest who is provided
accommodations and shall be changed between guests and as often as necessary.
Clean linen shall be stored and handled in a sanitary manner. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-
20-2010)
3-7-9: COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS, CODES AND ORDINANCES:
The following laws, codes and ordinances having effect on bed and breakfast
establishments shall apply:
   A.   City unified development code (title 10 of this code).
   B.   City building codes (title 9, chapters 1 and 2 of this code).
   C.   City property maintenance code (title 9, chapter 7 of this code).
   D.   This code.
   E.   Coles County food sanitation ordinance.
   F.   Illinois state plumbing code (title 9, chapter 4 of this code).
   G.   All other applicable federal, state and local laws, codes and
standards. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-10: REGISTER KEPT:
A register of all guests must be kept. The register shall include the guest
name, home address, vehicle make and license number and the length of stay of
the guest. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-11: REVOCATION OF LICENSE; REINSTATEMENT:
Any licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
revocation of his license upon conviction of violations of this chapter one
time in any twelve (12) month period. The license shall be reinstated only by
applying for a new license under the terms of this chapter and compliance with
laws, ordinances and codes or standards. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
3-7-12: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person in violation of terms of this chapter shall be guilty of a
petty offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) at the discretion of the court. Each day a violation occurs or
continues is considered a separate offense.
   B.   Food service violations and penalties shall be as prescribed in the
Coles County food sanitation ordinance. (Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
CHAPTER 8
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: License Required; Organizations Only
3-8-3: Ineligibility For License
3-8-4: License Fee
3-8-5: Issuance Of License
3-8-6: Contents Of Application And License
3-8-7: Restrictions On License
3-8-8: Raffles Manager
3-8-9: Records And Reports
3-8-10: Penalty
3-8-11: Survival Clause
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms defined in this section have the
meanings given them:
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and
businesses who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial and civic interests of a community.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those
eligible for benefits must also confer benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and operated
to provide systematic institution and useful branches of learning by methods
common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their
scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported
schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by
the government.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: An agency of the state or a unit of local government in
the state that is vested by law or ordinance with the duty to maintain public
order and to enforce criminal laws or ordinances.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and conducted
on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result
of the operation.
RAFFLE: A form of "lottery", as defined in section 28-2(b) of the "criminal
code of 20121", conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter, in
which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members of
which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 86-O-17, 4-1-1986; amd. Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
3-8-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; ORGANIZATIONS ONLY:
No person shall conduct raffles where the winning chances will be determined in
the City without first having obtained a license therefor pursuant to this
chapter. Licensees must be:
   A.   Organizations, as defined in section
3-8-1  of this chapter, that operate without profit to their members and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application for a raffle license and which have had during that
entire five (5)-year period been a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out
their objects;
   B.   A non-profit fundraising organization that the City determines is
organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster; or
   C.   A law enforcement agency. (Ord. 86-O-17, 4-1-1986; amd. Ord. 19-O-33,
10-1-2019)
3-8-3: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
No license shall be issued to any of the following:
   A.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony that will impair the
person’s ability to engage in the licensed position.
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or professional
gambling promoter.
   C.   Any person who is not of good moral character.
   D.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which such
a person is active or employed.
   E.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of
this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not.
   F.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is to participate in the management or operation of a "raffle" as
defined in section
3-8-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 86-O-17, 4-1-1986; amd. Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
3-8-4: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for a license issued under this chapter shall be ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. 86-O-17, 4-1-1986; amd. Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
3-8-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The City Clerk shall issue a license to permit the conduct of raffles to any
bona fide nonprofit, charitable, educational, religious, fraternal, veterans,
labor, nonprofit fundraising organization, or law enforcement agency meeting
the requirements of this chapter. Said license shall be issued only upon
written application signed by the president or secretary or other high officer
of the organization applying for the license. (Ord. 86-O-17, 4-1-1986; amd.
Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
3-8-6: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION AND LICENSE:
The license and application for license must specify the area or areas in which
raffle chances will be sold or issued, the time period during which raffle
chances will be sold or issued, the time of determination of winning chances
and the location or locations at which winning chances will be determined. The
application must also contain a sworn statement attesting to the not-for-profit
character of the prospective license organization, signed by the presiding
officer and the secretary of that organization. (Ord. 86-O-17, 4-1-1986; amd.
Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
3-8-7: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE:
   A.   The conduct of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct the game.
      2.   No person except a bona fide director, officer, employee, or member
of the sponsoring organization may manage or participate in the management of
the raffle. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for managing or
participating in the management of the raffle. Sponsoring organizations may
contract with third parties who, acting at the direction of and under the
supervision of the sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the
sponsoring organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may
pay reasonable compensation for such services. Such services include the
following: (a) advertising, marketing and promotion, (b) legal, (c) procurement
of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose of operating the
raffle, (d) rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented,
(e) accounting, auditing and bookkeeping, (f) website hosting, (g) mailing and
delivery, (h) banking and payment processing, and (i) other services relating
to the operation of the raffle.
      3.   A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle provided that the rent is not determined as a
percentage of receipts or profits from the raffle.
      4.   Raffle chances may be sold throughout the state, including beyond
the borders of the City. Winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.
      5.   No person under the age of eighteen (18) may participate in the
conducting of the raffles or chances. A person under the age of eighteen (18)
may be within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parents or guardian.
   B.   The following limitations shall apply to all licenses:
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed ten million dollars
($10,000,000.00).
      2.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00).
   3.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   4.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
for any one raffle shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180).
   5.   Each license shall be valid for only one raffle or for a specified
number of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed the
current calendar year.
(Ord. 18-O-19, 6-19-2018; amd. Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019; Ord. 2022-O-30, 7-5-
2022)
3-8-8: RAFFLES MANAGER:
   A.   Manager Required: All management, operations and conduct of raffles
shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated by the
organization.
   B.   Bond Requirements:
      1.   The manager shall give a fidelity bond in favor of the organization
applying for the license in accordance with the following schedule:
Bond Required Aggregate Retail Value Of All Prizes To Be Awarded In Raffle
Bond Required Aggregate Retail Value Of All Prizes To Be Awarded In Raffle
$ 5,000.00       Up to $30,000.00
7,500.00         Up to $40,000.00
10,000.00        Up to $50,000.00
12,500.00        Up to $60,000.00
15,000.00        Up to $70,000.00
17,500.00        Up to $80,000.00
20,000.00        Up to $90,000.00
22,500.00        Up to $100,000.00
 
      2.   The fidelity bond shall provide that notice be given, in writing, to
the City not less than thirty (30) days prior to its cancellation.
      3.   The bond requirement shall be waived if the application states that
the members, or if there are no members the governing board, of the
organization applying for the license requests the waiver of the fidelity bond,
and said request for waiver is approved by unanimous vote of the City Council.
(Ord. 87-O-13, 5-19-1987; amd. Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
3-8-9: RECORDS AND REPORTS:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient.
The distribution of the net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose,
amount and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles program shall be
segregated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the State Department of Revenue, and
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of
its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   The licensee shall report promptly after the conclusion of each raffle
to its membership, or if there are no members to its governing board, and to
the City its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the
distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by this chapter.
   D.   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and licensees shall make available their records relating to operation
of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places. (Ord. 86-O-17,
4-1-1986; amd. Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
3-8-10: PENALTY:
Any person guilty of any violation under this chapter shall be fined not less
than one dollar ($1.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for
each violation. (Ord. 86-O-17, 4-1-1986; amd. Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
3-8-11: SURVIVAL CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection or clause of this chapter shall be deemed to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the remaining section, subsection and
clauses shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 19-O-33, 10-1-2019)
CHAPTER 9
MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER COACH PARKS 1
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: License Required
3-9-3: License Fee
3-9-4: Term Of License; Renewals
3-9-5: Permit For Construction
3-9-6: Inspections
 
Notes
  1. See also sections
1 10-7-18 and
  10-7-19 of this code.
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
MOBILE HOME OR TRAILER COACH: A structure used, or so constructed as to permit
it being used, as a conveyance upon the public streets and highways, and
constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof for human
habitation, dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons; provided, that
this definition shall refer to and include all portable contrivances used or
intended to be used generally for living and sleeping quarters and which are
capable of being moved by their own power, toward or transported by another
vehicle. Any structure built in a factory that is transported to its permanent
site and put on a permanent foundation with permanent utility hookup and
assessed as real estate and not as personal property is not classified as a
"mobile home".
MOBILE HOME PARK OR TRAILER COACH PARK: A parcel or parcels of land where
individual trailer sites are rented, leased or sold to users or owners of
trailer coaches or mobile homes. (Ord. 72-O-20, 9-5-1972)
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
An annual license will be required to operate and maintain a mobile home park
or trailer coach park within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 72-O-20, 9-5-
1972; amd. 1991 Code)
3-9-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for the operation of a mobile home park or trailer coach park
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year. (Ord. 04-O-13, 3-2-2004)
3-9-4: TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS:
The license will be issued for one year and shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight on September 14 of the year next following the issuance thereof
and said license shall be renewed from year to year upon payment of the fee
herein provided by filling out the required application supplied by the city
clerk. (Ord. 72-O-20, 9-5-1972; amd. 1991 Code)
3-9-5: PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION:
No person shall construct a mobile home park or trailer coach park without a
permit to do so from the city. Such construction must conform to the unified
development code of the city. (Ord. 04-O-13, 3-2-2004)
3-9-6: INSPECTIONS:
All trailer coach parks operated under the provisions of this chapter shall be
inspected periodically to see that they comply with regulations of the city
laws and a record kept of said inspections by the inspection division of the
building and zoning office of the city. (Ord. 72-O-20, 9-5-1972)
CHAPTER 10
AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE AND REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definitions
3-10-2: Ambulance Service License
3-10-3: Application Procedure
3-10-4: Issuance Or Denial Of License
3-10-5: Expiration Of Ambulance Service License
3-10-6: Renewal Application
3-10-7: Ambulance Availability, Design, And Equipment Requirements
3-10-8: EMT Requirements
3-10-9: Change In Location Of Ambulance
3-10-10: Approval And Notification Of Use And Decommissioning Of Ambulance
3-10-11: Change In Ownership
3-10-12: Provision Of Ambulance Service Regardless Of Ability To Pay Or
Location Of Services
3-10-13: Use Of Unapproved Ambulance Or Location Prohibited
3-10-14: Compliance With Emergency Dispatch Procedures
3-10-15: Monitoring Emergency Dispatch Calls
3-10-16: Immediate Emergency Response Required
3-10-17: Response Times
3-10-18: Authority To Promulgate Ambulance Operation Emergency Dispatch
Procedures
3-10-19: Right To Inspect Operational Locations And Ambulances
3-10-20: Right Of Fire Chief To Authorize Service By Unlicensed Vehicles
3-10-21: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 4, chapter 1 of this code.
3-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
specified in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section.
ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT/MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE (ALS/MIC): An advanced level of
prehospital and interhospital care that includes basic life support functions
(including cardiopulmonary resuscitation [CPR] plus cardiac monitoring, cardiac
defibrillation, telemetered electrocardiography, administration of
antiarrhythmic agents, intravenous therapy, administration of medications,
drugs and solutions, use of adjunctive medical devices, trauma care, and other
authorized techniques and procedures) initiated for the treatment of real or
potential acute life threatening conditions under the direction of a physician
licensed to practice medicine in all of its branches or a registered
professional nurse/MICN or registered professional nurse/field RN, and where
authorized by a project medical director in an Illinois department of public
health approved advanced life support system.
AMBULANCE: Any publicly or privately owned vehicle that is specifically
designed, constructed or modified and equipped, and is intended to be used for,
and is maintained or operated for the emergency transportation of persons who
are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
AMBULANCE SERVICE: The operation of an enterprise which has as one of its
purposes the operation, or use on the streets, alleys, or any public way within
the city of an ambulance which responds to emergency calls for the
transportation of persons who are reported to be sick, injured, wounded,
otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
AMBULANCE SERVICE LOCATION: The location at which ambulances are stored,
maintained or from which ambulances are dispatched by an ambulance service.
BASIC LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES (BLS): The rendering of basic level of prehospital
and interhospital emergency care, including, but not limited to, airway
management, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, control of shock and bleeding and
splinting of fractures, as outlined in a basic emergency care course approved
by the Illinois department of public health and meeting the current national
curriculum requirements of the United States department of transportation.
CHANGE IN AMBULANCE: A change by either adding or removing from service an
ambulance from the list of those previously approved by the fire chief.
CHANGE IN AMBULANCE SERVICE LOCATION: A change by either adding or removing
from use as part of the ambulance service a storage, dispatch or maintenance
facility used in the ambulance service from the list of those previously
approved by the fire chief.
EMERGENCY: A condition or situation in which an individual declares a need for
immediate attention or when that need is declared by emergency medical
personnel or a public safety official.
EMERGENCY CALL: The request by radio, telephone, telecommunications device for
the deaf (TDD), or in person for ambulance service to respond to an emergency.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-BASIC (EMT-B): A person who has successfully
completed a course of instruction in basic life support services as required by
and is currently certified by the Illinois department of public health in
accordance with standards prescribed by the emergency medical services (EMS)
systems act for the state of Illinois or by rules adopted pursuant to said act,
who provides emergency medical services.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE (EMT-I): An EMT-I currently certified
by the department who has completed a department approved course of instruction
in specific advanced life support/mobile intensive care services and who is
currently functioning in a program approved by the Illinois department of
public health to provide such services under the supervision and control of a
project medical director.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC (EMT-P): A person who has successfully
completed an Illinois department of public health approved course of
instruction in advanced life support/mobile intensive care services and is
currently certified by the Illinois department of public health.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE BUSINESS RECORDS: Those records which document the staff on
duty for the ambulance service at any time and records which establish the
staff's minimum qualifications required by this chapter, documents which record
the number of responses to emergency calls, response times to emergency calls,
maintenance of records of the ambulance, phone logs indicating emergency calls
for service and such other documents, tape recordings, computer records or
other media which contain information necessary or convenient for the fire
chief to determine if the ambulance service has or is complying with the
provisions of this title and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to
this chapter.
FIRE DEPARTMENT: The fire department of the city of Charleston.
HOSPITAL: The meaning ascribed to that term in the state of Illinois hospital
licensing act, as that act is now or may hereafter be amended.
ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH: The department of public health, state of
Illinois, or its successor in function.
INTERMEDIATE LIFE SUPPORT CARE: Intermediate level of prehospital and
interhospital emergency care that includes BLS care, plus intravenous
cannulation and fluid therapy, invasive airway management, trauma care, and
other authorized techniques and procedures initiated for the treatment of real
or potential acute life threatening conditions, under the direction of a
physician licensed to practice medicine in all its branches or a registered
professional nurse/MICN or registered professional nurse/field RN, and where
authorized by a project medical director in a department approved EMS system.
MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT: An intergovernmental or interagency agreement providing
for shared and common assistance when requested by one of the member agencies.
The equipment and personnel provided by a mutual aid request may be
predetermined for a particular type of incident or determined at the time of
the request in consideration of available resources.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The police department of the city of Charleston.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL NURSE/FIELD RN: A registered nurse, licensed under the
"Illinois nursing act", who has been approved by the project medical director
in an Illinois department of public health approved EMS system, and who has
satisfactorily completed additional supplementary training, including, but not
limited to, courses in extrication; telemetry and communications; advanced
cardiac life support, including defibrillation and intubation or its equivalent
and either trauma nurse specialist or nurse trauma life support or their
equivalents as approved by the project medical director.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL NURSE/MICN: A registered nurse, licensed under the
"Illinois nursing act", as amended, who has satisfactorily completed the mobile
intensive care nurse course, including training in telemetry and
communications, advanced cardiac life support, and a prehospital trauma support
course or its equivalent, as approved by the Illinois department of public
health.
SERVICE ZONE: A geographical area defined by boundaries mutually agreed to by
the fire chief and ambulance service and illustrated by the map attached to the
emergency medical services rules and regulations.
TRANSFER: The nonemergency transfer of a patient from one medical facility to
another. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-2: AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE:
   A.   Ambulance Service License Required: No person, whether acting as owner,
principal, agent, employee, lessee or licensee, shall furnish, operate,
conduct, advertise, or otherwise engage in ambulance service in the city of
Charleston without a current ambulance service license issued pursuant to this
chapter by the city of Charleston or in violation of the terms or conditions of
the license.
   B.   Ambulance Service License Not Required: No ambulance license is
required by:
      1.   An ambulance service which has no maintenance, dispatch or storage
facilities in the city of Charleston and which does not respond to an emergency
with the city of Charleston; or
      2.   An ambulance service authorized by the fire chief to operate without
a license in accordance with section
3-10-20 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-3: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
   A.   The application for license as an ambulance service shall be filed with
the city clerk on a form prescribed and furnished by the city of Charleston.
The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   Applicant's name, address, and trade or other assumed name under
which the applicant proposes to operate the ambulance service.
      2.   Name and address of each owner of the ambulance service.
      3.   Description of each ambulance to be used in the operations during
the period of the license.
      4.   Address and location from which an ambulance or ambulances will be
operated, stored, dispatched or maintained by the ambulance service whether
located in or outside the city of Charleston.
      5.   List of personnel of the ambulance service with EMT certification
and the personnel's respective EMT certifications.
   B.   At the time the application for license is submitted, the license fee
shall also be submitted. The cost of the licensing fee shall be one hundred
twenty five dollars ($125.00) per year. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-4: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Upon receipt of an application for an ambulance service license, the
fire chief shall cause an investigation of the applicant and the proposed
operations. Such investigation shall be completed within fifteen (15) business
days from receipt of the application and license fee unless the ambulance
service agrees to an extension of time.
   B.   The fire chief shall approve the issuance of an ambulance service
license to the applicant unless the fire chief, after reasonable investigation,
finds that the applicant or the staff proposed to be used by the applicant, or
a vehicle or vehicles proposed to be used by the applicant do not meet the
requirements of this chapter, or the provisions of this code relating to the
denial of a license, or other requirements imposed by law.
   C.   Each license shall be issued to the person named in the application for
the ambulances and locations specified in the application. The license may not
be transferred or assigned to any other person.
   D.   A copy of each license issued by the fire chief shall be filed with the
city clerk. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-5: EXPIRATION OF AMBULANCE SERVICE LICENSE:
Each license shall expire on April 30 following date of its issuance. (Ord. 08-
O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-6: RENEWAL APPLICATION:
   A.   The annual license renewal fee and an application for renewal of an
ambulance service license shall be filed with the city clerk on a form
prescribed and furnished by the city of Charleston no sooner than ninety (90)
days prior to the license expiration but no later than sixty (60) days prior to
the license expiration. Failure to submit a license renewal application within
the prescribed time period shall be grounds for denying the renewal license.
The ambulance service denied a renewal license for this reason may apply for a
new license at any time.
   B.   An application for renewal of an ambulance service license may be
denied for the same reasons that an original application for an ambulance
service license may be denied. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-7: AMBULANCE AVAILABILITY, DESIGN, AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   An ambulance service licensed to operate within the city limits of the
city of Charleston shall maintain at least two (2) ALS units in the city limits
at all times for responses.
   B.   An ambulance service licensed to operate within the city limits of the
city of Charleston shall provide coverage in "zones" mutually agreed to by the
applicant ambulance service and the fire chief. Coverage will be defined in the
"EMS Response And Deployment Rules And Regulations".
   C.   An ambulance service licensed to operate within the city limits of the
city of Charleston shall be capable of responding two (2) units in most
circumstances for additional help.
   D.   An ambulance service licensed to operate within the city limits of the
city of Charleston must enter into a mutual assistance agreement relating to
ambulance service pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-5-7. Said agreement shall not prohibit the city of Charleston nor shall it
prohibit the ambulance service from entering into other mutual ambulance
assistance agreements with other ambulance services.
   E.   An ambulance service licensed to operate within the city limits of the
city of Charleston must execute an agreement for participation in the mutual
aid box alarm system (MABAS), a copy of said agreement being supplied to the
fire chief.
   F.   In addition to the coverage provided in the zones referenced above,
each ambulance service shall be required, at the direction of the fire chief,
to respond with available ambulances to locations outside of the Charleston
city limits as part of a response to a request from the state of Illinois or
another local governmental unit pursuant to any mutual aid agreement the city
has with the state of Illinois or another unit of local government. Said
ambulance service shall not be entitled to reimbursement for the costs of its
response to said mutual aid request unless, and only, to the extent that the
city of Charleston receives payments or reimbursement for said services.
   G.   Each ambulance used or proposed to be used in a licensed ambulance
service shall meet the same design and equipment requirements that the
ambulance would be required to meet in order to be licensed by the state of
Illinois now or as may be required hereafter by the state of Illinois by
amendment.
   H.   Additional ambulance requirements for operating within the Charleston
city limits include the following:
      1.   All ambulances licensed to operate within the city of Charleston
shall be type III ALS ambulances; and
      2.   All ambulances licensed to operate within the city of Charleston
shall be equipped with Zoll biphasic monitors; and
      3.   All ambulances licensed to operate within the city of Charleston
shall be equipped with radios that have all MABAS channels in the units and
IFERN1, IFERN2, and interoperable communications with other state and local
agencies; and
      4.   All ambulances licensed to operate within the city of Charleston
shall be IO drill equipped; and
      5.   All ambulances licensed to operate within the city of Charleston
shall have the capability of taking critical care EMT-P calls; and
      6.   All ambulances licensed to operate within the city of Charleston
shall have the capability of providing extrication and/or specialized rescues
(high angle vertical, confined space, trench and structural collapse).
   I.   An ambulance shall be considered available for use by the ambulance
service if it is under the sole control of the ambulance service for its sole
use and it is operational, stored and dispatched by the ambulance service from
within the Charleston city limits or a location approved by the fire chief.
(Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-8: EMT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   When in use for emergency calls, each ambulance shall have as personnel
in the ambulance two (2) EMT-Ps on all calls.
   B.   Each licensed ambulance service must maintain at least two (2) units in
town at all times with two (2) EMT-Ps at minimum.
   C.   A registered professional nurse/MICN, registered professional nurse/
field RN, or physician may be counted as an EMT-P for purposes of meeting the
requirements of this section.
   D.   Additional training requirements for operating within the Charleston
city limits shall include the following:
      1.   All personnel are trained in technical rescue awareness.
      2.   All personnel are trained in emergency response to terrorism basic
concepts.
      3.   All personnel shall be trained annually on the Charleston fire
department's incident command system.
      4.   All personnel are certified FSVO (fire service vehicle operator).
      5.   All personnel are NIMS compliant with certificates in IS 100; IS
200; and IS 700.
      6.   All supervisors have supervisory training equal to two hundred (200)
hours.
      7.   All supervisors are NIMS compliant with IS 300; IS 400 and unified
command.
      8.   Each ambulance unit operating must be staffed by a minimum of one
EMT-P trained in hazardous material operations for emergency medical services
by their employer.
      9.   Each ambulance service shall provide a copy of documentation to the
fire chief or fire chief's designee showing annual certification of required
training. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-9: CHANGE IN LOCATION OF AMBULANCE:
   A.   A licensed ambulance service shall notify the fire chief in writing at
least one hundred twenty (120) business days prior to changing the location of
its operations. For purposes of this section, "location of operations" means
the zone where ambulances and staff are located while on duty awaiting to be
dispatched.
   B.   The fire chief shall approve or deny the request within ten (10)
business days after receipt of a request. The fire chief shall notify the city
clerk of any approved change of location. The fire chief shall approve the
change in location unless the proposed change would violate this code or any
provision of an ordinance of the city or state or federal law or regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-10: APPROVAL AND NOTIFICATION OF USE AND DECOMMISSIONING OF AMBULANCE:
   A.   No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall operate or allow
another person to operate an ambulance to respond to an emergency call for or
on behalf of a licensed ambulance service unless its use for such purpose is
approved by the fire chief.
   B.   All requests for approval to use an ambulance under this section shall
be submitted in writing to the fire chief on a form provided by the fire chief.
   C.   The fire chief shall approve the use of an ambulance within fifteen
(15) business days of receipt of the written request unless its use would
violate a provision of this code, any rules or regulations promulgated to
implement this chapter, an ordinance of the city, or a state or federal law or
regulation.
   D.   A licensed ambulance service shall notify the fire chief in writing
within five (5) business days after it permanently ceases use of an ambulance.
   E.   The fire chief shall notify the city clerk of the change in licensing.
(Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-11: CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP:
A licensed ambulance service shall report in writing to the fire chief any
change in ownership sixty (60) calendar days prior to change in ownership. The
fire chief may deny issuance of license if the owners do not meet this code,
provisions of an ordinance of the city, state, federal law or regulation. The
fire chief shall notify the city clerk of any change in ownership. For purposes
of this section, "change in ownership" shall mean the transfer of all or any
part of an interest in a sole proprietorship or partnership or the transfer of
more than five percent (5%) of the stock of a private corporation or twenty
five percent (25%) of the stock of a public corporation. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-
2008)
3-10-12: PROVISION OF AMBULANCE SERVICE REGARDLESS OF ABILITY TO PAY OR
LOCATION OF SERVICES:
Each licensed ambulance service shall provide emergency service within the city
of Charleston without regard to a person's ability to pay for such service or
the location of requested services. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-13: USE OF UNAPPROVED AMBULANCE OR LOCATION PROHIBITED:
No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall operate or maintain an
ambulance service at a location not approved by the fire chief. (Ord. 08-O-14,
5-20-2008)
3-10-14: COMPLIANCE WITH EMERGENCY DISPATCH PROCEDURES:
   A.   Each licensed ambulance service shall comply with all emergency
dispatch procedures established by the city of Charleston fire department and
police department and any dispatching agency for the fire or police department.
   B.   If for any reason a licensed ambulance service is not able to comply
with the operational requirements set forth in this section, it shall
immediately report that status to the Charleston fire department in accordance
with the fire chief's emergency dispatch procedures.
   C.   An ambulance service shall not respond to any requests for emergency
assistance unless it is in compliance with the operation requirements set forth
in this chapter, unless specifically authorized to respond by the fire chief or
the fire chief's designee as provided for the fire chief's emergency dispatch
procedures.
   D.   An ambulance service licensed to operate within the Charleston city
limits shall have in place and utilize the current system used for emergency
medical dispatch (EMD). (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-15: MONITORING EMERGENCY DISPATCH CALLS:
It shall be unlawful for any ambulance service to respond in or through the
city to a call for an ambulance made by an organized police or fire department
or any such department's official dispatching agency unless a specific request
is directed to the ambulance service by the organized police or fire department
or any such department's official dispatching agency. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-16: IMMEDIATE EMERGENCY RESPONSE REQUIRED:
Each licensed ambulance service shall immediately respond to any emergency call
for an ambulance directed to that ambulance service and originated by the
Charleston fire or police department or any such department's official
dispatching agency. If the licensed ambulance service is not able to
immediately respond to the emergency or is not able to respond with an
appropriate or requested level of service, the licensed ambulance service shall
immediately report this situation to the agency and shall follow the directions
of that agency regarding the response. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-17: RESPONSE TIMES:
Any ambulance service licensed to operate within the Charleston city limits
shall meet the following response criteria:
   A.   "Response time" is defined as the amount of time that has elapsed
between the time when the call is received by the ambulance service until the
time of arrival at the scene of the emergency.
   B.   The ALS ambulance should arrive at the scene of the emergency within
eight (8) minutes of the time the call was received by the ambulance service.
This time criteria must be met on at least ninety percent (90%) of the calls
received during any period of six (6) consecutive months. This applies to all
ALS units on code response (lights and sirens).
   C.   All other noncode responses should arrive on scene within twelve (12)
minutes of the time the call was received by the ambulance service. This time
criteria must be met on at least ninety percent (90%) of the calls received
during any period of six (6) consecutive months.
   D.   Any ambulance service licensed to operate within the Charleston city
limits shall provide to the fire chief or fire chief's designee a written
biannual report on or before April 30 and on or before October 31 showing
response time compliance. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-18: AUTHORITY TO PROMULGATE AMBULANCE OPERATION EMERGENCY DISPATCH
PROCEDURES:
   A.   The fire chief is hereby granted the authority to promulgate rules and
regulations for governing the emergency dispatch of ambulances in order to
promote the safe response of ambulances in an emergency.
   B.   Any emergency dispatch rules and regulations promulgated by the fire
chief shall not conflict with the provisions of this code and shall be
considered supplemental to this code.
   C.   The emergency dispatch rules and regulations shall provide for the
selection of a licensed ambulance service to be dispatched in an emergency
requiring the response of an ambulance. The rules and regulations may provide
that the selection of an ambulance in any situation may be based on rotational,
geographical or other criteria as the fire chief shall determine will promote
an orderly response by persons with sufficient training and experience to
respond to the emergency.
   D.   The fire chief shall file any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant
to this section with the city clerk and shall mail a copy of any such rule or
regulation to each licensed ambulance service, to the police chief, and to all
official dispatching agencies for the Charleston fire or police department
pursuant to this code at the time the rule or regulation is promulgated and at
least seven (7) calendar days prior to such rule or regulation taking effect.
(Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-19: RIGHT TO INSPECT OPERATIONAL LOCATIONS AND AMBULANCES:
The fire chief shall have the right to inspect all operational locations and
ambulances proposed to be used or used by a licensed ambulance service at any
reasonable time and investigate the emergency response business records of the
applicant and staff to be used in the ambulance service at reasonable times,
provided, however, that the fire chief shall not be allowed to inspect those
portions of records which are prohibited from inspection by federal or state
law. Should the ambulance service refuse to allow inspection of a portion of a
record due to a federal or state law, the fire chief may require that the
ambulance service specify the particular law which restricts inspection and
shall be allowed to inspect those portions of the records that are not
prohibited by law from disclosure. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
3-10-20: RIGHT OF FIRE CHIEF TO AUTHORIZE SERVICE BY UNLICENSED VEHICLES:
In the case of an emergency where the number of licensed ambulances available
is determined by the fire chief to be insufficient to render the required
emergency ambulance service, the fire chief may authorize nonlicensed vehicles
to operate as ambulances in response to the emergency. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-
2008)
3-10-21: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The fire chief may impose fines against or suspend or revoke the license of a
licensed ambulance service for any violations of the provisions of this chapter
or any rules or regulations promulgated to implement the provisions of this
chapter, in accordance with the provisions of this title or any amendment
thereto. (Ord. 08-O-14, 5-20-2008)
CHAPTER 11
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: License Required
3-11-3: Application
3-11-4: Conditions
3-11-5: Denial Or Revocation Of License
3-11-6: Penalties
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property for
retail sale within this State who does not maintain in this State an
established office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse, service center
or residence from which such business is conducted. However, this chapter does
not apply to any person who delivers tangible personal property within this
State who is fulfilling an order for such property which was solicited or
placed by mail or other means.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, firm, association or
other entity.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of
goods, wares or merchandise in this State and who, for the purpose of
conducting such business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of
any kind, or vacant lot. However, this chapter does not apply to any person
selling goods, wares or merchandise which are raised, produced or manufactured
by him, to any person selling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products at
an established City market, to any person operating a store or refreshment
stand at a resort, to any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to
property owned by him or upon which he resides, to any person operating a stand
or booth at a State or County Fair, or to any person operating a stand or booth
at a trade show, exposition, convention or similar event. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-
2017)
3-11-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It is a violation of this chapter for any person, either as principal or agent,
to conduct business as a transient merchant or itinerant vendor in the City
without first complying with the requirements of section 2a of the Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act 1  by obtaining a certificate of registration and, if a bond
or other security is required, by posting bond or other approved security, and
without having obtained a license under this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 120/2a.
3-11-3: APPLICATION:
Any person who wishes to obtain a license as a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor shall file a written license application with the Police Department as
provided in this section.
   A.   The license application shall include the applicant's:
      1.   Name;
      2.   Permanent business address (which must include a street address);
      3.   Residence address of the principal (and, if the applicant is a
corporation, the residence addresses of its officers);
      4.   The location at which the applicant intends to do business, and
proof of the property owner's permission to do business at that location;
      5.   The nature of the business the applicant intends to conduct;
      6.   A copy of the applicant's certificate of registration under the
Retailers' Occupation Tax Act;
      7.   A complete inventory of the goods the applicant intends to offer for
sale; and
      8.   A list of all licenses to conduct business as a transient merchant
or an itinerant vendor obtained by the applicant in this State in the twelve
(12) months preceding the date of filing of the application, and disclosure of
any revocation of such licenses.
   B.   A license issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the
year it was issued. The Police Department may collect a license application fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) from any person wishing to conduct business as
either a transient merchant or itinerant vendor under this chapter. (Ord. 17-O-
21, 5-16-2017)
3-11-4: CONDITIONS:
Any license issued under this chapter is expressly conditioned on compliance
with all applicable laws, including the Transient Merchant Act of 1987, 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 465/1 et seq. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
3-11-5: DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The Police Department will send the applicant or licensee a "notice of
denial" or "notice of revocation" for a license under this chapter by first
class mail, if the Police Department determines that the applicant or licensee:
      1.   Made any material misrepresentation or false statement in the
license application;
      2.   Failed to comply with applicable laws, including registration with
the Illinois Department of Revenue for the payment of Sales Tax;
      3.   Failed to conduct and/or supervise activities under the license so
as to reasonably ensure that such activities are in compliance with the terms
of the license and with the provisions of this chapter; or
      4.   Authorized, condoned, or knowingly tolerated any unlawful activities
or any activities conducted under the license in such a manner as to constitute
a nuisance, crime, fraud, trespass, or invasion of privacy.
   B.   Within five (5) business days of the "notice of denial" or "notice of
revocation", the applicant or licensee may submit a written request to the
Mayor for a hearing to dispute the license denial or revocation.
   C.   Within five (5) business days of the applicant or licensee's request
for a hearing, the Mayor will submit a "notice of hearing" to the applicant or
licensee by first class mail, not less than five (5) business days prior to the
date of the hearing. The "notice of hearing" will describe the Police
Department's grounds for denial or revocation of the license, and notify the
applicant of the time and place of the hearing, and their right to counsel, to
submit evidence, and to cross examine witnesses.
   D.   The Mayor will deny the application or revoke the license:
      1.   In the absence of a timely request for hearing; or
      2.   Upon finding of grounds for denial or revocation of the license
based upon the preponderance of the evidence after a hearing. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-
18-2017)
3-11-6: PENALTIES:
   A.   If any person makes retail sales as a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor without having obtained a license under this chapter, the Police
Department may hold the inventory, truck, or other personal property of the
person until he obtains a license to conduct business as a transient merchant
or itinerant vendor.
   B.   If the property has been held by the Police Department for more than
sixty (60) days and the person whose property is being held has not obtained a
license under this chapter, the Police Department, or the City, may petition
the Circuit Court for an order for the sale of the property being held.
      1.   If the court finds that the person whose property is held has not
obtained a license under this chapter, the court may order the Police
Department or City to sell the property.
      2.   Proceeds of the sale of the property, less reimbursement to the
Police Department of the reasonable expenses of storage and sale of the
property, shall be deposited in the Treasury of the City.
   C.   Notwithstanding any other remedies available to the City pursuant to
this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
for each offense, to which court or adjudication costs may be added. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which the violation occurs or
continues to occur. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
CHAPTER 12
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
3-12-1: Storing Or Selling Fireworks Prohibited; Exceptions
3-12-2: Authority Of Fire Department Chief To Seize Or Remove Fireworks
3-12-3: License Required For Seasonal Retailers Of Fireworks
3-12-4: Storage Of Fireworks By Seasonal Retailers; License Required
3-12-5: License Fee
3-12-6: Term Of License
3-12-7: Penalty
3-12-8: Exempt From Regulation
3-12-1: STORING OR SELLING FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to store, sell, offer or expose for
sale, or have in possession with intent to sell or to use, discharge or cause
to be discharged, ignited, fired or otherwise set in action within the limits
of the City, any fireworks inconsistent with Illinois Compiled Statutes chapter
425, act 30, section 2.
   B.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to articles of the kind
and nature herein mentioned, which shall be in the possession of railroads or
transportation companies for the purpose of transportation, unless the same
shall be held voluntarily by such railroads or companies as warehousemen. This
chapter shall not apply to signal devices used by railroad companies or to
explosives used for blasting or similar purposes. (Ord. 19-O-10, 4-2-2019)
3-12-2: AUTHORITY OF FIRE DEPARTMENT CHIEF TO SEIZE OR REMOVE FIREWORKS:
The Chief of the Fire Department shall seize, take, remove or cause to be
removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks or fireworks or combustibles
offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter. (Ord.
19-O-10, 4-2-2019)
3-12-3: LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SEASONAL RETAILERS OF FIREWORKS:
Licenses for the seasonal retailers of fireworks by properly qualified
individuals or corporations may be issued by the Chief of the Fire Department
in such form as may be prescribed, and upon furnishing such information as the
Chief of the Fire Department may require. Such public sales by seasonal
retailers shall be of such character and so located, as in the opinion of the
Chief of the Fire Department, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous
to property or endanger any person or persons. Application for such licenses
shall be made fifteen (15) days in advance of the first date of sale. (Ord. 19-
O-10, 4-2-2019)
3-12-4: STORAGE OF FIREWORKS BY SEASONAL RETAILERS; LICENSE REQUIRED:
Such fireworks or devices for public sale by seasonal retailers may be stored
within the limits of the City when the license for such storage has been issued
by the Chief of the Fire Department. The buildings or premises in or upon which
such storage is to be made shall be properly inspected by the Chief of the Fire
Department and certified as a proper place for such storage. No license shall
be issued for such storage within one hundred feet (100') of any inhabited
school, hospital, church or other public institution or any building used as a
place of public assembly. (Ord. 19-O-10, 4-2-2019)
3-12-5: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for the public sale of fireworks by seasonal retailers shall be
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each site where the fireworks
are sold. (Ord. 19-O-10, 4-2-2019)
3-12-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued to seasonal retailers shall be valid for thirty (30) days
from the date the license is issued. The license will expire after thirty (30)
days of issuance. (Ord. 19-O-10, 4-2-2019)
3-12-7: PENALTY:
Notwithstanding any other remedies available to the City pursuant to this
chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense, to which court or adjudication costs may be added. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which the violation occurs or
continues to occur. (Ord. 19-O-10, 4-2-2019)
3-12-8: EXEMPT FROM REGULATION:
The fireworks display permits issued by the Fire Chief, pursuant to subsection
1-8B-7A17 of this Code, and the Assistant Fire Chief, pursuant to subsection
1-8B-8A29 of this Code, are excluded from regulation of this chapter. (Ord. 19-
O-10, 4-2-2019)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
AMBULANCE SERVICE 1
SECTION:
4-1-1: Established; Authority
4-1-2: Ambulance Rates
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 10 of this Code.
4-1-1: ESTABLISHED; AUTHORITY:
   A.   Established: There is hereby established a Municipal ambulance service
to be incorporated within the Fire Department for the purposes of providing
emergency and nonemergency care and transportation of sick, injured and
disabled citizens within the limits of the City and beyond the limits of the
City according to policies.
   B.   Authority: The operation of the ambulance service shall be under the
direction of the Fire Chief. (Ord. 07-O-1, 1-2-2007)
4-1-2: AMBULANCE RATES:
   A.   The fees shall be increased annually, effective May 1 of each year,
beginning in 2024, without further City Council action, pursuant to the annual
report submitted for the previous year to the Illinois Department of Healthcare
and Family Services (HFS) and/or the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) reflecting the actual cost incurred for transporting patients.
   B.   The base rates applicable to all calls for service shall be charged a
fee equal to the amount listed in Section A above and Mileage at eighteen
dollars ($18.00) per loaded mile.
   C.   Disposable medical supplies used in patient treatment by the Municipal
ambulance service may be charged to the patient(s) on a current cost basis as
shall be determined by the Fire Chief.
      1   See also title 3, chapter 10 of this Code.
   D.   The fee for non-emergency standby service to any commercial enterprise
shall be one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) per hour with the exception of
Coles County Fair Association for the annual Coles County Fair, Charleston
Community Unit #1 sporting events, and Eastern Illinois University sporting
events.
   E.   In lieu of the base rate, ALS emergency calls that do not result in
transportation by ambulance shall be billed at one hundred and seventy-five
dollars ($175.00).
   F.   A fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) will be charged when a third
medic is utilized on out-of-town transfers.
   G.   The fee for extrication services shall be five hundred dollars
($500.00) for non-residents.
   H.   Resident and Non-resident public service calls will be assessed a
charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) per incident after exceeding five requests per
calendar year at the discretion of the Fire Chief. (Ord. 19-O-18, 4-16-2019;
amd. Ord. 20-O-11, 4-21-2020; Ord. 21-O-9, 4-20-2021; Ord. 2024-O-19, 4-2-2024)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Nuisances Enumerated
4-2-4: Unlawful Dumping Or Depositing Of Materials
4-2-5: Responsibility Of Owner Or Occupant
4-2-6: Abatement Notice And Proceedings
4-2-7: Lien Provisions
4-2-8: Inspections
4-2-9: Violations; Penalties
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to identify and deal with, within a timely
manner, certain public nuisances. (Ord. 87-O-41, 10-6-1987)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
BULK WASTE:
   A.   Appliances, including, but not limited to: washer, dryer, refrigerator,
freezer, stove, television, and water heater; or
   B.   Indoor furniture, including, but not limited to: bed springs,
mattresses, carpet, couch, chairs, and cushions; or
   C.   Other items exposed to the elements not designed for exterior use.
FRONT YARD: The yard extending across the full width of a lot that lies
adjacent to the public or private street or roads and extends from the front
property line of said lot to the front of the structure on the lot.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
JUNK: Scrap and old iron; steel, chain, brass, copper, magnesium, aluminum,
tin, lead or other base metals; scraps of woolens, clips, bagging, rubber and
glass and empty bottles of different kinds and sizes when the number of each
kind or size is less than one gross; wrecked or dilapidated motor vehicles;
engines; machinery stored or held; and all articles and things discarded or no
longer used as a manufactured article composed of or consisting of any one or
more of the materials or articles herein mentioned.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree
limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
PREMISES: Any real property or improvements thereon as the case may be.
PROPERTY: See definition of Premises.
RUBBISH: Combustible or noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
WEEDS: Includes noxious weeds such as buckthorn, bull nettle, burdock, Canada
thistle, cocklebur, curled dock, dodders, field bindweed, giant foxtail, hoary
cress, jimson, Johnson grass, leafy spurge, oxeye daisy, perennial sow thistle,
quack grass, ragweed, Russian knapweed, sweet clover, wild carrot, wild garlic
and wild mustard. (Ord. 87-O-41, 10-6-1987; amd. Ord. 93-O-38, 7-20-1993; Ord.
11-O-47, 10-18-2011)
4-2-3: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
It is hereby declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the city to
maintain such premises in such manner that any one or more of the following
subsections are found to exist:
   A.   Junk And Rubbish: The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation on
the premises of any junk, garbage or rubbish, including, but not limited to,
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles, automotive
parts and equipment, appliances, furniture, containers, packing materials,
scrap metal, wood, building materials or debris which is within view of persons
on adjacent property or public right of way and which constitutes visual blight
or reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the
senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values; provided,
however, that wood and building materials being used or to be used for a
project of construction or repair or renovation for which a building permit has
been obtained may be stored for such period of time as is necessary to
expeditiously complete the project.
   B.   Dirt, Sand, Gravel: The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation of
dirt, sand, gravel, concrete or other similar materials for an unreasonable
period, which constitutes visual blight or reduces the aesthetic appearance of
the neighborhood or is offensive to the senses or is detrimental to nearby
property or property values. (Ord. 87-O-41, 10-6-1987)
   C.   Off Street Parking: The parking of motor vehicles in front yard of
premises except on parking lots built in conformance with title 10 of this
code.
   D.   Unified Development Code Violations: Any condition in violation of
title 10 of this code.
   E.   Building Codes Violations: Any condition in violation of title 9,
chapter 1, "Building Code"; title 9, chapter 2, "Residential Building Code";
title 9, chapter 4, "Plumbing Code"; or title 9, chapter 7, "Property
Maintenance Code", of this code.
   F.   Fire Code Violations: Any condition in violation of title 9, chapter 3,
"Fire Code", of this code. (Ord. 87-O-41, 10-6-1987; amd. 2006 Code)
   G.   Weeds And Grass: Any premises or city right of way adjacent to that
premises on which the owner or person having control or the agent of the person
having control permits any grass or weeds over eight inches (8") in height or
deleterious, unhealthful growth or other noxious matter that may be growing,
lying or located thereon 1 . (Ord. 87-O-41, 10-6-1987)
   H.   Bulk Waste: The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation of bulk
waste. The keeping of bulk waste shall not be permitted on open porches,
carports, open garages, pavilions or similar structures.
   I.   Offensive Premises: Any premises which is not maintained so as to pose
a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public, is littered with
animal feces, or which has improperly maintained trees, shrubs or vegetation
that pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public or has
conditions which constitute a mosquito harborage. (Ord. 93-O-38, 7-20-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  4-6-1 of this title.
4-2-4: UNLAWFUL DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF MATERIALS:
   A.   Bodies Of Water: It is unlawful to dump or empty garbage, rubbish or
refuse of any kind, or the washings from any tank, truck, car or building, into
any running stream, swamp or pool or stagnant water within the city limits.
(Ord. 66-O-17, 7-13-1966)
   B.   Vacant Lots; Public Property:
      1.   The depositing of any garbage, rubbish, landscape waste, combustible
material or junk on any vacant lot within the city limits is unlawful.
      2.   The dumping or spreading of any garbage, rubbish, landscape waste,
combustible material or junk on any street, parkway, public right of way or
other publicly owned property is unlawful. (Ord. 11-O-47, 10-18-2011)
4-2-5: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT:
   A.   Every owner of real property within the city is required to maintain
such property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter,
and such owner remains liable for violations hereof regardless of any contract
or agreement with any third party regarding such property.
   B.   Every occupant, lessee, or holder of any interest in property other
than as owner thereof is required to maintain such property in the same manner
as is required of the owner thereof, and the duty imposed by this section on
the owner thereof shall in no instance relieve those persons herein referred to
from similar duty. (Ord. 87-O-41, 10-6-1987)
4-2-6: ABATEMENT NOTICE AND PROCEEDINGS:
The city shall cause the owner who violates subsections
4-2-3A, B, G, H and I of this chapter to abate such violation on his property.
If any owner fails to abate said violation on his property within ten (10) days
of notice by certified mail or personal service, the city may order the
abatement of the violation. The cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the violation is located, and there shall be a lien upon said
real estate. In addition to the filing of a lien upon such real estate, the
city shall have authority to collect the cost by filing a personal collection
action against the owner in court. (Ord. 93-O-38, 7-20-1993)
4-2-7: LIEN PROVISIONS:
Charges for the cost incurred by the city for the abatement of a violation from
any property pursuant to this chapter shall be a lien upon the premises with
priority as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-13, as amended.
At any time after a bill has been sent to the owner for abatement of the
violation, a lien may be filed with the recorder of deeds in the manner
provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20-13, paragraph 1. The failure
of the city to record such lien claimed or to mail notice, or the failure of
the owner to receive notice of such lien shall not affect the right to
foreclose on the lien for those charges established in subsections A and B of
this section. For the purpose of this section, the city shall be deemed to
incur the cost of the abatement, as follows:
   A.   If the abatement is done by city personnel, the cost transmitted by the
superintendent of the department which performs the abatement to the building
official, a calculation of the number of hours required to do the abatement by
those employees times the hourly wage of said employees (including cost of
benefits of employment per hour), the fair market rental of all pieces of
equipment necessary to perform the abatement, plus the cost of disposal of all
materials removed.
   B.   If the abatement is done by private contractor, the amount said
contractor invoices the city for work, plus disposal of materials removed.
(Ord. 93-O-38, 7-20-1993)
4-2-8: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public, the
duly authorized agent of the city is authorized to access any property at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties
under this chapter.
   B.   If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a structure or
premises subject to the provisions of this chapter refuses, impedes, inhibits,
interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to any part of
the structure or premises where inspection authorized by this chapter is
sought, the city shall seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order
that such owner, occupant, or other person in charge shall permit an inspection
of his premises. (Ord. 93-O-38, 7-20-1993)
4-2-9: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Citation: Any violation of this chapter will, unless otherwise
specified, result in the issuance of a complaint or citation for an ordinance
violation by a police officer, the fire chief or his designee, or the building
official or his designee.
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor greater
than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense may be deemed committed
on each day during or on which violation occurs or continues.
   C.   Temporary Restraining Order: In any action or proceedings brought
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the circuit court shall have the
power and, in its discretion, may issue a temporary restraining order or a
temporary injunction, as well as a permanent injunction, upon such terms and
under such conditions as will do justice and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
   D.   Other Remedies: In addition to the foregoing, the city shall have such
other powers to abate nuisances as may be provided by law. (Ord. 93-O-38, 7-20-
1993)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
SECTION:
4-3-1: Definitions
4-3-2: Receptacles
4-3-3: Reserved
4-3-4: Disposal Of Garbage, Rubbish And Landscape Waste
4-3-5: Violations; Penalties
4-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, when used in this chapter, have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them in this section:
GARBAGE: Animal or vegetable waste from food supply and food supply cans,
including only such paper in which it may be wrapped.
LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, leaves, tree
limbs and other materials accumulated as the result of the care of lawns,
shrubbery, vines and trees.
RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and
the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal and coke, and
other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and
similar materials. "Rubbish" does not include tires, batteries, hazardous
substances and other regulated items disallowed for disposal in the landfill.
(Ord. 99-O-35, 7-20-1999)
4-3-2: RECEPTACLES:
   A.   Required: Every owner, or his agent, or the occupant of any house,
building or apartment in the City wherein persons reside, board or lodge shall
provide for each such house, building or apartment and at all times maintain in
good order and repair, containers for garbage, rubbish and combustible
materials, in a number sufficient to store and to handle for disposal the
accumulations for each such house, building and apartment according to the
specifications in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Specifications:
      1.   Garbage:
         a.   For garbage, all properties with curbside service shall use a
"tote" container or other garbage storage container approved by the City. For
garbage, all properties with backyard service shall either use a "tote"
container approved by the City and provided by the hauler, or provide their own
containers.
         b.   All garbage containers shall be watertight, made of metal,
plastic, or other suitable material to be approved by the City and have a close
fitting cover in order that animals be unable to force the lid open.
         c.   The name of the garbage hauler shall be denoted on all garbage
containers used for curbside service and shall be readily visible and obvious
for easy identification. The hauler shall provide the appropriate emblem 1 .
The containers shall have a capacity of not less than twenty (20) gallons and
not more than forty (40) gallons, and shall be fitted with suitable handles
unless it is a "tote" type of container provided by a licensed collector.
      2.   Rubbish And Landscape Waste: For rubbish and landscape waste, the
size and type of containers shall be identical to the containers used for
garbage; except, that plastic bags may be used.
   C.   Placement For Collection: For curbside collection, containers and totes
shall be placed at the curb no earlier than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. the day
before the scheduled collection by a licensed hauler, and shall be removed from
the curb no later than seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. the day of scheduled
collection. Should the hauler fail to collect items on the scheduled day, the
owner/agent/occupant of the property must remove the items from the curb by the
prescribed time above. Items too large for containers (furniture, appliances,
landscape waste, etc.) shall not be placed at the curb and shall be concealed
from sight at all times until collected. Arrangement for the timely removal of
such items shall be the responsibility of the owner/agent/occupant.
   D.   Maintenance Of Receptacle Area: The garbage collector is responsible
for cleaning up only that garbage, rubbish and landscape waste which is
scattered in the process of conveying the material to his truck. It is the sole
responsibility of the customer to clean up any garbage, rubbish and landscape
waste which is strewn about from the ravages of animals or other causes.
   E.   Screening Requirements:
      1.   Owners/agents/occupants with backyard collection shall conceal or
screen all containers and large items from sight at all times.
      2.   Owners/agents/occupants with curbside collection shall conceal or
screen all containers and large items from sight at all times; except, that
containers, only, may be placed at the curb during the time prescribed in this
chapter.
   F.   Open Containers Restricted:
      1.   Rubbish and landscape waste may be placed in open containers or
plastic bags as long as there is no danger of the contents being blown about by
the wind or improperly discharged in any manner. Failure to properly store
rubbish and landscape waste shall be unlawful.
      2.   The use of open containers for food cans, cartons or any other
material which will draw flies is strictly unlawful. Such containers must be
tightly covered in metal or plastic cans which have the same specifications as
garbage cans. (Ord. 99-O-35, 7-20-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  4-3A-6B of this chapter.
4-3-3: RESERVED:
(Ord. 19-O-26, 6-18-2019)
4-3-4: DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND LANDSCAPE WASTE:
   A.   Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of by contract with a scavenger
licensed under chapter 3, article A of this title.
   B.   1.   Landscape waste shall be disposed of by the following methods:
         a.   Contract with a private scavenger service for disposal as allowed
by State Statute.
         b.   Composting on the site of origin.
         c.   Other methods as approved by State law.
      2.   Disposal of landscape waste in a landfill is strictly prohibited.
   C.   Burning of garbage and rubbish is strictly prohibited.
   D.   Composting on the site of origin must be done within a wire mesh
enclosure so as to prevent blowing and scattering of the waste. (Ord. 99-O-35,
7-20-1999)
4-3-5: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   Citation: Any violation of this chapter will, unless otherwise
specified, result in the issuance of a complaint or citation for an ordinance
violation by a police officer or the building official or his designee.
   B.   Fines: Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the following fines:
 
First offense                                                        $ 50.00
Second offense within 12 months of the first offense                 100.00
Third offense within 12 months of the first offense                  150.00
Fourth offense within 12 months of the first offense                 200.00
Fifth offense or more within 12 months of the first offense for each 250.00
offense
 
   C.   Separate Offenses: A separate offense may be deemed committed on each
day during or on which violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 99-O-35, 7-20-1999)
ARTICLE A. SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
4-3A-1: License Required
4-3A-2: Application For License
4-3A-3: Bond Required
4-3A-4: Types Of Licenses; Transferability
4-3A-5: Collection Of Large Items And Landscape Waste
4-3A-6: Required Information
4-3A-7: Vehicle Requirements
4-3A-8: Parking Restrictions
4-3A-9: Disposal And Storage Restrictions
4-3A-10: Fees
4-3A-11: Violations; Penalties
4-3A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of “scavenger”
within the city limits without first securing a license for each vehicle sought
to be used. The scavenger business incorporates the collection, hauling, and
disposal of “garbage”, “rubbish” and combustible refuse as defined in section
4-3-1  of this chapter. (Ord. 99-O-34, 7-20-1999; amd. Ord. 2022-O-31, 8-2-
2022)
4-3A-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for scavenger licenses shall be made to the clerk and shall be
referred by the clerk to the city manager. The application for a license shall
state the place of disposal. No such license shall be issued except on order of
the council. The license may be revoked at any time upon recommendation of the
city manager and final action of the council. (Ord. 99-O-34, 7-20-1999)
4-3A-3: BOND REQUIRED:
No scavenger license shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor
has filed with the clerk a bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
This bond shall be conditioned to indemnify the city for any damage, loss or
liability resulting from the conduct of business by the licensee and shall also
be conditioned that the licensee shall obey all the ordinances relating to the
business conducted in the city. (Ord. 99-O-34, 7-20-1999)
4-3A-4: TYPES OF LICENSES; TRANSFERABILITY:
   A.   Standard Licenses: Standard licenses are required to provide scavenger
services that collect, haul and dispose of “garbage” and “rubbish” as defined
in section
4-3-1  of this chapter.
   B.   Special Licenses: Special licenses are hereby authorized which are
limited to the collection of rubbish and combustible materials. The equipment
used by such licensee need not be completely watertight but shall be
appropriate to use for the collection of rubbish and combustible materials and
shall be subject to approval of the city manager.
   C.   Number of Licenses and Additional Licenses: In recognition of the need
for competition in the market for scavenger services within the city, and in
further recognition of the deleterious effects and burdens of scavenger
vehicles on the City’s roads, the number of available standard scavenger
licenses shall be four (4). From and after the effective date hereof, no
additional licenses shall be issued to any person until public convenience and
necessity for additional scavenger services in the city has been established to
the satisfaction of the council.
   D.   Transferability Of License: A scavenger license under the terms of this
article may be transferable only upon approval by the council. (Ord. 99-O-34,
7-20-1999; amd. Ord. 2022-O-31, 8-2-2022)
4-3A-5: COLLECTION OF LARGE ITEMS AND LANDSCAPE WASTE:
As a condition of the license, each hauler shall provide for its customers the
timely collection of large items (e.g., furniture, white goods) and landscape
waste upon arrangement by the customer. The hauler shall reserve the right to
bill extra for said services. (Ord. 99-O-34, 7-20-1999)
4-3A-6: REQUIRED INFORMATION:
   A.   Collection And Route Information:
      1.   As a condition of the license, each hauler shall maintain on file
with the city clerk route information to include:
         Street sections served
         Scheduled collection day(s)
         Vehicle information (including gross vehicle weight) for each vehicle
to be registered as required herein.
      2.   Any changes in the route information shall require amendments to be
filed by said scavengers.
   B.   Information Required On Receptacles: As a condition of the license,
each hauler shall provide each customer with curbside collection with an emblem
(s) denoting the hauler’s name. Such emblems shall be attached to each
container and shall be readily visible for identification purposes. The minimum
size font for the hauler’s name shall be four inches (4") in height. (Ord. 99-
O-34, 7-20-1999; amd. Ord. 2022-O-31, 8-2-2022)
4-3A-7: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Any vehicle used by a scavenger service shall be completely enclosed
with a watertight, factory constructed packer type refuse body; provided,
however, that vehicle may be utilized by scavenger services for the purpose of
providing bulk refuse hauling through the use of roll off dumpsters, said term
being known and utilized within the scavenger industry.
   B.   Vehicles used to haul only rubbish and landscape waste shall be
configured so that rubbish or landscape waste is not blown, spilled or in any
other way improperly discharged from the vehicle.
   C.   All scavenger vehicles shall be cleaned and disinfected when not in use
in order that these vehicles do not become offensive. Any laxity on the part of
the driver or owner of the scavenger vehicle as far as keeping such vehicles
clean will be considered a violation of this article. (Ord. 99-O-34, 7-20-1999)
4-3A-8: PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger vehicle, without necessity therefor, to
park before any building, place of business or other premises, an unreasonable
length of time in loading or unloading or in passing along any street or
through any inhabited place or ground. (Ord. 99-O-34, 7-20-1999)
4-3A-9: DISPOSAL AND STORAGE RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger or any individual to dispose of or store
any refuse any place within the city limits. (Ord. 99-O-34, 7-20-1999)
4-3A-10: FEES:
   A.   Scavenger Service: The council reserves the right to set the fee for
all scavenger services and to dictate the amount of scavenger service to be
rendered for the established fee.
   B.   Scavenger License: Each scavenger shall be licensed to provide
scavenger services within the city. The annual fee for the license is one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per year and shall extend from July 15 for a period
of one year. Scavengers in possession of a license shall be automatically
eligible for renewal except upon recommendation of the city manager and final
action of the council.
   C.   Vehicle Registration: In addition, each vehicle shall be registered.
The annual fee for the registration is fifty dollars ($50.00) per vehicle, per
year, and shall extend from July 15 for a period of one year. In order to be
registered, the vehicles must meet the standards of this article. (Ord. 04-O-
12, 3-2-2004; amd. Ord. 2022-O-31, 8-2-2022)
4-3A-11: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person(s) or business violating this article shall be subject to the
following:
 
Providing scavenger service without a $500.00 per offense
license
Operating a nonpermitted vehicle      100.00 per offense
Illegal dumping:                       
First offense                         750.00
Second offense                        Suspension of license for one year
Third offense                         Permanent revocation of license
All other infractions                 50.00 per offense
 
(Ord. 99-O-34, 7-20-1999)
CHAPTER 4
NEW OR EXPANDED POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY SITES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Notice Of Intent For Site Approval
4-4-3: Application For Site Approval
4-4-4: Public Hearings
4-4-5: City Council Approval
4-4-6: Application Fees
4-4-7: Host Agreement
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
AGENCY: Illinois environmental protection agency.
BOARD: Illinois pollution control board.
POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES: Any waste storage, sanitary landfill, waste
disposal site, waste transfer station, waste treatment facility, or waste
incinerator which wishes to be located within the corporate limits of the city
of Charleston, or the expansion of any existing facility described herein
within the corporate limits of the city of Charleston. (Ord. 96-O-13, 3-5-1996)
4-4-2: NOTICE OF INTENT FOR SITE APPROVAL:
   A.   At least fourteen (14) days prior to filing a pollution control
facility application with the city, the applicant shall notify in written form,
either in person or by registered mail (return receipt requested), the
following:
      1.   All owners of all property within the subject area not totally owned
by the applicant.
      2.   All owners identified through tax records of Coles County, a
property within two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of a lot line
of the subject property. In computing the two hundred fifty foot (250')
requirement, all property occupied by public roads, streets, alleys or other
public ways should be excluded. In no event shall this requirement exceed four
hundred feet (400'), including public streets, alleys or other public ways.
      3.   Members of the general assembly from the legislative district from
which the proposed facility will be located.
   B.   At least fourteen (14) days prior to filing an application with the
city, notice shall be published in the newspaper having the largest general
circulation in the city. Such notices shall state: 1) name and address of the
applicant; 2) location of the proposed site; 3) the nature and size of the
development; 4) the nature of the activity proposed; 5) the probable life of
the activity; 6) the date when the request for site approval will be submitted
to the city; 7) a description of the right of persons to comment on such
request. (Ord. 96-O-13, 3-5-1996)
4-4-3: APPLICATION FOR SITE APPROVAL:
   A.   The applicant shall file in the office of the city clerk, twenty five
(25) copies of the following:
      1.   An application form provided by the city and available in the city
clerk's office.
      2.   Information and documentation requested on a form provided by the
city and which is available in the city clerk's office which supports the
application based on the criteria as established by 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/39.2.
      3.   Copies of all documents submitted to the Illinois environmental
protection agency in connection with the application to the Illinois
environmental protection agency permitted for citing approval, except trade
secrets as determined in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/17.1.
   B.   Upon receipt of any such request, the city clerk shall date- stamp the
same and immediately deliver the request to the mayor and building official.
   C.   No application for site approval shall be deemed to have been filed or
accepted for filing unless all the required attachments have been included. In
order to prove that all attachments have been submitted, the building official
shall review the request to determine if the application is complete. The
intent of this review is to minimize delays that may be caused by an incomplete
application. If complete, the application shall be considered to be filed as of
the date it was deemed as being complete by the building official.
   D.   1.   Within twenty (20) working days of the receipt of the request, the
building official shall notify the applicant and the city clerk:
         a.   That the application is complete and is accepted for filing; or
         b.   That the application is not complete, specifying the
deficiencies. Should the application be deemed incomplete, it is considered not
filed and is not subject to further action being taken.
      2.   If the application is complete, the city clerk shall, within five
(5) working days of the notice that the application is complete, forward one
set of the request and all attachments to: a) city council members; b) city
attorney; c) city engineer; d) Coles County health department; e) fire chief of
the city; f) general assembly members from the legislative districts affected.
   E.   All such documents shall be placed in a file in the office of the city
clerk and shall be available for public inspection and may be copied upon
payment of actual costs of reproduction.
   F.   Any person may file written comments about the application with the
city clerk. The city council shall consider any comments that are received
postmarked no later than thirty (30) days after date of the last public
hearing.
   G.   The city clerk shall date-stamp the written comment and immediately
forward one copy to each of the persons/agencies outlined in subsection B of
this section. The city clerk will note the date of the postmark on the envelope
in receiving the copy. (Ord. 96-O-13, 3-5-1996)
4-4-4: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   A.   Public forum public hearings shall be held by the city council no
sooner than ninety (90) days but no later than one hundred twenty (120) days
from receipt of the application for site approval.
   B.   Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application, the mayor shall
notify the applicant, in writing, of the scheduled public hearing date.
   C.   The applicant shall be responsible for publishing notice of the public
hearing in the newspaper of largest general circulation in Coles County. The
applicant shall also notify, by certified mail, all members of the general
assembly from the district in which the proposed site is located, and the
Illinois environmental protection agency.
   D.   The public hearing shall develop a record sufficient to form the basis
of appeal of the decision in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
40.1.
   E.   The mayor shall preside over the public hearing. The hearing officers
shall consist of the city council. The mayor may request that the
representatives of the city attorney's office, the city planning and zoning
department, and the city engineer be present at the hearing to assist the
hearing officers.
   F.   The hearing officers, based upon the application, written comments,
transcripts of public hearings and other pertinent documents shall determine
compliance or noncompliance with the review criteria and make recommendations
on site approval to the city council no sooner than thirty (30) days after the
last public hearing but no later than sixty (60) days after the last public
hearing.
   G.   Any time prior to the completion by the applicant of the present
application, and the hearing of factual evidence and the cross questioning by
the city council and the participants, the applicant may not file more than one
amended application upon payment of additional fees pursuant to section
4-4-6 of this chapter in which an additional period of ninety (90) days is
required. (Ord. 96-O-13, 3-5-1996)
4-4-5: CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL:
   A.   No sooner than thirty (30) days after the last public hearing but no
later than one hundred eighty (180) days from receipt of the application for
site approval, the city council shall, at a regular or special meeting, approve
or deny the application for a new pollution control facility site.
   B.   After reviewing the recommendation of the hearing officers, the city
council shall base its decision on the application for a new regional pollution
control facility in accordance with 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/39.2, as
follows:
      1.   The facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of the
city.
      2.   The facility is so designed, located and proposed to be operated so
the public health, safety and welfare shall be protected.
      3.   The facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility with the
character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the value of
the surrounding property.
      4.   The facility must be located outside the boundary of the 100-year
floodplain or the site of a flood.
      5.   The plan of operations for the facility is designed to minimize the
danger surrounding the area from fire, spills, or other operational accidents.
      6.   Traffic patterns to and from the facility are so designed as to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows.
      7.   If the facility will be treating and disposing of hazardous waste,
an emergency response plan must exist for the facility which includes
notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case of an
accidental release.
      8.   The city council may consider the evidence of previous operating
experience and the past record of convictions or admissions of past violations
of the applicant, and any subsidiary or parent corporation in the field of
solid waste management.
   C.   The statement of the decision and reason for the decision based on the
criteria and conditions imposed by the city council shall be made in writing.
The Illinois environmental protection agency and the applicant shall be
notified by registered mail of the decision.
   D.   The city council's root decision shall be made available for public
inspection at the office of the city clerk and copies provided upon payment of
the actual cost of reproduction.
   E.   If there is no final action by the city council within one hundred
eighty (180) days of filing of the application for site approval, the applicant
may deem the request approved. (Ord. 96-O-13, 3-5-1996)
4-4-6: APPLICATION FEES:
   A.   No new pollution control application will be accepted until a filing
fee is paid.
   B.   The following application fee shall be made payable to the city of
Charleston and shall be paid to the city clerk's office:
      1.   Applications for waste storage sites waste transfer stations shall
pay a fee of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
      2.   Landfills with disposal sites with treatment or waste facility or
waste incinerator shall pay a fee of two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00).
   C.   The applicant shall be responsible for any costs that may be incurred
upon the application fee during the application process. The additional costs
incurred within the application process exceeding the application fee shall be
submitted by the applicant for payment as they occur. Further, for any
unprojected costs above the application fee, the council has the right to
request payment for said costs. Said costs will be paid by the applicant within
thirty (30) days of request by the city.
   D.   Fees collected hereunder shall be used only to defray costs incurred by
the city in connection with site approval application which may include
professional consultants hired by the city to provide technical assistance. Any
remainder after final resolution shall be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 96-
O-13, 3-5-1996)
4-4-7: HOST AGREEMENT:
   A.   Prior to final city council approval for the pollution control
facility, the applicant shall negotiate with the city a host agreement.
   B.   The host agreement shall regulate the type of facility to be run, host
fee payments, capacity guarantees to the city, and requirements for transfer of
ownership or lease to another corporation or individual of the facility.
   C.   All host fee payments shall be negotiated as per the Illinois solid
waste management act 1  which authorizes local government entities to collect a
surcharge from pollution control facilities. (Ord. 96-O-13, 3-5-1996)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 20/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 5
TREES
SECTION:
4-5-1: Title
4-5-2: Definitions
4-5-3: Duties Of Property Owners
4-5-4: Violation; Penalty
4-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the TREE ORDINANCE FOR THE CITY
OF CHARLESTON. (Ord. 69-O-17, 7-15-1969)
4-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given in this section:
CITY: The city of Charleston, Coles County, Illinois.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
TREE: A tree in a public place except where otherwise indicated. (Ord. 69-O-17,
7-15-1969)
4-5-3: DUTIES OF PROPERTY OWNERS:
It shall be the duty of any person growing trees, plants or bushes within a
public highway or property abutting on public places or property:
   A.   To trim his trees, plants or bushes so as not to cause a hazard to
public places or interfere with the proper lighting of public highways by the
streetlights, or interfere with the free flow of traffic along the public way,
or obstruct the view of motorists using the public way, and so that the minimum
clearance of any overhanging portion of any tree shall be nine feet (9').
   B.   To treat or remove any tree or plant so diseased or insect ridden as to
constitute a hazard to trees or plants in public places. (Ord. 69-O-17, 7-15-
1969)
4-5-4: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an
amount not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord.
69-O-17, 7-15-1969)
CHAPTER 6
GRASS AND WEEDS
SECTION:
4-6-1: Weeds And Other Matter
4-6-2: Notice To Destroy
4-6-3: Action Upon Noncompliance
4-6-4: Notice Of Lien
4-6-5: Penalty For Violation
4-6-6: Foreclosure Of Liens
4-6-1: WEEDS AND OTHER MATTER 1 :
   A.   Controlled: Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no
owner and no person in control of any lot, place or area within the city and no
agent of such owner or person in control, shall permit on such lot, place or
area or upon any abutting area between the right of way line/property line and
street surface or pavement, any weeds or grass over eight inches (8") in
height, or deleterious, unhealthful growths or other noxious matter that may be
growing, lying, or located thereon.
   B.   Exemptions: The following are generally exempted from the provisions of
this chapter:
      1.   Lands zoned agricultural as designated in title 10 of this code and
shown on the official zoning map of the city unless used for nonagricultural
purposes. For purposes of this subsection "agricultural use" shall be construed
to mean vacant land or the production of products such as field crops,
livestock, fowl and other conventional agricultural pursuits; and
      2.   Lands in any zoning district(s), which are being used for
agricultural purposes.
Provided, however, that the portions of those lands exempted by this subsection
which are within twenty feet (20') of the right of way of a public street or
alley maintained for traffic or within twenty feet (20') of the property line
of adjacent lands used for nonagricultural or nonforestry purposes (for
example, church, school, store, factory, house, apartment building, offices,
etc.) shall not be exempted from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 08-O-19,
7-15-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  4-2-3G of this title.
4-6-2: NOTICE TO DESTROY:
The city manager, or his designee, annually, at or near the commencement of the
growth season, shall notify, by general publication in a newspaper published
within the city, all such owners, person in control, or agents, to cut,
destroy, or remove any such weeds, grass, growths, or matter found growing,
lying or located on such properties and areas regulated by section
4-6-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 08-O-19, 7-15-2008)
4-6-3: ACTION UPON NONCOMPLIANCE:
Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any such owner, person in control or
agent so notified to cut, destroy or remove such weeds, grass, growths or
matter, after publication of the notice provided for in section
4-6-2 of this chapter, the city or its authorized agent shall cut, destroy or
remove such weeds, grass, growth or matter, and any expense incurred by the
city or its authorized agent in so doing shall be a charge against the owner,
person in control or agent so failing, which charge may be recovered in an
appropriate action at law; provided, however, that no land clearance made
necessary by excessive growth shall be done unless the city or its authorized
agent shall first post a notice on such property to clear such excessive
growth, and such owner, person in control or agent shall fail for seven (7)
days after such notice to so clear such land. In addition to reimbursement of
costs incurred by the city, handling fee(s) and/or late fee(s) may be imposed
as determined by the city. (Ord. 11-O-23, 5-3-2011)
4-6-4: NOTICE OF LIEN:
If such weeds, grass, growth or matter are cut, destroyed or removed by this
city or its agent, a notice of lien of the cost and expense thereof incurred
shall be recorded in the following manner: The city or its agent shall file
notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of Coles County,
Illinois. Such notice of lien shall contain a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the
cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and the date or dates
when said costs and expense were incurred. Such notice shall be under oath and
shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the cost and expense is incurred.
Such liens are assessed to recover the expenses incurred by the city and shall
not serve as an exemption from any penalties imposed for violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 08-O-19, 7-15-2008)
4-6-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any owner, person in control, or agent who does not maintain property subject
to section
4-6-1 of this chapter in compliance with the provisions of said section
4-6-1 of this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each
day such a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 08-O-19, 7-
15-2008)
4-6-6: FORECLOSURE OF LIENS:
In addition to any other legal remedy available under this code or applicable
state or federal law, any lien filed pursuant to this chapter may be enforced
by proceedings to foreclose, as in the case of mortgage or mechanic's liens
under Illinois law, against the property subject to said lien for the
collection of weed cutting costs incurred by the city plus any and all
administrative, filing and/or legal fees or costs for the enforcement of the
provisions under this chapter or such unpaid liens may be sent to the Coles
County clerk for collection through property tax billing as allowed under
Illinois law. Such action shall be commenced only upon those liens which equal
or exceed a total amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) collectively
against a parcel of property (i.e., 1 or more weed liens filed on the same
property for weed cutting costs, including administrative, filing and legal
fees) and has been recorded in the Coles County recorder's office for a one
year period or longer. (Ord. 08-O-19, 7-15-2008)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: License, Compliance And Tag Required
5-1-3: Running At Large Prohibited
5-1-4: Rabies Control
5-1-5: Prohibited Conditions
5-1-6: Excrement Removal Required
5-1-7: Violation; Penalty
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the text otherwise indicates, the following
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AT LARGE: A. On the premises of person other than owner, possessor or keeper
without consent.
   B.   In or upon a vehicle without consent of the vehicle owner.
   C.   In a park, public or private school grounds or public place whatsoever
and not under the owner's control by leash or other means of physical
restraint.
   D.   On a public way, except when under the owner's control by a leash.
DOG: Both male and female dogs.
DOMESTIC ANIMALS: Any animal located within the city of Charleston used as a
pet and not for livestock purposes.
OWNER: Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping,
or harboring a domestic animal. (Ord. 69-O-21, 8-6-1969, eff. 8-16-1969; amd.
Ord. 94-O-42, 9-6-1994)
5-1-2: LICENSE, COMPLIANCE AND TAG REQUIRED:
   A.   License And Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to
own, possess or harbor a domestic animal without first having obtained a
license therefor in compliance with the ordinances made and providing for same
by the county. (Ord. 75-O-10, 2-4-1975; amd. Ord. 94-O-42, 9-6-1994)
   B.   Tag: Every domestic animal over the age of six (6) months, whether
kennel licensed or individually licensed, and if individually licensed, whether
on or off the owner's premises, shall at all times wear a substantial, durable
collar, to which shall be attached securely, the license tag required; further,
said tag shall not be used on the collar of any other domestic animal than the
one for which it is issued; and further, no person shall remove the collar or
tag, or both, from any domestic animal without the consent of the person to
whom the license is issued. (Ord. 58-O-5, 5-28-1958; amd. Ord. 94-O-42, 9-6-
1994)
5-1-3: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
No domestic animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, muzzled or unmuzzled, shall
be allowed to run at large. If any such domestic animal is found running at
large in violation of this section, it shall be taken up and impounded by the
animal control warden, and shall not be released except upon approval of said
warden and payment of the appropriate fees. (Ord. 69-O-21, 8-6-1969; amd. 1991
Code; Ord. 94-O-42, 9-6-1994)
5-1-4: RABIES CONTROL:
If a domestic animal is believed to have rabies or is bitten by a domestic
animal suspected of having rabies, the procedures shall be followed as set out
by the county animal control regulations and state statute provisions in 510
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12, 5/13 and 5/14. (1991 Code; amd. Ord. 94-O-42,
9-6-1994)
5-1-5: PROHIBITED CONDITIONS:
It shall also be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts:
   A.   Noise: To keep or harbor or own any domestic animal which shall, by
loud or frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, cause annoyance to
the neighborhood or to people passing to and fro on the streets.
   B.   Dangerous, Threatening Animal: To keep or harbor or own any domestic
animal which, by constant threat of attacking or biting, shall cause annoyance
to the neighborhood or to people passing to and fro on the streets.
   C.   Failure To Take Animal To Pound: To refuse to deliver up his domestic
animal or domestic animals to the county animal shelter when properly requested
to do so.
   D.   Cruelty: For any person keeping, harboring or owning a domestic animal
or any other person to be cruel and inhumane to a domestic animal, said
treatment to consist of cruelty, beating, torturing, mutilating, cruelly
killing, failure to provide food, drink or shelter or abandoning any domestic
animal. (Ord. 69-O-21, 8-15-1969, eff. 8-25-1969; amd. Ord. 94-O-42, 9-6-1994)
5-1-6: EXCREMENT REMOVAL REQUIRED:
Every owner or person having possession and/or control of any dog or any other
animal shall be required to immediately remove and appropriately dispose of any
and all animal defecation that has been placed upon private property or public
property within the city by the animal under said person's ownership, custody
and/or possession, except for private property owned or under the control of
the individual owning or in possession of the animal. (Ord. 99-O-1, 1-5-1999)
5-1-7: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any owner found violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense. (Ord. 69-O-21, 8-15-1969, eff. 8-25-1969; amd. Ord.
99-O-1, 1-5-1999)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
5-2-1: Offenses Relating To Persons
5-2-1-1: Assault And Battery
5-2-1-2: Unlawful Assemblies
5-2-1-3: Cruelty To Persons
5-2-1-4: Disorderly Conduct
5-2-1-5: Disturbing The Peace
5-2-1-6: Loafing
5-2-2: Offenses Relating To Morals And Decency
5-2-2-1: Swindling
5-2-2-2: Petit Theft
5-2-2-3: False Pretenses
5-2-2-4: Distribution Of Obscene Literature
5-2-2-5: Obscene Conduct
5-2-2-6: Indecent Exposure; Improper Dress
5-2-2-7: Drunkenness
5-2-2-8: Reserved
5-2-2-9: Gambling
5-2-3: Offenses Affecting Public Health, Safety And Protection
5-2-3-1: Windowsills To Be Kept Clear
5-2-3-2: Obstructing Officers
5-2-3-3: Riot
5-2-3-4: Refuse Assistance To Officers
5-2-3-5: Aid To An Offense
5-2-3-6: Aid In Escape
5-2-3-7: Escapes
5-2-3-8: Playing Ball On Streets
5-2-3-9: Expectorating In Public
5-2-3-10: Weapons
5-2-3-11: Furnishing Weapons, Liquor Or Drugs To Prisoners
5-2-4: Offenses Relating To Property
5-2-4-1: Injurious Material On Thoroughfares
5-2-4-2: Junk
5-2-4-3: Letting Premises For Unlawful Purposes
5-2-4-4: Public Picnics And Dances
5-2-4-5: Malicious Injury To Property
5-2-4-6: Trespassing
5-2-4-7: Water Flowing Upon Streets
5-2-4-8: Billposting
5-2-5: Miscellaneous Offenses
5-2-5-1: Injury To Birds; Disturbing Nests
5-2-5-2: Burglar Tools
5-2-5-3: Loudspeakers; Sound Trucks
5-2-5-4: Picketing
5-2-5-5: False Representation
5-2-1: OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS:
5-2-1-1: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
   A.   Assault: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit assault, which
is hereby defined as any conduct which places another in reasonable
apprehension of receiving a battery.
   B.   Battery: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit battery. A
person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly, without legal
justification and by any means, causes bodily harm to an individual or makes
physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. (1964
Code)
5-2-1-2: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more persons to assemble together
for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the purpose of committing an
unlawful act and not to disperse upon the command of an officer so to do.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect within the City a crowd
of people to the annoyance of the citizens thereof or to the annoyance or
injury of the public. (1964 Code)
5-2-1-3: CRUELTY TO PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly or inhumanely whip, injure, beat
or mistreat his own wife, child, stepchild or apprentice, or other child under
his care. (1964 Code)
5-2-1-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any illegal or improper
diversion or to use, or allow or permit to be used, insulting, indecent or
immoral language, or use, allow or permit to be used, loud or unusual noises,
indecent behavior or offensive or unbecoming conduct to occur on premises under
said person's control, or to be guilty of any indecent, insulting or immoral
conduct or behavior. (Ord. 94-O-12, 4-11-1994)
5-2-1-5: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously, intentionally,
negligently or unnecessarily act in such manner so as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace by:
   A.   Creating loud or unusual noises or indecent behavior or by offensive or
unbecoming conduct; or
   B.   Allowing or permitting loud or unusual noises or indecent behavior, or
by allowing or permitting offensive or unbecoming conduct to occur on premises
under said person's control. (Ord. 84-O-5, 4-17-1984)
5-2-1-6: LOAFING:
No person shall obstruct or encumber any depot, railroad platform, street
corner or other public place in the City by lounging in or about the same, and
after being directed to move on by any police officer, the person so offending
shall be subject to a penalty of not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. (Ord. 18-O-23, 7-17-2018)
5-2-2: OFFENSES RELATING TO MORALS AND DECENCY:
5-2-2-1: SWINDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, who by color, or aid of any trick or
sleight of hand performance, or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme, cards, dice
or device, to win for himself or for another any money or property or a
representative of either. (1964 Code)
5-2-2-2: PETIT THEFT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "petit theft" which is hereby
defined as a theft when the property taken is of a value less than one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00). (1964 Code)
5-2-2-3: FALSE PRETENSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food, drink, goods, wares or
merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any public place and call for
refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse to pay for same, or
depart without paying or satisfying the person from whom he received the food,
goods, wares and merchandise. (1964 Code)
5-2-2-4: DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE LITERATURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, pass, give, or deliver to
another any obscene, lewd or indecent book, pamphlet, picture, card, print,
paper, writing, mold, cast, or figure or to have same in his possession. (1964
Code)
5-2-2-5: OBSCENE CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or stool in any place open to
the public view, or to be guilty of any lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct, or
to sing any lewd or obscene song, ballad or other words in any public place or
any other place where other persons are present, or indecently to exhibit any
animal. (1964 Code)
5-2-2-6: INDECENT EXPOSURE; IMPROPER DRESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity or in any
indecent or lewd dress or condition in any public place, or in any such place
to make any indecent exposure of his or her person or private parts thereof or
the private parts of another, or to conduct himself in a lewd or lascivious
manner. (Ord. 18-O-23, 7-17-2018)
5-2-2-7: DRUNKENNESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be found drunk, intoxicated or under the
influence of intoxicating liquor upon any public thoroughfare or other public
place. (1964 Code)
5-2-2-8: RESERVED:
(Ord. 18-O-23, 7-17-2018)
5-2-2-9: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, operate for hire, or use in such
manner as to involve any chance in the determination of the number or value of
any article or articles purchased or played for, any cigar wheel, slot machine,
dice or any piece of mechanism, the operation of which involves or creates any
chance; provided, however, that specific gambling and games of chance including
video gambling shall be authorized provided that said gambling has previously
been authorized by the State of Illinois and authorized by the City of
Charleston. (Ord. 12-O-21, 5-15-2012; amd. Ord. 2022-O-9, 4-5-2022)
5-2-3: OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND PROTECTION:
5-2-3-1: WINDOWSILLS TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill, porch
or other projection above the first story of any building abutting on any
sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon any person on the
sidewalk in front of such building, unless said article be securely fastened or
protected by screens. (1964 Code)
5-2-3-2: OBSTRUCTING OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere wilfully with, resist, delay,
obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any officer of the City in the exercise
of his official duties. (1964 Code)
5-2-3-3: RIOT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to disperse immediately
upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two (2) or more persons are
assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or committing any unlawful
act. (1964 Code)
5-2-3-4: REFUSE ASSISTANCE TO OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any male citizen over the age of eighteen (18) years
to refuse or neglect to render assistance to any police officer when called
upon for such assistance or aid in the suppression of riot or other unlawful
assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense. (1964
Code)
5-2-3-5: AID TO AN OFFENSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or manner, to aid, abet,
counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the commission of any of the
acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the commission of such offense
hereby defined. (1964 Code)
5-2-3-6: AID IN ESCAPE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to escape from
lawful confinement or assist any person to escape from the custody of any peace
officer. (1964 Code)
5-2-3-7: ESCAPES:
It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in lawful
custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody. (1964 Code)
5-2-3-8: PLAYING BALL ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball or throw any ball to and fro
upon any public thoroughfare in the City. (1964 Code)
5-2-3-9: EXPECTORATING IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or
upon the floor of any public building or room used for public assemblies. (1964
Code)
5-2-3-10: WEAPONS:
   A.   Discharge Of Weapons: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm,
air gun, BB gun, pistol, cannon, toy gun, bow, mechanically drawn bow, or any
type of mechanical device projecting pellets, arrows, missiles or projectiles,
leaden or otherwise or any other type of missile excepting in a regularly
established shooting gallery or unless fired or discharged for ceremonial
purposes with a weapon that may cause a report but does not deliver a
projectile capable of causing serious injury and with the approval of the chief
of police; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit
any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his/her
duty or for training purposes at an authorized police training facility; nor to
any citizen for the discharge of a firearm when lawfully defending his person
or property. (Ord. 10-O-3, 3-2-2010)
   B.   Possession Of Weapons:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to possess within the corporate limits of the
city any bludgeon, blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sand bag, metal knuckles,
throwing star, or any knife commonly referred to as a switchblade knife which
has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button,
spring or other device in the handle of the knife.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to possess, with intent to use the same
unlawfully against another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor,
stiletto, broken bottle, or other piece of glass, stun gun, or laser, or
another dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument of like character. (Ord. 88-O-
61, 12-6-1988)
5-2-3-11: FURNISHING WEAPONS, LIQUOR OR DRUGS TO PRISONERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or attempt to furnish or take
into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any prisoner therein confined,
or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool, intoxicating liquors, drug
or other article without the consent of the officer in charge. (1964 Code)
5-2-4: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY:
5-2-4-1: INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or
upon any public thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person or
property. (1964 Code)
5-2-4-2: JUNK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or
materials which may be classified as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to
any schoolhouse, church, public parks, public grounds, business buildings or
residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage
of the same. (1964 Code)
5-2-4-3: LETTING PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used any
building or property owned by him for any purpose whereby riotous or disorderly
persons are gathered. (1964 Code)
5-2-4-4: PUBLIC PICNICS AND DANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used any yard,
ground or grave or other real estate within the city for public picnics or open
air dances, to be conducted in such manner as to be an annoyance or injury to
the public. (1964 Code)
5-2-4-5: MALICIOUS INJURY TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully and maliciously to injure, deface,
mutilate, remove, pull down, break or in any manner interfere with or molest or
desecrate or destroy any real or personal property belonging to or under the
control of any person. (1964 Code)
5-2-4-6: TRESPASSING:
   A.   Whoever enters upon the land or a building or a residence, or any part
thereof, of another, after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the
owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land or in
a building or a residence of another after receiving notice from the owner or
occupant to depart commits the offense of trespassing.
   B.   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of subsection A of this section if he has been notified personally,
either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding such
entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to such
land, building or residence, or the forbidden part thereof. (Ord. 88-O-65, 12-
20-1988)
5-2-4-7: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any
public thoroughfare. (1964 Code)
5-2-4-8: BILLPOSTING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, paint, print or
nail any handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind on any
curbstone, flagstone or any other portion or part of any sidewalk, or upon any
tree, lamppost, hitching post, telegraph pole, hydrant or upon any private
wall, door or gate, without the consent in writing of the owner of the wall,
door or gate; provided, however, that this subsection shall not prevent posting
by proper city and county officials of election signs, polling place signs and
any other signs or placards necessary under the law to the conduct of
elections. (1964 Code)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach in any manner to utility
poles, or any other poles located upon city streets or sidewalks, any card,
placard or poster of any kind.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach in any manner to city
buildings or other city property any card, placard or poster of any kind. (Ord.
58-O-3, 5-14-1958)
5-2-5: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
5-2-5-1: INJURY TO BIRDS; DISTURBING NESTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or
wound, by use of a firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow or otherwise, any bird,
other than English sparrows, or to take the eggs or young of any bird. (1964
Code)
5-2-5-2: BURGLAR TOOLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of
any description known as burglar's nippers, picklock, skeleton key, jimmy or
other burglar's instrument or tool of any description, unless it be shown that
the possession is innocent or for a lawful purpose. (1964 Code)
5-2-5-3: LOUDSPEAKERS; SOUND TRUCKS:
It shall be unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a sound
truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph with loudspeaker or
sound amplifier, or any instrument of any kind or character which emits loud
and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle, unless such person
in charge of such vehicle shall have first applied to and received permission
from the chief of police to operate any such vehicle so equipped. (1964 Code)
5-2-5-4: PICKETING:
It shall be unlawful for any person not an employee, past, present or
expectant, of the owner or proprietor of the business attempted to be picketed
and who has no personal dispute with the owner or proprietor concerning terms
and conditions of employment to stand, sit or walk on any street or sidewalk in
the city with the intent and purpose of dissuading or discouraging any person
from patronizing the place of business. (1964 Code)
5-2-5-5: FALSE REPRESENTATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be an
officer of the city or attempt to impersonate any such officer or, without
authority, perform any official act therein on behalf of an officer. (1964
Code)
CHAPTER 3
CANNABIS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Personal Use Of Cannabis
5-3-2: Personal Use Of Cannabis; Restrictions On Cultivation; Penalties
5-3-3: Persons Under Twenty One (21) Years Of Age
5-3-4: Identification And False Identification
5-3-5: Prohibited Conduct
5-3-6: Cannabis Waste
5-3-7: Cannabis Advertising
5-3-8: On-Premises Consumption Of Cannabis
5-3-9: Possession Of Adult Use Cannabis In A Motor Vehicle
5-3-10: Preemption
5-3-11: Drug Paraphernalia
5-3-12:    Penalties
5-3-1: PERSONAL USE OF CANNABIS:
   A.   Beginning January 1, 2020, except as otherwise provided in the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (the "Act"), the following acts are prohibited in the
City:
      1.   Possession, consumption, use, purchase, obtaining, or transporting
an amount of cannabis for personal use that exceeds the possession limit under
section 10-10 of the Act or otherwise not in accordance with the requirements
of the Act;
      2.   Cultivation of cannabis for personal use not in accordance with the
requirements of the Act; and
      3.   Controlling property if actions that are authorized by the Act occur
on the property not in accordance with the Act.
   B.   Except as otherwise provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, it
is unlawful for any person knowingly to possess cannabis.
   C.   Except as otherwise provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, it
is unlawful for any person knowingly to manufacture, deliver, or possess with
intent to deliver, or manufacture, cannabis.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-2: PERSONAL USE OF CANNABIS; RESTRICTIONS ON CULTIVATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person other than a registered qualifying patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act who cultivates cannabis
plants is liable for penalties provided by this chapter.
   B.   Any registered qualifying patient under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act who:
      1.   Cultivates cannabis plants in violation of section 10-5 of the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act;
      2.   Cultivates more than the allowable number of cannabis plants; or
      3.   Sells or gives away cannabis plants, cannabis, or cannabis-infused
products produced under section 10-5 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, is
liable for penalties as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-3: PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE (21) YEARS OF AGE:
   A.   The transfer of cannabis, with or without remuneration, to a person
under twenty one (21) years of age, or allowing a person under twenty one (21)
years of age to purchase, possess, use, process, transport, grow, or consume
cannabis except where authorized by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act or by the Community College Cannabis Vocational Program is
prohibited.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age
knowingly to possess cannabis or cannabis paraphernalia, except under
provisions of law authorizing the possession of medical cannabis.
   C.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit his or
her residence, any other private property under his or her control, or any
vehicle, conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be used by an
invitee of the parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the invitee is under
the age of twenty one (21), in a manner that constitutes a violation of this
section. A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted his or her
residence, any other private property under his or her control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be used in violation of
this section if he or she knowingly authorizes or permits consumption of
cannabis by underage invitees. In this subsection, where the residence or other
property has an owner and a tenant or lessee, the trier of fact may infer that
the residence or other property is occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-4: IDENTIFICATION AND FALSE IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   A person who is under twenty one (21) years of age may not present or
offer to a cannabis business establishment or the cannabis business
establishment's principal or employee any written or oral evidence of age that
is false, fraudulent, or not actually the person's own, for the purpose of:
      1.   Purchasing, attempting to purchase, or otherwise obtaining or
attempting to obtain cannabis or any cannabis product; or
      2.   Gaining access to a cannabis business establishment.
   B.   An agent or employee of a cannabis business establishment must demand
and be shown adequate written evidence of age and identity of a person before
furnishing cannabis or cannabis products to the person.
   C.   An agent or employee of a cannabis business establishment cannot
knowingly accept false or fraudulent written evidence of age and identity of a
person before furnishing cannabis or cannabis products to the person.
   D.   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a
document showing a person is twenty one (21) years of age or older, issued by a
federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision or agency
thereof, including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a
registration certificate issued under the Military Selective Service Act, or an
identification card issued to a member of the Armed Forces.
   E.   Proof that the cannabis business establishment or its employee or agent
was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction
forbidden by this section is an affirmative defense in any prosecution under
this section.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-5: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   A.   No person may engage in the following conduct:
      1.   Possessing Cannabis:
         a.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         b.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         c.   In any correctional facility;
         d.   In a vehicle not open to the public unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving; or
         e.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
      2.   Using Cannabis:
         a.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         b.   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
         c.   In any correctional facility;
         d.   In any motor vehicle;
         e.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
         f.   In any public place; or
         g.   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under twenty one
(21) years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
      3.   Smoking cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited under the
Smoke Free Illinois Act;
      4.   Operating, navigating, or being in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or snowmobile while using or under the
influence of cannabis in violation of section 11-501 or 11-502.1 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code, section 5-16 of the Boat Registration and Safety Act, or
section 5-7 of the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act;
      5.   Facilitating the use of cannabis by any person who is not allowed to
use cannabis under this Act or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act;
      6.   Transferring cannabis to any person contrary to the Act or the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act;
      7.   The use of cannabis by a law enforcement officer, corrections
officer, probation officer, or firefighter while on duty; or
      8.   The use of cannabis by a person who has a school bus permit or a
commercial driver's license while on duty.
As used in this section, "public place" means any place where a person could
reasonably be expected to be observed by others. "Public place" includes all
parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the state or a unit
of local government. "Public place" includes all areas in a park, recreation
area, wildlife area, or playground owned in whole or in part, leased, or
managed by the state or a unit of local government. "Public place" does not
include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide
licensed child care, foster care, or other similar social service care on the
premises.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-6: CANNABIS WASTE:
   A.   Any recyclable waste generated by a cultivator for personal use,
cannabis cultivation facility, craft grower facility, or infuser must be
recycled per applicable state and local laws, ordinances, and rules.
   B.   Any cultivator for personal use, cannabis cultivation facility, craft
grower facility, or infuser must store, secure, and manage all recyclables and
waste, including organic waste composed of or containing finished cannabis and
cannabis products, in accordance with applicable state and local laws,
ordinances, and rules.
   C.   Cannabis and cannabis-infused product waste must be destroyed by
rendering it unusable following the methods set forth in this section or state
law. The allowable method to render cannabis waste unusable is by grinding and
incorporating the cannabis waste with other ground materials so the resulting
mixture is at least fifty percent (50%) non-cannabis waste by volume. Material
used to grind with the cannabis falls into two (2) categories, compostable
waste and non-compostable waste.
      1.   Compostable Mixed Waste: Cannabis waste to be disposed as compost
feedstock or in another organic waste method (for example, anaerobic digester)
may be mixed with the following types of waste materials:
         a.   Food waste;
         b.   Yard waste; or
         c.   Other approved wastes (e.g., agricultural material, biodegradable
products and paper, clean wood, fruits and vegetables, plant matter).
      2.   Non-Compostable Mixed Waste: Cannabis waste to be disposed in a
landfill or by another disposal method may be mixed with the following types of
waste materials:
         a.   Paper waste;
         b.   Cardboard waste;
         c.   Plastic waste;
         d.   Soil; or
         e.   Other approved wastes (e.g., non-recyclable plastic, broken
glass, leather).
   D.   Cannabis waste rendered unusable following the methods described in
this section can be disposed. Disposal of the cannabis waste rendered unusable
may be delivered to a permitted solid waste facility for final disposition.
Examples of acceptable permitted solid waste facilities include:
      1.   Compostable Mixed Waste: Compost, anaerobic digester or other
facility with approval of the jurisdictional health department.
      2.   Non-Compostable Mixed Waste: Landfill, incinerator or other facility
with approval of the jurisdictional health department.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-7: CANNABIS ADVERTISING:
   A.   No cannabis business establishment nor any other person or entity shall
engage in advertising that contains any statement or illustration that:
      1.   Is false or misleading;
      2.   Promotes over-consumption of cannabis or cannabis products;
      3.   Depicts the actual consumption of cannabis or cannabis products;
      4.   Depicts a person under twenty one (21) years of age consuming
cannabis;
      5.   Makes any health, medicinal, or therapeutic claims about cannabis or
cannabis-infused products;
      6.   Includes the image of a cannabis leaf or bud; or
      7.   Includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors, including
cartoons, toys, animals, or children, or any other likeness to images,
characters, or phrases that is designed in any manner to be appealing to or
encourage consumption by persons under twenty one (21) years of age.
   B.   No cannabis business establishment nor any other person or entity shall
place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, an advertisement of
cannabis or a cannabis-infused product in any form or through any medium:
      1.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of the perimeter of school
grounds, a playground, a recreation center or facility, a child care center, a
public park or public library, or a game arcade to which admission is not
restricted to persons twenty one (21) years of age or older;
      2.   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter;
      3.   On or in publicly owned or publicly operated property; or
      4.   That contains information that:
         a.   Is false or misleading;
         b.   Promotes excessive consumption;
         c.   Depicts a person under twenty one (21) years of age consuming
cannabis;
         d.   Includes the image of a cannabis leaf; or
         e.   Includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors,
including cartoons, toys, animals, or children, or any other likeness to
images, characters, or phrases that are popularly used to advertise to
children, or any imitation of candy packaging or labeling, or that promotes
consumption of cannabis.
   C.   Subsections A and B do not apply to an educational message.
   D.   Sales Promotions: No cannabis business establishment nor any other
person or entity may encourage the sale of cannabis or cannabis products by
giving away cannabis or cannabis products, by conducting games or competitions
related to the consumption of cannabis or cannabis products, or by providing
promotional materials or activities of a manner or type that would be appealing
to children.
For purposes of this section, "advertise" means to engage in promotional
activities including, but not limited to: newspaper, radio, internet and
electronic media, and television advertising; the distribution of fliers and
circulars; billboard advertising; and the display of window and interior signs.
"Advertise" does not mean exterior signage displaying only the name of the
licensed cannabis business establishment.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-8: ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF CANNABIS:
On-premises consumption of cannabis is prohibited at or in a dispensing
organization (as defined in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act) or retail
tobacco store (as defined in the Smoke Free Illinois Act) in the City's
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-9: POSSESSION OF ADULT USE CANNABIS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE:
   A.   No driver may use cannabis within the passenger area of any motor
vehicle upon a highway in the City.
   B.   No driver may possess cannabis within any area of any motor vehicle
upon a highway in this state except in a sealed, odor-proof, child-resistant
cannabis container.
   C.   No passenger may possess cannabis within any passenger area of any
motor vehicle upon a highway in this state except in a sealed, odor-proof,
child-resistant cannabis container.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-10: PREEMPTION:
   A.   This chapter should not be construed to regulate or license the
activities described in the Cannabis Regulations and Tax Act, except as
otherwise provided in the Act.
   B.   This chapter should not be construed to regulate the activities
described in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 55-25 of the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act in a manner more restrictive than the regulation of
those activities by the state under the Act.
   C.   In the event of a conflict between this chapter, and the Act and its
administrative rules, the Act and its rules will prevail.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-11: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definitions: All defined terms used in this chapter which are not
expressly defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to such term in the
Drug Paraphernalia Control Act, Illinois Controlled Substances Act, the
Cannabis Control Act, or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act. As used in this
subsection, unless the context otherwise requires:
   CANNABIS: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3 of the Cannabis
Control Act, as if that definition were incorporated herein.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA: Equipment, products, or materials intended to be
used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting, or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA: Equipment, products, or materials intended to be
used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting, or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102
of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other
than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in section 10 of the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act and cannabis paraphernalia
as defined in section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, which are
intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, or the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act or
a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act. It includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substances.
      2.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
      3.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
      4.   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
a controlled substance by private persons;
      5.   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cocaine or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in
violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act into the human body
including, where applicable, the following items:
         a.   Water pipes;
         b.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         c.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         d.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         e.   Carburetor pipes;
         f.   Electric pipes;
         g.   Air-driven pipes;
         h.   Chillums;
         i.   Bongs;
         j.   Ice pipes or chillers;
      6.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this Drug Paraphernalia Control Act.
Drug paraphernalia does not include:
      1.   Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or
other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful
research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
      2.   Items historically and customarily used in connection with the
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
or inhaling of cannabis, tobacco, or any other lawful substance. Items exempt
under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes,
sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette-rolling papers.
      3.   Items listed in this subsection which are used for decorative
purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable
of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by the Drug Paraphernalia
Control Act and this subsection.
      4.   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or
needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act.
In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt from the definition
of "drug paraphernalia," the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all
other logically relevant factors, the following:
      1.   The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the item
involved has been put;
      2.   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the item
and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the device
upon its functioning;
      3.   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
      4.   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the time
and place of sale or commercial delivery;
      5.   Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose or
use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
      6.   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was displayed
for sale, as well as any item or displayed for sale or otherwise exhibited upon
the premises where the sale was made;
      7.   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate
supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed
distributor or dealer of cannabis or tobacco products;
      8.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
   MANUFACTURER: The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of controlled substances, either directly or
indirectly, by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently
by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of controlled substances
or labeling of its container; except, that "manufacturer" does not include the
preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of controlled substances as an
incident to lawful research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision
or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, or any
other entity.
   PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing a
"synthetic cannabinoid", stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms
are defined herein, or a drug that is misbranded or falsely advertised as a
product containing a synthetic alternative drug.
   STATE: Includes the State of Illinois and any state, district, commonwealth,
territory, insular possession thereof, and any area subject to the legal
authority of the United States of America.
   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any compound that functions similar to the active
ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), including, but not limited
to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including isomers, esters, ethers,
salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor agonist.
   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/ HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that functions similar to
the active ingredient of any substance listed on schedule I(d) and schedule III
(g) of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, including, but not limited to,
any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their "controlled substance analog" (including
salts, isomers, esters, ethers and salts of isomers) which have a psychedelic/
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain.
   SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that functions similar to the active
ingredient of any substance listed on schedule I(f), schedule II(d) and
schedule III(b) of the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (such as cathinone,
methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA), including, but not limited to, any quantity of a
natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture, preparation, substance and
their "controlled substance analog" (including salts, isomers, and salts of
isomers) which have a stimulant effect on the central nervous system.
   B.   Unlawful Use Or Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: A person who
knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing a controlled substance into the
human body, or in preparing a controlled substance for that use is liable for
the penalties provided by this section.
   C.   Advertising Drug Paraphernalia: It is unlawful for any person to place
in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the
purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of
objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   D.   Sale Or Delivery Of A Synthetic Alternative Drug: It is unlawful for
any person to sell, offer for sale, publicly display for sale or attempt to
sell, give, deliver, or barter any product containing a synthetic alternative
drug.
   E.   Possession Of A Synthetic Alternative Drug: It is unlawful for any
person to knowingly possess or deliver a product containing a synthetic
alternative drug with the intent of using the product for ingestion,
consumption, inhaling, or intravenous use. In determining intent under this
section, a trier of fact may take into consideration, among other things: the
proximity of the product to drug paraphernalia; the presence of the product on
or within drug paraphernalia; the proximity of the product to a different
controlled substance; and whether or not the individual in possession of the
product is exhibiting physical effects commonly associated with being under the
influence of a controlled substance.
   F.   Use Of A Synthetic Alternative Drug: It is unlawful for any person to
be under the influence of a product containing a synthetic alternative drug.
   G.   Manufacture Of Synthetic Alternative Drug: It shall be unlawful for any
person to manufacture, or assemble the ingredients with the intent to
manufacture, a product containing a synthetic alternative drug. In determining
intent under this section, a trier of fact may take into consideration, among
other things: the proximity of the product or ingredients to drug
paraphernalia; the presence of the product or ingredients on or within drug
paraphernalia; the proximity of the product or ingredients to a different
controlled substance.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
5-3-12: PENALTIES:
   A.   Whenever in this section, any act is prohibited, or is made or declared
to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this code or any ordinance, the
doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, the minimum civil penalty for the violation shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00) and the maximum fine shall be seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
   B.   Any person found to be in violation of sections
5-3-11 (D-G) are subject to a fine as permitted above plus restitution.
Restitution shall be the cost of testing the substance and associated testing
expenses of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation thereof.
   C.   Each day any violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance
continues shall constitute a separate offense, and a separate fine shall be
assessed for each day, or part thereof, that the violation continues.
(Ord. 2019-O-40, 12-17-2019)
CHAPTER 4
MINORS
SECTION:
5-4-1: Curfew
5-4-2: Tobacco Products, Electronic Cigarettes, And Alternative Nicotine
Products; Persons Under Twenty One Years Of Age
5-4-3: Truancy
5-4-4: Encouraging Delinquency
5-4-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Age And Hour Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person of less
than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly,
building, place, street or highway at the following times unless accompanied by
a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at least twenty one
(21) years of age unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of
the State authorize a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
      1.   Between one minute after midnight (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. on Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after midnight (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. on Sunday; and
      3.   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   B.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It shall be unlawful for a
parent, legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his
custody or control to violate the provisions of subsection A of this section.
   C.   Detaining Child: Each member of the police force, while on duty, is
hereby authorized to detain any person wilfully violating the provisions of
this section until the parent or legal guardian of the child shall take him or
her into custody, but such officer shall, immediately upon taking custody of
the child, communicate with the parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 86-O-16, 4-1-
1986)
5-4-2: TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS; PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE YEARS OF AGE:
   A.   Definitions:
    ADULT-ONLY FACILITY: A facility or restricted area (whether open-air or
enclosed) where the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe (such
as by checking identification as required under State law, or by checking the
identification of any person appearing to be under the age of 30) that no
person under legal age is present. A facility or restricted area need not be
permanently restricted to persons under twenty one (21) years of age to
constitute an adult-only facility, provided that the operator ensures or has a
reasonable basis to believe that no person under twenty one (21) years of age
is present during the event or time period in question.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. "Alternative nicotine product" excludes
cigarettes as defined in section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco
products as defined in section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995;
tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in this section; or any
product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration as a
nontobacco product for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and
sold solely for that approved purpose.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE: Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism
to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for
inhalation; any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to
be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or any solution or
substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for use in the device.
"Electronic cigarette" includes, but is not limited to, any electronic nicotine
delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe,
electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any components
or parts that can be used to build the product or device.
"Electronic cigarette" does not include: cigarettes as defined in section 1 of
the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in section 10-5 of the
Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and alternative nicotine
product as defined in this section; any product approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a
tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler
prescribed by a physician for that condition and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic product approved for use
under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. "Tobacco product" includes any
component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately. "Tobacco product" does not include: an electronic cigarette and
alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; or any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
   VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products.
   B.   Prohibited Sales And Delivery; Signs Posted:
      1.   Minimum Age To Sell Or Distribute To: No person shall sell, buy for,
distribute samples or furnish any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or
alternative nicotine product to any person under twenty one (21) years of age.
      2.   Signs: Signs informing the public of the age restriction provided
for in this subsection shall be posted at or near every display of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products, tobacco
accessories and smoking herbs and on or upon every vending machine which offers
tobacco products for sale. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall
state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE
PRODUCTS, TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND SMOKING HERBS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE
(21) YEARS OF AGE OR THE MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white card with letters to
be at least one-half inch (1/2") high.
      3.   Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products: No person under sixteen (16)
years of age may sell any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative
nicotine product at a retail establishment selling tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products. This subsection does not apply to
a sales clerk in a family-owned business which can prove that the sales clerk
is in fact a son or daughter of the owner.
      4.   Proximity To Certain Institutions Prohibited: It shall be unlawful
for any person to sell, buy for, distribute samples or furnish tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products within one
hundred feet (100') of any school, child-care facility, or other building used
for education or recreation programs for persons under twenty one (21) years of
age.
      5.   Free Distributions Prohibited: A person shall not distribute without
charge samples of any tobacco product to any other person, regardless of age,
except for smokeless tobacco in an adult-only facility. This subsection does
not apply to the distribution of a tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or
alternative nicotine product sample in any adult-only facility.
      6.   Vending Machines: Tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and
alternative nicotine products may be sold through a vending machine only if
such tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, and alternative nicotine products
are not placed together with any other type of product, other than matches, in
the vending machine and the vending machine is in any of the following
locations:
         a.   Places to which persons under twenty one (21) years of age are
not permitted access at any time; or
         b.   Places where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on the
premises and vending machine operation is under the direct supervision of the
owner or manager.
   C.   Purchase Prohibited: No person under twenty one (21) years of age shall
buy any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product.
No person under twenty one (21) years of age in the furtherance or facilitation
of obtaining any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine
product shall display or use a false or forged identification card or transfer,
alter, or deface an identification card.
   D.   Possession Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years to possess any tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products.
   E.   Penalty:
      1.   Any natural person under the age of twenty one (21) who violates any
provision of this section shall be fined in an amount not to exceed one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a first offense, and for a second or subsequent offense,
shall be fined in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      2.   Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, or natural person
twenty one (21) years of age or older who violates any provision of this
section shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars
($500.00) for a first offense, and for a second or subsequent offense, shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
19-O-27, 6-18-2019)
5-4-3: TRUANCY:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of
eighteen (18) enrolled in a public, private or parochial school to absent
himself or herself from attendance at school without parental permission. Any
person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the offense of
truancy and be subject to the penalty set forth in this Code. Emergency or
unforeseen absences due to illness or causes beyond the control of the person
so absenting himself or herself from school without parental permission shall
not constitute truancy if permission for such absence has been subsequently
obtained from the parent or guardian of said person, and such permission is
submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within twenty four (24)
hours immediately following said absence.
   B.   Responsibility Of Parent Or Guardian: It is hereby made unlawful for
any parent, guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any
person under eighteen (18) years of age to allow or permit any such child,
ward, or other person under such age enrolled in a public, private or parochial
school to absent himself or herself from attendance without fully complying
with the policies and requirements of the school district in which the child is
enrolled.
   C.   Penalties:
      1.   Each day that such person under eighteen (18) years of age absents
himself or herself from school attendance shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such.
      2.   Each day that any parent, guardian or other person having the legal
care and custody of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age
violates the provisions of subsection B of this section shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ord. 04-O-8, 2-17-2004)
5-4-4: ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid
or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities; and it
shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license
of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a
motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. (1964
Code)
CHAPTER 5
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5-5-1: Definitions
5-5-2: Discrimination Prohibited
5-5-3: Property Owner Preferences
5-5-4: Interpretation And Effect
5-5-5: Penalty
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless a different meaning appears clearly from its
context, the following terms shall have the meanings provided in this section:
DISCRIMINATE OR DISCRIMINATION: To differentiate in treatment between
individuals or groups of individuals on the basis of color, geographical or
national ancestry or origin, race or religion, or any combination thereof, or
on the friends or associates of an individual or group of individuals.
DWELLING: Any building or structure, or portion thereof, which is arranged,
designed or used as a home, residence or living quarters of one or more human
beings.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Any building, structure or things, or portion thereof,
used or occupied, or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied, as
a home, residence, or living quarters for one or more human beings, including
any vacant land appropriately zoned and intended to be used for the
construction or emplacement of any such building, structure or thing.
PERSON: Any person, including associations, firms, partnerships and
corporations, as well as natural persons, both in these definitions and
elsewhere herein; and as to partnerships, includes all partners thereof
individually; and as to corporations, all officers thereof individually.
TRANSFER: To sell, rent, lease, barter, sublease, purchase, exchange or assign
real property or any interest therein or possession thereof. (Ord. 68-O-15, 5-
21-1968)
5-5-2: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
   A.   No person shall "discriminate", as defined in section
5-5-1 of this chapter, against any other person in regard to the sale, lease,
rental or transfer of any housing accommodation.
   B.   No person shall "discriminate", as defined in section
5-5-1 of this chapter, against any other person in regard to the financing of,
or dealings concerning the sale, lease, rental or transfer of any housing
accommodation.
   C.   No person shall circulate or publish any statement or advertise in any
manner or way to indicate an intent to "discriminate", as defined in section
5-5-1 of this chapter, against any person or group of persons in the sale,
lease, rental, or transfer of any housing accommodation, or the financing of or
dealings concerning such sale, lease, rental or transfer thereof. (Ord. 68-O-
15, 5-21-1968)
5-5-3: PROPERTY OWNER PREFERENCES:
Nothing in this chapter shall require an owner of the legal or equitable title
to property to offer the same to the public at large before selling or renting
it, nor shall any provision of this chapter be deemed to prohibit a person from
giving preference to others for any reason other than those based upon color,
geographical or national ancestry or origin, race or religion. (Ord. 68-O-15,
5-21-1968)
5-5-4: INTERPRETATION AND EFFECT:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed according
to the fair import of the terms therein contained to further the purposes and
policy expressed.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal or restrict the
existing powers of the building official to work through conciliation,
discussion and education to eliminate discrimination in housing and all other
matters. (Ord. 68-O-15, 5-21-1968; amd. 1991 Code)
5-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 68-O-15, 5-21-1968)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE ALARMS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Purpose And Applicability
5-6-2: Definitions
5-6-3: System Certification
5-6-4: Inspection, Testing And Maintenance
5-6-5: Fire Alarm Activation; Response
5-6-6: Nuisance Fire Alarms
5-6-7: Service Fees
5-6-1: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage owners and fire alarm
businesses to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of fire
alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of fire alarm systems and
reduce or eliminate false fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms.
   B.   This chapter applies to fire alarm systems intended to summon fire
department personnel; sets forth an assessment of fees for excessive false fire
alarms and nuisance fire alarms; provides procedures for repeat offenders.
(Ord. 16-O-41, 12-6-2016)
5-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words and terms are used in this chapter, they shall
have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
ADOPTED CODE(S): The international fire prevention code and the National Fire
Protection Association life safety code 101.
ALARM INITIATING DEVICE: A device that is designed to respond either manually
or automatically to smoke, fire, or activation of a fire suppression system.
CHARLESTON FIRE DEPARTMENT: The fire chief or his designated representative.
FALSE FIRE ALARM: The activation of any fire alarm system which results in a
response by the fire department and which is caused by the negligence or
intentional misuse of the fire alarm system by the owner, its employees, agents
or any other activation of a fire alarm system not caused by heat, smoke, fire,
or acts of God, exclusive of a nuisance fire alarm.
FEE: The assessment of a monetary charge payable to the city of Charleston,
authorized pursuant to this chapter, to defray the expenses of responding to a
false fire alarm or nuisance fire alarm.
FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION REPORT: A document issued by the Charleston fire
department indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of fire
alarm activation due to fire, a nuisance fire alarm, or a false fire alarm.
FIRE ALARM BUSINESS: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity
that is appropriately licensed in the state/jurisdiction and installs, causes
to be installed, permits to be installed, alters, maintains, repairs, replaces
or services (including runner services) any fire alarm system.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: A system or portion of a combination system consisting of
components and circuits arranged to monitor and/or exterior annunciate the
status of a fire alarm or supervisory signal initiating devices and to initiate
the appropriate response to those signals.
FIRE WATCH: A Charleston fire department approved person or persons assigned to
the premises for the purpose of protecting the occupants from fire or similar
emergencies. A fire watch may involve at least some special action beyond
normal staffing, such as assigning an additional security guard(s) to walk the
premises, specially trained in fire prevention and in the use of fire
extinguishers, in notifying the fire department, in sounding the fire alarm
system located on the premises, and in understanding the particular fire safety
situation.
MONITORED SYSTEM: The process by which a fire alarm business receives signals
from a fire alarm system and notifies emergency forces.
NUISANCE FIRE ALARM: The activation of any fire alarm system, which results in
a response by the fire department, caused by mechanical failure, malfunction,
improper installation, lack of proper maintenance or any other response for
which the fire department personnel are unable to determine the apparent cause
of the alarm activation.
OWNER: Any person who owns the premises in which a fire alarm system is
installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or manage the
premises.
PREMISES: Any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures
which serve as dwelling units such as single-family, multi-family or any other
area within a building, structure or combination thereof used for any purpose,
wherein a fire alarm system is installed.
QUALIFIED FIRE ALARM TECHNICIAN: Any person who inspects, installs, repairs or
performs maintenance on fire alarm systems. This person shall be: a) factory
trained and certified; b) National Institute Of Certification In Engineering
Technologies (NICET) fire alarm level II certified; or c) licensed or certified
by state or local authority.
REPORT OF SERVICE/REPAIR: Appropriate documentation in a format acceptable to
the Charleston fire department that verifies proper repairs or maintenance has
been performed by both the fire alarm business and the owner. (Ord. 16-O-41,
12-6-2016)
5-6-3: SYSTEM CERTIFICATION:
All newly installed or recertified commercial fire alarm systems shall be
approved and certified by the Charleston fire department. The certification
shall indicate that the fire alarm system is in compliance with adopted codes.
Said certification shall be signed by a qualified fire alarm technician. (Ord.
16-O-41, 12-6-2016)
5-6-4: INSPECTION, TESTING AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The owner shall ensure that all fire alarm systems are inspected and
tested at least once per year in accordance with adopted codes.
   B.   The owner shall ensure that all fire alarm systems are periodically
maintained per manufacturer specifications and adopted codes. (Ord. 16-O-41,
12-6-2016)
5-6-5: FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION; RESPONSE:
   A.   The owner shall be responsible for the activation of a fire alarm
system.
   B.   A response to the activation of a fire alarm system shall result when
any officer or member of the fire department is dispatched to the premises
where the fire alarm system has been activated.
      1.   At the time of response, the Charleston fire department or designee
shall make every effort to notify any person identified as the property owner
or point of contact for the property of the activation of the fire alarm system
and may require such person to respond to the premises.
      2.   In the event the fire alarm system is a monitored system, it is the
responsibility of the company monitoring the fire alarm system to notify any
person identified as the property owner or point of contact at the request of
the Charleston fire department.
      3.   In the event the household fire alarm system is a monitored system,
it is the responsibility of the fire alarm business to offer the owner the
option to verify the fire alarm signal before dispatch, as allowed by adopted
code.
      4.   In the event the household fire alarm system is a monitored system,
it is the responsibility of the fire alarm business to forward cancellation of
a fire alarm signal to the fire department.
      5.   The Charleston fire department will respond to all fire alarms,
including ones in which the department receives a cancellation, to verify that
the alarm was truly a false alarm.
   C.   The officer or member of the fire department who responded to said
premises shall complete an NFIRS fire report for each fire alarm that the
department responds to indicating the cause of the alarm. (Ord. 16-O-41, 12-6-
2016)
5-6-6: NUISANCE FIRE ALARMS:
   A.   In the event the activation of a fire alarm system is deemed by the
Charleston fire department to be a nuisance fire alarm, the owner shall be
served with a fire alarm activation report by an officer or member of the fire
department, indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a
nuisance fire alarm.
      1.   This shall require the owner to submit proof of service/repair
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the fire alarm activation report to
verify, to the reasonable satisfaction of the Charleston fire department, that:
         a.   The fire alarm system has actually been examined by a qualified
fire alarm technician; and
         b.   A bona fide attempt has been made to identify and correct any
defect of design, installation or operation of the fire alarm system which was
identifiable as the cause of the nuisance fire alarm.
      2.   Failure to return a report of service/repair within said fifteen
(15) day period, which is reasonably satisfactory to the Charleston fire
department, shall result in assessment against the owner of a fee for the
nuisance fire alarm. (Ord. 16-O-41, 12-6-2016)
5-6-7: SERVICE FEES:
   A.   Newly Installed Systems: The provisions of this section shall not apply
to any newly installed fire alarm system for a period of forty five (45) days
from the date of installation, but shall apply from and after the expiration of
the initial forty five (45) day period following installation.
   B.   False Fire Alarm:
      1.   No fee shall be assessed for the first three (3) false fire alarms
at the same premises responded to by the fire department during each calendar
year. Thereafter, the owner shall pay the following fees for false fire alarms
responded to by the fire department at the same premises during each calendar
year, except when the fire alarm business is responsible for the false fire
alarm per subsection B2 of this section.
      2.   The fire alarm business shall be assessed a fee if the Charleston
fire department determines that a false fire alarm was directly caused by an on
site employee or representative of the fire alarm business. In this event, no
false fire alarm shall be counted against the owner.
      3.   False fire alarms activated by any components connected to the fire
alarm system shall be included in computing the total number of false fire
alarms for purposes of this subsection.
      4.   The activation of a fire alarm system will not be considered a false
fire alarm if the alarm is activated due to malicious causes beyond the control
of the owner.
      5.   The following fees shall be assessed for false fire alarms per
calendar year:
 
1 - 3 false fire alarms No fee shall be charged
4 - 6 false fire alarms $250.00 per occurrence
7+ false fire alarms    $500.00 per occurrence
 
   C.   Late Fee: Should any fee assessed pursuant to this chapter remain
unpaid in excess of ninety (90) days from the date fee is billed, a late fee
shall be assessed and shall be payable by the owner of the premises in addition
to the original fee. (Ord. 16-O-41, 12-6-2016)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Illinois Motor Vehicle Code Adopted
6-1-2: Use Of Certain Streets Restricted
6-1-3: Crosswalks
6-1-4: Operation Of Vehicles On Public Property
6-1-5: Clinging To Vehicles
6-1-6: Toy Vehicles
6-1-7: Equipment Restrictions
6-1-8: Towed Vehicles; Responsibility For Costs
6-1-9: Impeding Pedestrian Or Vehicular Traffic
6-1-10: Violation; Penalty
6-1-1: ILLINOIS MOTOR VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
For the purpose of regulating and controlling traffic on city streets, there is
hereby adopted, by reference, the provisions of the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes, and all amendments from time to time made therein.
(1991 Code; amd. Ord. 07-O-44, 8-7-2007)
6-1-2: USE OF CERTAIN STREETS RESTRICTED:
   A.   Closed Streets: It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle, other than
an emergency vehicle on duty, upon any street or portion thereof which is
closed to traffic and so marked by signs, barricades or otherwise. (Ord. 61-O-
5, 2-18-1961)
   B.   Local Delivery Only: It shall be unlawful to operate any semitrucks,
trucks or any vehicle of the second division over or upon any streets which are
properly marked "No Trucks, Local Service Vehicles Only". (Ord. 79-O-66; amd.
Ord. 80-O-54, 10-21-1980)
6-1-3: CROSSWALKS 1 :
   A.   Driving Through Crosswalks: Generally, it shall be unlawful for anyone
to drive a motor vehicle through or across, from any direction, a crosswalk
when said crosswalk is occupied by a pedestrian.
   B.   School Crosswalks; Speed Restrictions: No person shall drive a motor
vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour while passing a
school zone or while traveling upon any street or highway on or across which
children pass along or over going to or from school during school days when
children are present. (Ord. 61-O-5, 2-18-1961)
   C.   Crossing Guards:
      1.   Designated: Any person who is employed by the city or its agent for
the purpose of entering upon the roadway within a crosswalk in order to stop
vehicular traffic is designated a crossing guard. (Ord. 61-O-5, 2-18-1961; amd.
1991 Code)
      2.   Uniform: Each and every crossing guard within the city shall wear
such distinctive clothing as is necessary to warn vehicular traffic of his
presence and as is required by the laws, rules and regulations of the state
department of transportation. Each guard shall carry in an upright position a
sign bearing the letters "STOP", said sign being in conformity of design with
the laws of the state. (Ord. 73-O-36, 10-16-1973; amd. 2006 Code)
      3.   Authority: Each and every crossing guard within the city shall have
the power to enter upon the designated crosswalks and, upon raising the
handheld traffic control device, stop vehicular traffic for the purpose of
allowing pedestrians to walk across the roadway within the crosswalks.
   D.   Prohibited Pedestrian Crossings: Pedestrian crossings at other than
designated and marked crosswalks or at intersections are prohibited. (Ord. 73-
O-36, 10-16-1973; amd. Ord. 21-O-15, 4-20-2021)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 6-2-9 of this title for list of guarded crosswalks.
6-1-4: OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or snowmobile upon or in any public park,
nature reserve, or reservoir area owned or operated by the city, excepting on
the driveways, parking lots or appurtenances constructed by the city for motor
vehicle use. (Ord. 77-O-22, 6-14-1977; amd. Ord. 08-O-3, 2-5-2008)
   B.   Eastern Illinois University employees and authorized contractors will
be allowed to operate neighborhood vehicles in areas which shall be defined as
"university districts" and under the following provisions as follows:
      1.   Definitions:
    NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE: A self-propelled, electronic or gas powered four (4)
wheeled vehicle which is capable of attaining in one mile a speed of more than
twenty (20) miles per hour, but not more than twenty five (25) miles per hour,
and which conforms to federal regulations under title 49 CFR part 571.500.
   UNIVERSITY DISTRICTS: The areas enclosed by the following boundaries:
district 1: University Avenue, Grant Avenue, 4th Street, and the southwest
university property line extending between Heather Drive and University Avenue
plus all of University Court; district 2: 4th Street, Lincoln Avenue, 9th
Street and Roosevelt Avenue; district 3: McKinley Avenue, 18th Street, Edgar
Drive and 9th Street. See the map attached to the ordinance codified herein for
a graphical representation of the university districts.
      2.   General Prohibition: Except as expressly authorized in this section,
it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a neighborhood vehicle on any
street in the city. Only Eastern Illinois University employees and university
contractors authorized by the university shall operate neighborhood vehicles
within said boundaries.
      3.   Authorized Vehicle Use In University Districts: A person may operate
a neighborhood vehicle only on those streets located as part of the boundaries
or within the university districts. Further:
         a.   No person shall operate a neighborhood vehicle on any street
having a posted speed limit exceeding thirty five (35) miles per hour,
provided, that nothing herein shall prohibit a person from driving a
neighborhood vehicle across a street with a posted speed limit exceeding thirty
five (35) miles per hour.
         b.   All persons operating neighborhood vehicles shall comply with all
applicable requirements of section 11-1426.1 of the Illinois vehicle code, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 et seq., hereinafter referred to as the
"Illinois vehicle code".
         c.   No neighborhood vehicle may be operated on a street unless, at a
minimum, it has the following: brakes, a steering apparatus, tires, a rearview
mirror, red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear, a slow moving
emblem (as required of other vehicles in section 12-709 of the Illinois vehicle
code) on the rear of the neighborhood vehicle, a headlight that emits a white
light visible from a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the front, a
taillight that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred feet (100')
from the rear, brake lights, turn signals and a decal identifying it as a
university vehicle or university contractor vehicle. When operating on a
roadway, a neighborhood vehicle shall have its headlight and taillamps lighted
as required by section 12-201 of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 08-O-3, 2-5-
2008)
   C.   1. "Low speed vehicles" shall have the same meaning as set forth in 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-140.7 of the state of Illinois motor vehicle
code and each such vehicle shall have all of the equipment required therein,
including, but not limited to, a vehicle identification number that conforms to
federal requirements; moreover, a "low speed vehicle" must also display current
registration plates issued by the Illinois secretary of state under 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-412.
      2.   Low speed vehicles may lawfully be used within the corporate limits
of the city of Charleston upon streets where the posted speed limit is thirty
(30) miles per hour or less. (Ord. 12-O-35, 10-16-2012)
6-1-5: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle
or any toy vehicle to cling to or to attach himself or his vehicle to any
moving motor vehicle or wagon. (Ord. 61-O-4, 2-8-1961)
6-1-6: TOY VEHICLES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or
other toy vehicle to go upon any roadway other than within a crosswalk. (Ord.
61-O-4, 2-8-1961)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or
other toy vehicle to go upon any public sidewalk in front of any place of
business or in front of any public building. (Ord. 96-O-36, 8-6-1996)
6-1-7: EQUIPMENT RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Mufflers; Unnecessary Noise: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times be equipped with a muffler
upon the exhaust thereof in good working order and in constant operation to
prevent excessive or unusual noise, and it shall be unlawful for any person
operating any motor vehicle to use a cutout, bypass or similar muffler
elimination appliance.
   B.   Lug Wheels: It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to
pavement to be permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of
such vehicle shall first plank such streets. (1964 Code)
6-1-8: TOWED VEHICLES; RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS:
When a vehicle is removed from either public or private property, as authorized
by order of the chief of police, the owner of the vehicle will be responsible
for all towing costs. (Ord. 70-O-20, 6-2-1970)
6-1-9: IMPEDING PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC:
No person shall completely or substantially impede the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic in, on, or around any sidewalk or public property, way, or
place. No person shall have the exclusive right to any sidewalk or public
property, way, or place, nor the right to establish a stationary location
therein. (Ord. 21-O-15, 4-20-2021)
6-1-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Notwithstanding any other remedies available to the city pursuant to this
chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense, to which court or adjudication costs may be added. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which the violation occurs or
continues to occur. (Ord. 17-O-11, 4-18-2017)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SECTION:
6-2-1: Through Streets
6-2-2: One-Way Streets
6-2-2-1: One-Way Alleys
6-2-3: Stop Intersections
6-2-4: Light Signaled Intersections
6-2-5: Yield Intersections
6-2-6: Load Limits
6-2-7: Snow Removal Routes
6-2-8: Speed Limits
6-2-9: Guarded Crosswalks
6-2-10: No Parking On Certain Streets
6-2-11: Time Limit Parking
6-2-12: Loading Zones
6-2-13: Truck Parking
6-2-14: Parking At Intersections
6-2-15: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
6-2-16: Vehicle With Trailer Parking Only
6-2-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to constitute
through streets:
Street From To
Street                    From                        To
B Street                  Lincoln Avenue              Polk Avenue
Division Street           Grant Avenue                Lincoln Avenue
                         Lincoln Avenue              State Avenue
                         State Avenue                Northern terminus of said
                                                      street
E Street                  Polk Avenue                 Van Buren Avenue
Grant Avenue              Its western terminus        4th Street
Harrison Avenue           State Route 130             Eastern terminus
Jackson Avenue            Division Street             4th Street
                         4th Street                  14th Street
                         14th Street                 State Route 130
Jefferson Avenue          7th Street                  10th Street
Lincoln Avenue                                        
Madison Avenue                                        
Monroe Avenue             Division Street             4th Street
                         4th Street                  14th Street
                         14th Street                 State Route 130
Polk Avenue               Its western terminus        Division Street
                         Division Street             4th Street
University Drive          Southern terminus           Lincoln Avenue
University Drive E Street Lincoln Avenue              Polk Avenue
                          Its southern terminus, at
4th Street                the intersection of         Grant Avenue
                          southern corporate line
                         Grant Avenue                Lincoln Avenue
                         Lincoln Avenue              Polk Avenue
                         Madison Avenue              Railroad Avenue
                         Polk Avenue                 Madison Avenue
5th Street                Madison Avenue              Northern terminus of said
                                                      street
6th Street                Lincoln Avenue              Poplar Avenue
7th Street                Hayes Avenue                Lincoln Avenue
                         Lincoln Avenue              Madison Avenue
                         Madison Avenue              Poplar Avenue
8th Street                Harrison Avenue             Jackson Avenue
9th Street                Its southern terminus       Lincoln Avenue
10th Street               Its southern terminus       Lincoln Avenue
                         Lincoln Avenue              Jackson Avenue
                         Madison Avenue              Northern terminus of said
                                                      street
11th Street               Its southern terminus       Lincoln Avenue
                         Lincoln Avenue              Jackson Avenue
                         Madison Avenue              Poplar Avenue
14th Street               Intersection of State Route Jackson Avenue
                          130
                         Madison Avenue              Olive Avenue
 
(Ord. 61-O-4, 2-8-1961)
6-2-2: ONE-WAY STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any of the following streets in
any direction other than that indicated:
Street From To Ordinance
Street             From             To              Ordinance
Westbound only                                     
Monroe Avenue      State Route 130  Division Street 76-O-39
Poplar Avenue      6th Street       7th Street      75-O-54
West Pierce Avenue B Street         Division Street 81-O-33
3rd Street                                        61-O-4
Eastbound only
Jackson Avenue     Division Street  State Route 130 76-O-39
Madison Avenue     Division Street  3rd Street      78-O-8
Northbound only
3rd Street         Tyler Avenue     Harrison Avenue 81-O-34
7th Street         Lincoln Avenue   Monroe Avenue   61-O-4
11th Street        Lincoln Avenue   Monroe Avenue   61-O-5
Southbound only
6th Street         Monroe Avenue    Lincoln Avenue  61-O-4
7th Street         Lincoln Avenue   Johnson Avenue  03-O-33
9th Street         Jefferson Avenue Olive Avenue    00-O-54
10th Street        Monroe Avenue    Lincoln Avenue  61-O-5
 
6-2-2-1: ONE-WAY ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any of the following alleys in
any direction other than that indicated:
 
Between             From             To             Ordinance
Southbound only
5th and 6th Streets Jefferson Avenue Madison Avenue 97-O-12
 
6-2-3: STOP INTERSECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into the intersection of the
following named streets without first bringing such vehicle to a full stop:
Traffic Traveling On Stops At Ordinance
Traffic Traveling On              Stops At                  Ordinance
A Street                          Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 State Avenue              74-O-39
                                 West Buchanan Avenue      79-O-79
                                 West Johnson Avenue       94-O-40
                                 West Madison Avenue       68-O-24
                                 West Polk Avenue          68-O-24
                                  Division Street           68-O-24
                                  3rd Street                68-O-24
                                  4th Street                68-O-24
                                  5th Street                68-O-24
Adams Avenue                      6th Street                68-O-24
                                  7th Street                68-O-24
                                  10th Street               68-O-24
                                  11th Street               68-O-24
                                  14th Street               68-O-24
                                  16th Street               13-O-4
Alan Drive                        Douglas Street            92-O-11
Alley, between 4th Street and 6th Buchanan Avenue           69-O-15
Street
Andover Place                     Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
Arlington Park Trailer Court Road Decker Springs Road       80-O-34
                                  E Street                  80-O-34
                                  9th Street                74-O-39
                                  10th Street               74-O-39
Arthur Avenue                     11th Street               74-O-39
                                  12th Street               74-O-39
                                  20th Street               68-O-24
Ashby Drive                       Meadowlake Drive          00-O-50
                                  University Drive          68-O-24
                                  Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
B Street                          State Avenue              74-O-39
                                  West Madison Avenue       68-O-24
                                  West Polk Avenue          68-O-24
Biggs Street                      E Street                  68-O-24
                                  Fuller Street             74-O-39
Brosam Drive                      10th Street               68-O-24
                                  2nd Street                68-O-24
                                  3rd Street                68-O-24
                                  4th Street                68-O-24
Buchanan Avenue                   6th Street                68-O-24
                                  7th Street                68-O-24
                                  9th Street                68-O-24
                                  10th Street               68-O-24
                                  11th Street               68-O-24
                                  Grant Avenue              74-O-39
C Street                          State Avenue              74-O-39
                                  West Polk Avenue          68-O-24
Cambridge Street                  Woodlawn Drive            92-O-11
Carriage Lane                     Woodlawn Drive            92-O-11
Cedar Drive                       4th Street                74-O-39
Chamberlin Drive                  University Drive          68-O-24
Circle Drive                      18th Street               74-O-39
                                  9th Street                68-O-24
Cleveland Avenue                  11th Street               68-O-24
                                  12th Street               68-O-24
(westbound)                       20th Street               93-O-9
Clifton Drive                     Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
Colony Lane                       Village Road              92-O-11
Coolidge Avenue                   4th Street                74-O-39
Cortland Drive                    Lovers Lane               13-O-29
Cougill Drive                     West Polk Avenue          81-O-23
D Street                          E Street                  89-O-28
                                  State Avenue              74-O-39
Davis Street                      Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Polk Avenue               68-O-24
Decker Springs Road               State Avenue              83-O-39
Deer Run Trail                    University Drive          96-O-4
Division Street                   Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Polk Avenue               68-O-24
                                 State Avenue              74-O-39
                                 West Grant Avenue         68-O-24
Douglas Street                    Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 West Polk Avenue          68-O-24
E Street                          Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 State Avenue              74-O-39
                                 West Madison Avenue       94-O-29
                                 West Polk Avenue          68-O-24
Edgar Drive                       Illinois Route 130        91-O-49
                                  (eastbound)
                                 9th Street (westbound)    91-O-49
Edgewood Drive (northbound)       20th Street               92-O-11
Elm Avenue                        5th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                68-O-24
Fawn Hollow Drive                 Lincoln Highway Road      01-O-51
Fox Crest Drive                   West Polk Drive           80-O-55
Fox Lake Drive                    University Drive          88-O-60
                                 West Coolidge Avenue      88-O-60
Franklin Street                   McComb Street             06-O-34
                                 Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
Fuller Street                     E Street                  74-O-39
                                 Polk Avenue               74-O-39
                                 West Polk Avenue          68-O-24
Garfield Avenue                   7th Street                68-O-24
                                 9th Street                68-O-24
                                 12th Street               68-O-24
                                 18th Street               74-O-39
                                 20th Street               68-O-24
Glenwood Drive                    Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
Granite Drive                     West State Avenue         97-O-13
Grant Avenue                      4th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                68-O-24
                                 9th Street                68-O-24
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
                                 12th Street               68-O-24
                                 18th Street               74-O-39
                                 20th Street               68-O-24
Hall Court                        University Drive          68-O-24
Halsey Drive                      Meadowlake Drive          80-O-4
                                 Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
Hance Drive                       14th Street               80-O-9
Harding Avenue                    4th Street                74-O-39
                                 5th Street                92-O-11
Harrison Avenue                   4th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                68-O-24
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
                                 18th Street               74-O-39
Hawthorne Drive                   Wal-Mart entrance         06-O-46
(southbound)                      Shawnee Drive             07-O-36
Hayes Avenue                      7th Street                68-O-24
                                 9th Street                68-O-24
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
                                 12th Street               74-O-39
Hidden Lake Court                 McKinley Avenue           84-O-39
Ironwood Lane                     McKinley Avenue           81-O-37
Jackson Avenue                    4th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                66-O-6
Jefferson Avenue                  5th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                68-O-24
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
                                 13th Street               15-O-1
                                 14th Street               68-O-24
Johnson Avenue                    7th Street                68-O-24
                                 9th Street                68-O-24
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
                                 12th Street               68-O-24
                                 18th Street               74-O-39
                                 20th Street               74-O-39
Kenton Street                     Douglas Street            68-O-24
                                 Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
Kimberly Avenue                   20th Street               68-O-24
Kimwood Drive                                               
(north intersection)              Krishire Drive            99-O-46
(south intersection)              Krishire Drive            99-O-46
Krishire Drive                    State Route 130           78-O-4
(westbound only)                  Kari Knoll/Krishire Drive 99-O-46
                                  intersection
Locust Avenue                     Division Street           68-O-24
                                 5th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                93-O-9
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
Lynn Wood Drive                   West Polk Avenue          94-O-21
                                                            2022-O-2
Madison Avenue                    18th Street               00-O-29
(eastbound)                       Decker Springs Road       83-O-39
Maple Avenue                      5th Street                68-O-24
Marion Avenue                     Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
McComb Street                     Reynolds Drive            75-O-42
Meadowlake Drive                  Grant Avenue              80-O-4
                                 Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
Mitchell Avenue                   18th Street               74-O-39
Monroe Avenue                     Division Street           68-O-24
                                 4th Street                75-O-37
                                 7th Street                66-O-6
Montgomery Drive                  Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
Nantucket Street                  Woodlawn Drive            92-O-11
New England Drive                 Salem Road                99-O-46
Oakcrest Drive                    Polk Avenue               79-O-47
Oakwood Drive                     South 4th Street Road     94-O-61
Old State Road (eastbound)        Decker Springs Road       83-O-39
Olean Place                       McComb Street             06-O-34
Olive Avenue                      5th Street                00-O-29
Orchard Drive                     Johnson Avenue            90-O-41
                                 West Grant Avenue         74-O-39
Orchard Drive Loop                                          
(northbound)                      Orchard Drive             90-O-41
(westbound)                       Orchard Drive             90-O-41
Park Circle                                                 
(north)                           Loxa Road                 96-O-4
(south)                           Loxa Road                 96-O-4
Phillips Place                    Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
Pierce Avenue                     Division Street           68-O-24
                                 2nd Street                68-O-24
                                 4th Street                68-O-24
Polk Avenue                       Division Street           68-O-24
                                 4th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                68-O-24
Poplar Avenue                     5th Street                68-O-24
Railroad Avenue                   Division Street           68-O-24
                                 E Street                  84-O-34
                                 5th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                81-O-29
                                 9th Street                00-O-29
                                 10th Street               81-O-29
                                 11th Street               81-O-29
                                 12th Street               00-O-29
Retriever Run                     Red Bud Road              2022-O-25
Reynolds Drive                    West Lincoln Avenue       74-O-39
                                 West Madison Avenue       68-O-24
                                 West Polk Avenue          68-O-24
                                 West State Avenue         74-O-39
Roosevelt Avenue                  4th Street (westbound)    91-O-49
                                 7th Street                02-O-17
                                 9th Street                92-O-30
                                 9th Street (eastbound)    91-O-49
Salem Road                        Krishire Drive            85-O-17
                                 Woodlawn Drive            85-O-28
Seneca Drive                      University Drive          74-O-39
Shawnee Drive                     Tanglewood Drive          01-O-51
                                 Hawthorne Drive           07-O-36
(east and westbound)
Smith Drive                       18th Street               74-O-39
Stoner Drive East                 McKinley Avenue           81-O-37
Stoner Drive West                 McKinley Avenue           81-O-37
Sunset Place                      Eastgate Drive            99-O-33
Taft Avenue                       4th Street                68-O-24
(3-way stop)                      9th Street                78-O-4
Tanglewood Drive                  Harrison Avenue           94-O-61
Taylor Avenue                     2nd Street                68-O-24
                                 4th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 9th Street                68-O-24
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
Terrace Lane                      4th Street                74-O-39
Timberlane                        Polk Avenue               92-O-11
Tippecanoe Drive                  Tanglewood Drive          07-O-36
Tree Line Drive                   Madison Avenue            96-O-4
Tyler Avenue                      Division Street           68-O-24
                                 1st Street                68-O-24
                                 4th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
University Apartments             Terrace Lane              69-O-15
University Drive                  Sunnydale Drive           13-O-29
                                  West Lincoln Avenue       74-O-39
Van Buren Avenue                  East Gate Drive           79-O-78
                                 4th Street                68-O-24
                                 5th Street                16-O-1
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                68-O-24
                                 8th Street                68-O-24
                                 10th Street               68-O-24
                                 11th Street               68-O-24
                                 12th Street               68-O-24
                                 18th Street               74-O-39
Village Road                      Woodlawn Drive            92-O-11
Vine Avenue                       Division Street           68-O-24
                                 5th Street                68-O-24
                                 6th Street                68-O-24
                                 7th Street                68-O-24
Walnut Street                     Division Street           68-O-24
                                 5th Street                68-O-24
Warren Avenue                     Reynolds Drive            80-O-4
                                 University Drive          70-O-30
Washington Avenue                 Division Street           70-O-30
                                 4th Street                70-O-30
                                 5th Street                70-O-30
                                 6th Street                70-O-30
                                 7th Street                70-O-30
West Buchanan                     A Street                  79-O-79
                                 B Street                  68-O-24
                                 Division Street           68-O-24
West Cooper Avenue                E Street                  89-O-28
West Filmore Avenue               A Street                  68-O-24
                                 B Street                  68-O-24
                                 Division Street           68-O-24
West Fryer Avenue                 E Street                  89-O-28
West Grant Avenue                 Reynolds Drive            68-O-24
                                 University Drive          74-O-39
West Harrison Avenue              C Street                  68-O-24
                                 Division Street           68-O-24
                                 E Street                  68-O-24
West Hayes Avenue                 University Drive          74-O-39;
                                                            81-O-37
(eastbound)                       Douglas Street            73-O-23
West Jackson Avenue               Division Street           68-O-24
West Johnson Avenue               Division Street           74-O-39
                                 University Drive          68-O-24
(eastbound)                       Orchard Drive             90-O-41
West Madison Avenue               Division Street           68-O-24
                                 E Street                  94-O-20
                                 Reynolds Drive            85-O-20
                                 State Avenue              74-O-39
West Pierce Avenue                A Street                  74-O-39
                                 B Street                  68-O-24
                                 E Street                  68-O-24
West Polk Avenue                  Douglas Street            85-O-18
                                 E Street                  68-O-24
West Taylor Avenue                A Street                  68-O-24
                                 Division Street           68-O-24
                                 E Street                  68-O-24
West Tyler Avenue                 E Street                  89-O-28
West Van Buren Avenue             C Street                  68-O-24
                                 E Street                  68-O-24
Westgate Drive                    Douglas Street            70-O-38
Whitetail Drive                   Deer Run Trail            96-O-4
Wolff Drive                       South 4th Street          92-O-11
Woodfall Drive                    20th Street               00-O-34
Woodlawn Drive                    Krishire Drive            78-O-4
                                 Salem Road                85-O-28
Yearling Court                    Deer Run Trail            96-O-4
1st Street                        Adams Avenue              70-O-30
                                 Grant Avenue              70-O-30
                                 Harrison Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Pierce Avenue             70-O-30
                                 Polk Avenue               70-O-30
                                 State Avenue              74-O-39
2nd Street                        Grant Avenue              70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
                                 Polk Avenue               70-O-30
                                 Tyler Avenue              73-O-15
3rd Street                        Grant Avenue              70-O-30
                                 Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Madison Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
                                 Polk Avenue               70-O-30
                                 Tyler Avenue              74-O-25
                                 Washington Avenue         70-O-30
4th Street                        Grant Avenue              70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Polk Avenue               70-O-30
                                 Railroad Avenue           92-O-11
                                 Walnut Street             74-O-39
5th Street                        Coolidge Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
                                 Van Buren Avenue          70-O-30
6th Street                        Lincoln Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Madison Avenue            91-O-53
                                 Monroe Avenue             84-O-43
                                 Taft Avenue               80-O-4
North 6th Street                  Locust Avenue             00-O-29
                                 Railroad Avenue           00-O-29
7th Street                        Jackson Avenue            84-O-43
                                 Madison Avenue            84-O-43
(southbound)                      Monroe Avenue             84-O-55
North 7th Street                  Olive Avenue              00-O-29
South 7th Street                  Coolidge Avenue           79-O-52
                                 Wilson Avenue             79-O-52
8th Street                        Harrison Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Jefferson Avenue          70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            74-O-39
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
8th Street Circle                 Taft Avenue               80-O-4
9th Street                        Garfield Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Hayes Avenue              70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Jefferson Avenue          70-O-30
                                 Lincoln Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
                                 Roosevelt Avenue          92-O-30
                                 Van Buren Avenue          70-O-30
(northbound)                      Polk Avenue               80-O-36
North 9th Street                  Olive Avenue              00-O-29
10th Street                       Garfield Avenue           01-O-46
                                 Harrison Avenue           99-O-47
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Lincoln Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
(southbound)                      Cleveland Avenue          99-O-27
North 10th Street                 Olive Avenue              00-O-29
                                 Poplar Avenue             71-O-18
11th Street                       Garfield Avenue           01-O-46
                                 Harrison Avenue           99-O-47
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Lincoln Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
North 11th Street                 Olive Avenue              00-O-29
                                 Poplar Avenue             71-O-18
12th Street                       Garfield Avenue           01-O-46
                                 Harrison Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Lincoln Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
North 12th Street                 Olive Avenue              84-O-38
                                 Poplar Avenue             71-O-18
13th Street                       Buchanan Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Jefferson Avenue          15-O-1
                                 Lincoln Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
                                 Olive Avenue              85-O-42
North 13th Street                 Poplar Avenue             71-O-18
14th Street                       Buchanan Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Harrison Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Lincoln Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
North 14th Street                 Olive Avenue              00-O-29
15th Street                       Adams Avenue              11-O-8
                                 Harrison Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
16th Street                       Adams Avenue              11-O-8
                                 Jackson Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             70-O-30
17th Street                       Harrison Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Jackson Avenue            68-O-24
                                 Madison Avenue            70-O-30
                                 Monroe Avenue             68-O-24
                                 18th Street               70-O-30
19th Street                       Harrison Avenue           68-O-24
                                 Van Buren Avenue          79-O-78
20th Street                       Harrison Avenue           68-O-24
                                 Lincoln Avenue            70-O-30
                                 McKinley Avenue           92-O-11
                                 Van Buren Avenue          79-O-78
(northbound)                      Woodfall Drive            00-O-34
22nd Street                       Harrison Avenue           70-O-30
                                 Van Buren Avenue          79-O-78
24th Street                       Eastgate Drive            99-O-33
                                 Harrison Avenue           99-O-33
 
6-2-4: LIGHT SIGNALED INTERSECTIONS:
The following intersections are designated "light signal intersections":
Division Street and Lincoln Avenue
Douglas Street and Lincoln Avenue
Reynolds Drive and Lincoln Avenue
Reynolds Drive at Norfolk and Western Railroad
State Route 130 and Lincoln Avenue
University Drive and Lincoln Avenue
4th Street and Lincoln Avenue
5th Street and Madison Avenue
7th Street and Lincoln Avenue
(Ord. 73-O-45, 11-6-1973; amd. Ord. 91-O-53, 11-19-1991; Ord. 92-O-11, 4-21-
1992)
6-2-5: YIELD INTERSECTIONS:
The following streets or intersections shall be known as yield intersections:
Traffic Traveling On Yields To Ordinance
Traffic Traveling On            Yields To            Ordinance
A Street                        West Harrison Avenue 80-O-5
                               West Jackson Avenue  80-O-5;
                                                     89-O-28
Adams Avenue                    9th Street           80-O-5
Bryan Place                     13th Street          96-O-62
Buchanan Court                  Douglas Drive        92-O-11
Cameron Place                   Glenwood Drive       80-O-5
Cortland Drive                  Lovers Lane          00-O-47
                               Seneca Drive         80-O-5
Eden Drive                      Reynolds Drive       80-O-5
Ellington Place                 Eden Drive           80-O-5
Elm Avenue                      North 10th Street    80-O-5
                               North 11th Street    80-O-5
                               North 12th Street    80-O-5
                               North 13th Street    80-O-5
F Street                        Fuller Street        80-O-5
                               Madison Avenue       80-O-5
Fairlane Drive                  Pierce Avenue        92-O-11
Filmore Avenue                  Davis Street         80-O-5
Franklin Street                 McComb Street        80-O-5
G Street                        Madison Avenue       80-O-5
                               Monroe Avenue        80-O-5
Granite Drive                   Windsor Road         2025-O-18
Hidden Oaks                     Heather Drive        95-O-13
Jefferson Avenue                16th Street          85-O-16
Kenton Street                   McComb Street        80-O-5
Locust Avenue                   North E Street       80-O-5
                               North 10th Street    80-O-5
                               North 11th Street    80-O-5
                               North 12th Street    80-O-5
                               North 13th Street    80-O-5
Madison Avenue                  E Street             80-O-5
Marion Street                   Grant Avenue         80-O-5
Martin Street                   22nd Street          80-O-5
McLeod Avenue                   Mitchell Avenue      80-O-5
Miller Avenue                   Mitchell Avenue      80-O-5
Monroe Avenue                   F Street             80-O-5
                               Reynolds Drive       80-O-5
North A Street                  Walnut Avenue        80-O-5
North B Street                  Locust Avenue        80-O-5
                               Vine Avenue          80-O-5
                               Walnut Avenue        80-O-5
Poplar Avenue                   North 4th Street     80-O-5
Sarah's Lane                    Stone Drive West     81-O-37
Seneca Drive (southbound)       Cortland Drive       80-O-10
Teresa Court                    South 7th Street     79-O-53
Timothy Court                   South 7th Street     79-O-53
Village Road                    Williamsburg Drive   81-O-21
Vine Avenue                     North E Street       80-O-5
                               North 10th Street    80-O-5
                               North 11th Street    80-O-5
                               North 12th Street    80-O-5
                               North 13th Street    80-O-5
Walnut Avenue                   North 10th Street    80-O-5
                               North 11th Street    80-O-5
                               North 12th Street    80-O-5
                               North 13th Street    80-O-5
Warren Avenue                   Meadowlake Drive     80-O-5
West Filmore Avenue             Reynolds Drive       80-O-5
Whippoorwill Drive              Coolidge Avenue      80-O-5
Williamsburg Drive (northbound) Williamsburg Drive   78-O-5
                                (east-westbound)
Wilson Avenue                   6th Street Circle    92-O-11
1st Street                      Washington Avenue    81-O-41
North 2nd Street                Vine Avenue          80-O-5
5th Street Circle               Wilson Avenue        83-O-40
8th Street                      Railroad Avenue      81-O-30
9th Street                      Railroad Avenue      81-O-30
12th Street                     Adams Avenue         80-O-5
                               Jefferson Avenue     80-O-5
13th Street                     Adams Avenue         80-O-5
15th Street                     Jefferson Avenue     80-O-5
 
6-2-6: LOAD LIMITS:
It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle upon the following streets or
thoroughfares when the gross weight shall exceed the indicated limitation:
 
Street                                                   Load Limit
Alley connecting east end of Miller, Mitchell and McLeod 16 tons
Reynolds Drive Railroad Bridge                           8 tons
 
(Ord. 78-O-38, 9-5-1978; amd. Ord. 92-O-11, 4-21-1992; Ord. 93-O-9, 2-2-1993;
Ord. 94-O-33, 7-19-1994)
6-2-7: SNOW REMOVAL ROUTES:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on the following designated streets
during any period of snowfall accumulation in excess of two inches (2") and
thereafter for a period of twelve (12) hours or for a period of less than
twelve (12) hours if the commissioner of streets and public improvements, or in
his absence, the chief of police, determines that snow removal efforts on said
streets have been completed:
Street From To
Street          From             To
Grant Avenue    University Drive 4th Street
Harrison Avenue Division Street  18th Street
Jackson Avenue  Division Street  18th Street
Monroe Avenue   Division Street  18th Street
6th Street      Railroad Avenue  Lincoln Avenue
7th Street      Railroad Avenue  Lincoln Avenue
10th Street     Monroe Avenue    Lincoln Avenue
11th Street     Monroe Avenue    Lincoln Avenue
 
(Ord. 78-O-46, 10-17-1978; amd. Ord. 92-O-11, 4-21-1992)
6-2-8: SPEED LIMITS:
   A.   Speed Limit Categories: It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or
operate any motor vehicle, motor truck or motorcycle upon the following public
streets in excess of the following speed limits: (Ord. 69-O-32, 10-21-1969)
10 MILES PER HOUR
All streets contained entirely within Lake Charleston Municipal Park.
(Ord. 2022-O-21, - -2022)
15 MILES PER HOUR
All streets contained entirely within the following municipal parks: Lakeview
Park, Kiwanis Park, Reasor Park.
(Ord. 00-O-44, 9-19-2000)
20 MILES PER HOUR
Ashby Drive between Meadowlake Drive and University Drive in the subdivision
known as Meadowlake Subdivision, recorded as described on plats filed in the
county recorder's office, Coles County, Illinois, as documents 274915 and
290013.
Buchanan Avenue from its intersection with 11th Street easterly to its
terminus.
Circle Drive.
Davis Street from Lincoln Avenue to Polk Avenue.
Jackson Avenue from its intersection with 4th Street easterly to its
intersection with 8th Street.
Madison Avenue from Division Street to State Street.
Meadowlake Drive from Reynolds Drive to Grant Avenue.
Monroe Avenue from its intersection with 4th Street easterly to its
intersection with 8th Street.
4th Street from two hundred forty feet (240') north of the centerline of Grant
Avenue southerly to one hundred thirty feet (130') south of the intersection
with Roosevelt Avenue.
6th Street from its intersection with Jefferson Avenue southerly to its
intersection with Harrison Avenue.
7th Street from its intersection with Madison Avenue southerly to its
intersection with Van Buren Avenue.
15th Street from Harrison Avenue to Smith Drive.
(Ord. 69-O-32, 10-21-1969; amd. Ord. 70-O-16, 5-5-1970; Ord. 92-O-33, 11-17-
1992; Ord. 93-O-36, 7-20-1993; Ord. 93-O-42, 9-21-1993; Ord. 00-O-44, 9-19-
2000; Ord. 01-O-25, 5-1-2001; Ord. 03-O-26, 6-17-2003; Ord. 12-O-1, 2-7-2012;
Ord. 2022-O-22, - -2022)
35 MILES PER HOUR
Lincoln Highway Road from University Avenue to the west leg of Coolidge Avenue.
(Ord. 03-O-11, 4-15-2003)
45 MILES PER HOUR
North 14th Street from a point six hundred feet (600') north of Olive Avenue to
its intersection with Reasor Avenue.
(Ord. 82-O-14, 6-8-1982)
   B.   University Heights Subdivision And Arbors I And Arbors II Subdivisions:
It shall be unlawful for any person driving or operating any motor vehicle,
motor truck or motorcycle upon any public street or alley in the subdivision
known as the University Heights Subdivision, recorded as described on plats
filed in the county recorder's office, Coles County, as documents 276895,
301462, 303013, 310775, 314699, 318830 and 326931, and Arbors I Subdivision and
Arbors II Subdivision, recorded as described on plats filed in the county
recorder's office, Coles County, as documents 522862 and 543831, at a speed in
excess of twenty (20) miles per hour excepting on Reynolds Drive where it shall
be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle, motor truck or motorcycle at speeds
in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour. (Ord. 93-O-35, 7-20-1993)
   C.   Second Division Vehicles: The speed of all vehicles of the second
division shall always be reasonable and safe and be governed, as near as may
be, by the general requirements of subsection A of this section, but such speed
shall not exceed the following rates:
      1.   Vehicles having a gross weight of five thousand (5,000) pounds or
less, including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load, if equipped with
pneumatic tires, thirty five (35) miles per hour; if equipped with two (2) or
more solid rubber tires, ten (10) miles per hour.
      2.   Vehicles designed and used for carrying more than seven (7)
passengers and having a gross weight of not more than twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds, including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load if equipped with
pneumatic tires, thirty five (35) miles per hour; vehicles designed and used
for pulling and carrying freight and having a gross weight of not more than
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds, including the weight of the vehicle and
maximum load, if equipped with pneumatic tires, thirty five (35) miles per
hour; in either case, if equipped with solid rubber tires, ten (10) miles per
hour.
      3.   Vehicles designed and used for the carrying of more than seven (7)
passengers and having a gross weight of more than twelve thousand (12,000)
pounds, and not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds, including the
weight of the vehicle and maximum load, if equipped with pneumatic tires,
thirty five (35) miles per hour; vehicles designed and used for pulling and
carrying freight and having a gross weight of more than twelve thousand
(12,000) pounds and not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds, including
the weight of the vehicle and maximum load, if equipped with pneumatic tires,
thirty (30) miles per hour; in either case if equipped with solid rubber tires,
ten (10) miles per hour.
      4.   Vehicles having a gross weight of more than fifteen thousand
(15,000) pounds, including the weight of the vehicle and maximum load, if
equipped with pneumatic tires, twenty five (25) miles per hour; if equipped
with solid rubber tires, ten (10) miles per hour. (Ord. 61-O-4, 2-8-1961)
   D.   School Zones: School speed zone of twenty (20) miles per hour when
school is in session and children are present.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle,
motor truck or motorcycle upon the following public streets in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour on school days when school is in session and children are
present as set forth by Illinois Compiled Statutes:
Jefferson Avenue from its intersection at 6th Street easterly to its
intersection at 10th Street;
Lincoln Avenue from its intersection with 11th Street easterly to its
intersection with 18th Street;
Madison Avenue from its intersection at 7th Street easterly to its intersection
at 9th Street;
McComb Avenue from its intersection at Reynolds Drive westerly to a point six
hundred feet (600') from the centerline of McComb Drive and Reynolds Avenue;
Olive Avenue from its intersection at 7th Street easterly to its intersection
at 10th Street;
Reynolds Drive from its intersection at Warren Avenue north to a point one
hundred twenty five feet (125') north of the centerline of the intersection of
McComb and Reynolds Avenue;
7th Street from its intersection at Jefferson Avenue north to its intersection
at Washington Avenue;
13th Street from its intersection with Buchanan north to its intersection with
Tyler;
15th Street from its intersection with Smith Drive north to its intersection
with Harrison Avenue; and
18th Street from its intersection with Lincoln Avenue north to its intersection
with Mitchell Avenue. (Ord. 07-O-47, 8-7-2007)
6-2-9: GUARDED CROSSWALKS:
The crosswalks located at the following designated intersections are hereby
designated guarded crosswalks. It shall be unlawful for anyone to drive a motor
vehicle through or across a guarded crosswalk from any direction when said
crosswalk is occupied by a crossing guard.
Division Street and State Avenue.
Jackson Avenue and Division Street.
State Route 130 and Circle Drive.
8th Street and Madison Avenue.
12th Street and Lincoln Avenue.
(Ord. 73-O-36, 10-16-1973; amd. Ord. 92-O-11, 4-21-1992)
6-2-10: NO PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS:
There shall be no parking on the following streets in the city:
Street Side From To Ordinance
Street           Side            From              To                Ordinance
A Street         Both            Harrison Avenue   Jackson Avenue    03-O-30
                 Both            Lincoln Avenue    Johnson Avenue    04-O-55
Adams Avenue     South           5th Street        Division Street   68-O-29
                 Both            9th Street        12th Street       01-O-42
Arthur Avenue                    East edge of      425 feet east on
                 Both            pavement on 12th  Arthur Avenue     08-O-17
                                 Street
B Street         East            Lincoln Avenue    Buchanan Avenue   78-O-36
                 North           14th Street, east Its terminus      82-O-5
Buchanan Avenue  Both            13th Street       14th Street dead  94-O-50
                                                   end
                 See subsection E of this section for parking
C Street         regulations during major events held at Eastern     13-O-10
                 Illinois University
Cedar Drive      South           4th Street        Its terminus      07-O-13
                 See subsection E of this section for parking
Chamberlin Drive regulations during major events held at Eastern     13-O-10
                 Illinois University
Cleveland Avenue North           9th Street        10th Street       84-O-27
                 Both            9th Street        12th Street       90-O-1
Community Drive  Both            IL 130            Nursery Road      2023-O- 21
Deer Run Trail   North           T.R. 1550E        Whitetail Drive   02-O-6
                                                   (east)
                 East            Johnson Avenue    Grant Avenue      78-O-21
                                 Curb intersection
                                 with Lincoln
                 East            Avenue, north a                    80-O-33
                                 distance of 215
                                 feet
                 West            Pierce Avenue,    Lincoln Avenue    68-O-29
Division Street                  south
                 Both            Lincoln Avenue    Johnson Avenue    75-O-52
                                 Norfolk and
                 Both            Western Railroad  State Avenue      81-O-22
                                 right of way
                 Both            Pierce Avenue     State Avenue      68-O-29
                 Both            ENRG north right  Madison Avenue    92-O-11
                                 of way line
                 Both            Hayes Avenue      Coolidge Avenue   84-O-45
Douglas Street                   South of Lincoln
                 Both            Avenue and north                   74-O-1
                                 of Hayes Avenue
E Street         Both            Lincoln Avenue    West State Street 93-O-9
Edgar Drive      Both            9th Street        Illinois Route    91-O-49
                                                   130
Garfield Avenue  Both            9th Street        235 feet east of  01-O-34
                                                   12th Street
                 North           3rd Street        4th Street        08-O-21
                 North           7th Street        9th Street        84-O-23
                                 Centerline of     90 feet east and
                 South           east entrance to  90 feet west      93-O-9
                                 O'Brien Stadium   along Grant
                                                   Avenue
                                 Centerline of     90 feet east and
                 South           west entrance to  90 feet west      93-O-9
                                 O'Brien Stadium   along Grant
                                                   Avenue
                                                   A point 700 feet
Grant Avenue     South           4th Street        west of 4th       93-O-9
                                                   Street curb
                                                   intersection
                 South           7th Street        9th Street        68-O-29
                                 99 feet west of   A point 92 feet
                                 the centerline of east of the
                 South           the physical      centerline of the 92-O-9
                                 plant access road physical plant
                                                   access road
                 Both            University Drive  Reynolds Drive    79-O-73
                 Both            9th Street        12th Street       01-O-42
                 Both            12th Street       Its terminus      94-O-41
                 North           75 feet west of   90 feet east of   11-O-42
                                 15th Street       15th Street
                 South           Division Street   11th Street       68-O-29
Harrison Avenue  South           11th Street       675 feet east     11-O-42
                 Both            4th Street        7th Street        68-O-29
                 Both            10th Street       11th Street       78-O-12
                 Both            14th Street       18th Street       68-O-29
Hawthorne Drive  Both            Woodfall Drive    Shawnee Drive     01-O-48
                                 Curb intersection
                 South           of 9th Street for                  85-O-31
Hayes Avenue                     a distance of 130
                                 feet west
                 Both            9th Street        12th Street       01-O-42
                 Both            12th Street       Its terminus      94-O-41
                                 The intersection  The intersection
                                 with the southern with the northern
Illinois Route   Both            corporate         corporate         99-O-8
130                              boundary line to  boundary line to
                                 the city of       the city of
                                 Charleston        Charleston
                                 West curb line of
                 North           6th Street, west                   79-O-81
                                 for a distance of
                                 143.0 feet
Jackson Avenue                   West curb line of
                 North           5th Street, west                   79-O-81
                                 a distance of
                                 36.4 feet
                 Both            Division Street   2nd Street        77-O-18
                                                   9th Street, when
Jefferson Avenue North           7th Street        school is in      68-O-29
                                                   session
                 South           5th Street        7th Street        68-O-29
                 North           7th Street        9th Street        84-O-26
Johnson Avenue   South           18th Street       20th Street       99-O-48
                 Both            9th Street        12th Street       01-O-42
                 Both            12th Street       Its terminus      94-O-41
Kenton Street    South           250 feet from     425 feet from     12-O-38
                                 Reynolds Drive    Reynolds Drive
                                 Commencing at the
                                 west property
                                 line of lots 18
                                 and 19 in block 1
Lake View Drive  North           of the Island                      79-O-6
                                 Tract
                                 Subdivision,
                                 thence east 200
                                 feet
                                 East curb
                                 intersection at
                 North           Division Street,                   85-O-36
                                 east a distance
                                 of 350 feet
                 South           Division Street   1st Street        68-O-29
                                 West corporate
                 Both            limits of the     Division Street   05-O-30
                                 city
                                                   East corporate
                                                   limits of the
                                                   city; except,
Lincoln Avenue                                     that parking
(IL Rt. 16)                                        shall be allowed
                                                   on the south side
                                                   of Lincoln Avenue
                                                   from 15 feet east
                 Both            2nd Street        of the radius of  05-O-30
                                                   the alleyway
                                                   running north
                                                   between 9th
                                                   Street and 10th
                                                   Street easterly
                                                   to 30 feet west
                                                   of Lincoln
                                                   Avenue's radius
                                                   with 10th Street
Madison Avenue                  Its intersection  18th Street       81-O-10
                                 at State Street
McKinley Avenue  Both            18th Street       20th Street       76-O-22
                 Both            20th Street       Easterly terminus 84-O-46
McLeod Avenue    Both            Miller Avenue     310 feet south of 14-O-16
                                                   Miller Avenue
Meadowlake Drive West            Grant Avenue      Ashby Drive       10-O-32
                                 Centerline of
                 North           Monroe Avenue at  West 127 feet - 0 97-O-53
                                 its intersection  inches
Monroe Avenue                    with 5th Street
                                 West edge of
                 North           pavement of 6th   70 feet west      12-O-24
                                 Street
Nursery Road     Both            Recreation Drive  IL 130            2023-O-21
                 See subsection E of this section for parking
Orchard Drive    regulations during major events held at Eastern     13-O-10
                 Illinois University
Pierce Avenue    South           2nd Street        3rd Street        68-O-29
                 Both            B Street          Division Street   68-O-29
Polk Avenue      North           Division Street   4th Street        78-O-10
                South           Division Street   4th Street        68-O-29
                South           Lynn Wood Drive   E Street          01-O-49
                                                                     2022-O-2
                South           7th Street        9th Street        68-O-29
                Both            Division Street   E Street          82-O-27
                Both            4th Street        7th Street        68-O-29
Recreation Drive Both            Community Drive   Nursery Road      2023-O-21
                 East            Eden Drive        277 feet north    14-O-38
                 West            Eden Drive        323 feet north    14-O-38
                                 North curb        North 410 feet -
Reynolds Drive   Both            intersection of   0 inches          99-O-4
                                 Lincoln Avenue
                 Both            West Madison      R.R. Bridge       93-O-9
                                 Avenue
Roosevelt Avenue Both            4th Street        9th Street        91-O-49
Taft Avenue      Both            4th Street        8th Street Circle 79-O-3
                 Both            8th Street Circle 9th Street        68-O-29
Taurus Loop      Inside of loop  Woodfall Drive    Woodfall Drive    12-O-37
Taylor Avenue    North           9th Street        10th Street       73-O-46
                South           9th Street        10th Street       14-O-39
                South           10th Street       11th Street       68-O-29
Teresa Court                                                      79-O-74
Timothy Court                                                     79-O-74
                 South           1st Street        Division Street   87-O-4
                 Both            East edge of 4th  65 feet east      10-O-31
Tyler Avenue                     Street
                 Both            2nd Street        4th Street        11-O-40
                 Both            4th Street        75 feet west      07-O-48
University Drive Both            Lincoln Avenue    Lincoln Highway   77-O-12
                                 south             Road
                 North           5th Street        4th Street        78-O-15
                 South           4th Street        5th Street        68-O-29
                 South           5th Street        6th Street        78-O-9
Van Buren Avenue South           7th Street        8th Street        77-O-19
                 South           9th Street        10th Street       92-O-11
                 Both            4th Street        7th Street        04-O-31
                 Both            18th Street       20th Street       00-O-41
                                                   1,300 feet east
                 North           18th Street       of the            99-O-23
                                                   intersection with
Victoria Lane                                      18th Street
                                                   491 feet east of
                 South           18th Street       the intersection  99-O-23
                                                   with 18th Street
                                 The south edge of 180 feet south of
Village Road     Both            the driving lanes the south edge of 07-O-4
                                 on Woodlawn Drive the driving lanes
                                                   on Woodlawn Drive
Washington       South           5th Street        6th Street        73-O-46
Street
West Madison     North           West State Street Reynolds Drive    93-O-9
Avenue           South           Division Street   F Street          93-O-9
 
West State       Both            E Street          West Madison      93-O-9
Street                                             Avenue
West Vine Avenue Both            East edge of E    208 feet east     10-O-30
                                 Street
Wilson Avenue    Both            8th Street        6th Street        95-O-5
Woodfall Drive   Both            Hawthorne Drive   890 feet east of  08-O-7
                                                   Hawthorne Drive
                 Both            Intersection of   Village Road      68-O-13
Woodlawn Drive                   9th Street
                 Both            Village Road      Salem Road        79-O-4
                 East            Lincoln Avenue    Grant Avenue      07-O-8
                                                   A point 140 feet
                 West            Lincoln Avenue    south of Lincoln  07-O-8
1st Street                                         Avenue
                                 A point 315 feet
                 West            south of Lincoln  Grant Avenue      07-O-8
                                 Avenue
                                                   100 feet north of
                 East            Lincoln Avenue    centerline of     06-O-45
                                                   Pierce Avenue
2nd Street       East            Taylor Avenue     Polk Avenue       16-O-29
                 West            Grant Avenue      Lincoln Avenue    68-O-29
                 West            Monroe Avenue     Jackson Avenue    93-O-9
                 West            Pierce Avenue     Polk Avenue       07-O-55
                 East            Polk Avenue       Tyler Avenue      13-O-28
3rd Street       West            Lincoln Avenue    Taylor Avenue     68-O-29
                 West            Madison Avenue    Adams Avenue      68-O-29
                 Both            Grant Avenue      Lincoln Avenue    92-O-11
                 Both            Lincoln Avenue    Buchanan Avenue   86-O-8
                 West            Madison Avenue    Railroad Avenue   68-O-29
4th Street                                         South city limits
                 Both            Madison Avenue    or on the right   68-O-29
                                                   of way thereof
                 East            Van Buren Avenue  Railroad Avenue   68-O-29
                 West            Jackson Avenue    Van Buren Avenue  78-O-11
                                 North of Madison
                 West            Avenue a distance                  80-O-11
5th Street                       of 180 feet
                 West            Railroad Avenue   Madison Avenue    81-O-42
                 West            Van Buren Avenue  Its dead end at   92-O-11
                                                   Town Branch Creek
                 Both            Jackson Avenue    Madison Avenue    68-O-29
                 East            Lincoln Avenue    120 feet south of 83-O-10
                                                   Van Buren Avenue
                 East            Van Buren Avenue,                  78-O-37
6th Street                       north 37.02 feet
                 West            Van Buren Avenue,                  78-O-37
                                 north 17.00 feet
                 Both (no van or Van Buren Avenue,                  78-O-37
                 truck parking)  north 56.33 feet
                                 Curb intersection
                                 of Lincoln        Lincoln Avenue
                 East            Avenue, north a   north             80-O-29
                                 distance of 253
                                 feet
                                 From a point 208
                 East            feet north of the Lincoln Avenue    93-O-9
                                 centerline of
                                 Grant Avenue
                                                   90 feet south of
                                                   the centerline of
                 East            Harrison Avenue   Harrison Avenue   93-O-37
                                                   at its
7th Street                                         intersection with
                                                   7th Street
                 East            Centerline of     160 feet south    00-O-32
                                 Harrison Avenue
                 East            Madison Avenue    Olive Avenue      00-O-39
                 West            Hayes Avenue      Lincoln Avenue    93-O-9
                 West            Lincoln Avenue    Grant Avenue      91-O-5
                 West            Lincoln Avenue    Harrison Avenue   68-O-29
                                                   A point 260 feet
                 West            Lincoln Avenue    south of Van      83-O-1
                                                   Buren Avenue
                 West            Madison Avenue    Jefferson Avenue  68-O-29
                 Both            220 feet north of Lincoln Avenue    92-O-11
                                 Grant Avenue
                 East            Van Buren Avenue  Harrison Avenue   80-O-52
                 East            Van Buren Avenue  Madison Avenue    68-O-29
                 West            Monroe Avenue     Madison Avenue    84-O-3
8th Street       Both            Jackson Avenue    Monroe Avenue     68-O-29
                                                   Jefferson Avenue
                 Both            Madison Avenue    when school is in 68-O-29
                                                   session
                 Both            Taft Avenue       Wilson Avenue     95-O-5
                                                   A point 1,000
                 East            Lincoln Avenue    feet south of     80-O-49
                                                   Cleveland Avenue
                                                   57 feet north of
                 East            Lincoln Avenue    9th Street's      91-O-59
                                                   intersection with
                                                   Lincoln Avenue
                 East            Madison Avenue    Jefferson Avenue  68-O-29
                 East            Monroe Avenue     Madison Avenue    92-O-11
                                 1,000 feet south
                 East            of intersection   Taft Avenue       91-O-49
                                 with Cleveland
                                 Avenue
                 East            Van Buren Avenue  Jackson Avenue    92-O-11
9th Street                       Woodlawn Avenue,
                 East            north a distance                   82-O-5
                                 of 320 feet
                 West            Garfield Avenue   Taft Avenue       68-O-29
                                                   A point 480 feet
                 West            Lincoln Avenue    south of          77-O-30
                                                   Cleveland Avenue
                 West            Lincoln Avenue,   Its terminus      77-O-30
                                 south
                                 North of Lincoln
                 West            Avenue and south                   74-O-1
                                 of Polk Avenue
                 West            Madison Avenue    Olive Avenue      00-O-53
                 West            Van Buren Avenue  Adams Avenue      68-O-29
                 Both            Lincoln Avenue    Polk Avenue       04-O-1
                 East            Lincoln Avenue    Monroe Avenue     68-O-29
                 East            Locust Avenue     Vine Avenue       78-O-16
                 East            Madison Avenue    Railroad Avenue   68-O-29
                 West            Locust Avenue     Poplar Avenue     78-O-13
10th Street      Both            Lincoln Avenue    Cleveland Avenue  93-O-9
                 Both            Madison Avenue    Jefferson Avenue  92-O-11
                 Both            Madison Avenue    Monroe Avenue     68-O-29
                 Both            Monroe Avenue     Jackson Avenue    80-O-64
                 Both            Olive Avenue      Locust Avenue     78-O-14
                 East            Jefferson Avenue  Adams Avenue      92-O-11
                 East            Monroe Avenue     Jefferson Avenue  68-O-29
                 East            Monroe Avenue     Madison Avenue    92-O-11
                 West            Lincoln Avenue    Monroe Avenue     68-O-29
11th Street      West            Madison Avenue    Jefferson Avenue  87-O-1
                 West            Monroe Avenue     Madison Avenue    84-O-3
                 Both            Elm Avenue        Poplar Avenue     74-O-1
                 Both            Lincoln Avenue    Dead end          01-O-42
                 Both            Monroe Avenue     Jackson Avenue    80-O-64
12th Street      Both            Lincoln Avenue    Cleveland Avenue  01-O-42
13th Street      West            Taylor Avenue     Buchanan Avenue   12-O-28
                                 Entrance of north Main gate
                 East            employee parking  entrance of       95-O-56
                                 lot               trailmobile
14th Street                      Entrance of north Entrance of south
                 West            employee parking  employee parking  95-O-56
                                 lot               lot
                 Both            Lincoln Avenue    Buchanan Avenue   94-O-50
15th Street      Both            Harrison Avenue   Smith Drive       03-O-24
                                 South of Madison
16th Street      East            Avenue and north                   76-O-12
                                 of Monroe Avenue
18th Street      Both            Nursery Road      700' North        2023-O-21
 
   A.   Fine For Violation: The owner or operator of any vehicle which is
parked in violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a
fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within forty eight (48) hours after
said violation has been written, or in the event that said violation is not
paid within forty eight (48) hours of said violation notification, said fine
shall be in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00).
   B.   Payment: The foregoing violation ticket may be paid at the police
department or same deposited in the collection boxes.
   C.   Unpaid Violation Tickets: If said violation ticket is not paid within
ten (10) days of receipt of same, the fine per violation shall be as prescribed
in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   D.   Towing Of Vehicles: In all cases of violation of this section, the
police department and the city reserve the right to have vehicles towed, towing
being without waiver of any remaining penalties for violation of this section.
(Ord. 08-O-9, 4-1-2008)
   E.   Eastern Illinois University Major Events:
      1.   Parking Restrictions: In order to prevent the blocking of the
roadway during major events held at Eastern Illinois University, said "major
events" being defined as commencement ceremonies, home football games, state
high school track meets, and Special Olympics celebrations; no parking will be
permitted on any part of Orchard Drive from Grant Avenue to Johnson Avenue;
Chamberlin Drive (from C Street to University Drive); and C Street (from West
Grant Avenue north to dead end of street); from two (2) hours prior to and two
(2) hours following the scheduled times of said events.
      2.   Violations: The owner or operator of any vehicle parked in violation
of this subsection may be issued a nonmoving violation ticket and, in addition
thereto or in lieu thereof, any vehicle wrongfully parked may be towed at the
owner's/operator's expense. (Ord. 13-O-10, 6-4-2013)
6-2-11: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person or operator to park any vehicle
longer than the following periods of time between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. for all days, except Fridays, which
shall be nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., and except Sundays, New Year's Day,
Decoration Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, on any
of the following streets:
2 HOURS
 
Street                    Side  From           To                    Ordinance
Jackson Avenue (except as
otherwise set forth in    Both  5th Street     8th Street            08-O-6
this code)
                                               The north/south alley
Jefferson Avenue          North 5th Street     running between 5th   08-O-6
                                               Street and 6th Street
Monroe Avenue (except as
otherwise set forth in    Both  5th Street     8th Street            08-O-6
this code)
6th Street (except as
otherwise set forth in    Both  Madison Avenue Van Buren Avenue      08-O-6
this code)
7th Street (except as
otherwise set forth in    Both  Madison Avenue Van Buren Avenue      08-O-6
this code)
 
15 MINUTES
Street Side From To Ordinance
Street         Side  From                    To                       Ordinance
                     A point 43 feet west of A point 56 feet west of
               South the curb intersection   the intersection with    93-O-9
Jackson Avenue       with 7th Street         7th Street
               South 6th Street              West to first alley west 92-O-11
                                             of 6th Street
                                             A point 50 feet west of
Monroe Avenue  North 14th Street             the intersection of 14th 08-O-6
                                             Street
                     A point 141 feet north  A point 161 feet north
3rd Street     East  of its curb             of said curb             91-O-33
                     intersection with       intersection
                     Madison Avenue
                     The curb intersection   A point 38 feet north of
               East  of 6th Street and       the curb intersection of 08-O-6
                     Monroe Avenue           6th Street and Monroe
                                             Avenue
                     Van Buren Avenue south
               East  for a distance of 132                           91-O-33
6th Street           feet
                     A point 72.5 feet north A point 90 feet north of
                     of the curb             the curb intersection of
               West  intersection of Van     Van Buren Avenue and 6th 91-O-33
                     Buren Avenue and 6th    Street
                     Street
               West  Jefferson Avenue        Madison Avenue           91-O-58
               West  Monroe Avenue, north    Alley                    91-O-33
                     A point 10 feet south
                     of centerline of the    A point 35 feet south of
7th Street     West  alley between Jackson   centerline of same alley 07-O-37
                     Avenue and Van Buren
                     Avenue
 
      2.   The following locations will be monitored and enforced daily from
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.:
30 MINUTES
 
Street        Side  Location                            Ordinance
Monroe Avenue South First space east of 7th Street      17-O-12
6th Street    East  First space north of Monroe Avenue  17-O-12
              West  First space south of Jackson Avenue 17-O-12
7th Street    West  First space south of Jackson Avenue 17-O-12
 
   B.   Specific Area Parking Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any
vehicle to be parked for a period in excess of two (2) hours on the following
streets or portions of streets:
 
Street            Side  From              To               Time
Division Street   East  Lincoln Avenue    Pierce Avenue    6:00 A.M. to 10:00
                                                           P.M.
Lincoln Avenue    North 2nd Street        Division Street  6:00 A.M. to 10:00
                                                           P.M.
                                          A point 700 feet
West Hayes Avenue North Intersection with west of the      8:00 A.M. to 4:00
                        University Drive  centerline of    P.M.
                                          University Drive
 
(Ord. 08-O-6, 3-4-2008)
   C.   Parking Prohibited During Certain Times: There shall be no parking on
the following streets in the city during the following times:
2:00 A.M. TO 5:30 A.M.
Street Side From To Ordinance
Street           Side  From           To           Ordinance
Copperfield Lane Both                            08-O-6
Division Street  West  Johnson Avenue Grant Avenue 91-O-33
Fairfield Lane   Both                            08-O-6
Grant Avenue     North 4th Street     3rd Street   92-O-11
Hayes Avenue     North 7th Street     9th Street   91-O-33
Ridgefield Lane  Both                            08-O-6
Stonefield Lane  Both                            08-O-6
Woodfield Lane   Both                            08-O-6
 
7:00 A.M. TO 4:00 P.M.
 
Street            Side  From                  To                    Ordinance
                        Its intersection with 645 feet east of the
West Hayes Avenue North University Drive      University Drive east 89-O-17
                                              right of way line
 
2:00 A.M. TO 4:00 A.M. WEDNESDAYS
 
Street         Side From          To             Ordinance
Jackson Avenue     6th Street    7th Street     98-O-13
Monroe Avenue      6th Street    7th Street     98-O-13
6th Street         Monroe Avenue Jackson Avenue 98-O-13
7th Street         Monroe Avenue Jackson Avenue 98-O-13
 
6:00 A.M. UNTIL 6:00 P.M. MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY
 
Street      Side  From       To           Ordinance
Cedar Drive North 4th Street Its terminus 07-O-13
 
   D.   Temporary Parking Restrictions During Coles County Fair: It shall be
unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or park on the following designated
streets during the period of time that the Coles County Fair is in operation,
said period to commence on the first day of the opening of said fair and
terminating on the closing day of the said Coles County Fair:
 
Street              Side  From                To                 Ordinance
F Street            Both  West Madison Avenue West Monroe Avenue 93-O-9
G Street            Both  West Madison Avenue West Monroe Avenue 93-O-9
                    South F Street            1,000 feet west of 93-O-9
West Madison Avenue                           Reynolds Drive
                    North Reynolds Drive      1,000 feet west of 93-O-9
                                              Reynolds Drive
West Monroe Avenue  Both  F Street            Reynolds Drive     93-O-9
 
   E.   Penalties For Violation:
      1.   The owner or operator of any vehicle which is parked in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of fifteen dollars
($15.00) if paid within forty eight (48) hours after said violation has been
written, or in the event that said violation is not paid within forty eight
(48) hours of said violation notification, said fine shall be in the amount of
twenty dollars ($20.00).
      2.   The foregoing violation ticket may be paid at the police department
or same deposited in the collection boxes.
      3.   If said violation ticket is not paid within ten (10) days of receipt
of same, the fine per violation shall be as prescribed in section
1-4-1 of this code.
      4.   In all cases of violation of this section, the police department and
the city reserve the right to have vehicles towed, towing being without waiver
of any remaining penalties for violation of this section.
(Ord. 08-O-9, 4-1-2008; amd. Ord. 2022-O-38, 11-1-2022)
6-2-12: LOADING ZONES:
During the times specified herein, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a
vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle for a period of time longer than is
necessary for the loading and unloading of passengers, not to exceed three (3)
minutes, and for the driver to stand any freight carrying vehicle for a period
of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials, not to
exceed thirty (30) minutes, in any of the following places:
   A.   In any public alley, during any hour of the day or night.
   B.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
   C.   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M., except on Sundays. (Ord. 61-O-4, 2-8-1961)
   D.   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater from five o'clock (5:
00) P.M. to eleven fifty nine o'clock (11:59) P.M., Monday through Friday and
from one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) P.M., until eleven fifty nine
o'clock (11:59) P.M., on Saturday and Sunday. (Ord. 92-O-24, 9-15-1992, eff.
11-1-1992)
   E.   On the following streets:
 
Street        Side Location                                          Ordinance
Hayes Avenue      A 30 foot portion, commencing 24 feet east of the 89-O-30
                   radius point of 7th Street and Hayes Avenue
                   At a 20 foot portion, commencing 24 feet west of
Monroe Avenue     the curb line of Monroe Avenue and 8th Street and 80-O-59
                   extending westward a distance of 20 feet
6th Street    East From 25 feet south of Jackson Avenue to 50 feet   02-O-19
                   south of Jackson Avenue
 
   F.   It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand, park or load
a vehicle from the following places:
 
Street         Side From          To                              Ordinance
Reynolds Drive East McComb Avenue Warren Avenue when school is in 99-O-4
                                  session
 
(Ord. 2022-O-38, 11-1-2022)
6-2-13: TRUCK PARKING:
   A.   Trucks And Motor Homes: It shall be unlawful to park any truck, pickup
truck with camper top, motor home, van or any truck type vehicle within any
parking space immediately adjacent to any of the following intersections:
Street Intersection With Ordinance
Street     Intersection With                                      Ordinance
5th Street Jackson Avenue - the northwest and southwest corners   90-O-27
6th Street Jackson Avenue                                         76-O-32
          Monroe Avenue                                          76-O-32
          Van Buren Avenue - the northeast and northwest corners 76-O-32
7th Street Jackson Avenue                                         76-O-32
          Monroe Avenue                                          76-O-32
8th Street Jackson Avenue - the northwest and southwest corners   76-O-32
 
   B.   Semitruck Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to park any
semitruck or other truck larger than ten thousand (10,000) pounds' gross
vehicle weight on the following streets:
Alley connecting east end of Miller, Mitchell and McLeod, provided however,
that the weight limit on this roadway shall be 16 tons as prescribed by city
ordinance.
Lincoln Avenue, provided however, that semitruck trailer parking shall be
allowed and authorized on that portion of Lincoln Avenue commencing at the curb
intersection of 2nd Street and traveling westbound until 300 feet east of the
curb intersection with Division Avenue on the north side of the road from 6:00
A.M. to 8:00 P.M. Monday through Friday only except parking on said roadway
shall be prohibited in its entirety on all holidays recognized by the city.
9th Street.
10th Street.
(Ord. 99-O-4, 1-5-1999)
   C.   Semitruck Parking Only: The following streets are hereby designated
"Semitractor Truck Parking Only":
 
Street      Side From             To                         Ordinance
14th Street East Main entrance of Entrance of south employee 95-O-56
                 trailmobile      parking lot
 
6-2-14: PARKING AT INTERSECTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle within fifty feet (50') from the
intersection on the following described streets:
Division Street and Grant Avenue.
1st Street and Grant Avenue.
2nd Street and Grant Avenue.
3rd Street and Grant Avenue.
(Ord. 80-O-16, 5-6-1980)
6-2-15: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 1 :
The following public parking spaces are hereby designated handicapped parking:
 
Street                         Parking Area Designation              Ordinance
                               The first parking space at the
Jackson Avenue                 southeast corner of 6th Street and    82-O-4
                               Jackson Avenue, also identified as
                               parking space 34
Lot G (Carnegie Public Library The 2 east parking spaces located on
parking lot)                   the south side of Van Buren Avenue    88-O-47
                               between 5th Street and 6th Street
Monroe Avenue                  The first space west of 7th Street on 02-O-7
                               the north side of Monroe Avenue
                               The first parking space at the
6th Street                     southwest corner of 6th Street and    82-O-4
                               Monroe Avenue, also identified as
                               parking space 97
7th Street                     The first space north of Jackson      02-O-7
                               Avenue on the east side of 7th Street
 
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 6-3-5 of this title.
6-2-16: VEHICLE WITH TRAILER PARKING ONLY:
The following two (2) public parking spaces are hereby designated for vehicle
with trailer parking only.
The remaining five (5) spaces at this location shall be available for vehicle
parking or vehicle with trailer parking unless there is a special event, such
as a fishing tournament and the spaces are temporarily signed as vehicle with
trailer parking only prior to the special event.
 
Street               From To
Lake Charleston Loop See Exhibit A, attached to Ord. 20-O-3.
 
(Ord. 20-O-3, 2-4-2020)
CHAPTER 3
PARKING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Parking Prohibited In Certain Places
6-3-2: General Parking Restrictions
6-3-3: Commercial Establishment Parking Areas
6-3-4: Truck And Equipment Parking
6-3-5: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
6-3-1: PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES:
It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic signal:
   A.   In any intersection. (Ord. 68-O-29, 11-5-1968)
   B.   In crosswalks, provided however, that if said crosswalk is located
within a designated school zone that said prohibition shall extend to all areas
within said crosswalk and twenty feet (20') to either side of said crosswalk.
(Ord. 12-O-2, 2-21-2012)
   C.   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or the approach thereto.
   D.   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within twenty feet (20')
of a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
   E.   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal or a through street sign
on the approaching side. (Ord. 68-O-29, 11-5-1968)
   F.   Within twenty feet (20') of the radius point at any intersection. (Ord.
94-O-60, 12-20-1994)
   G.   At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable
width of the roadway for moving traffic to less than eighteen feet (18').
   H.   At any curb within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   I.   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
   J.   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing.
   K.   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance.
   L.   On any sidewalk or parkway.
   M.   At any place where official signs prohibit parking. (Ord. 68-O-29, 11-
5-1968)
   N.   On a two-way roadway in any manner other than with the right hand
wheels parallel to and within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb line,
or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right hand shoulder, and
upon a one-way roadway in any manner other than parallel to the curb or edge of
the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with the right
hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the right hand curb line or as close
as practicable to the right edge of the right hand shoulder, or with the left
hand wheels within twelve inches (12") of the left hand curb line or as close
as practicable to the left edge of the left hand shoulder. (Ord. 79-O-72, 11-
20-1979)
6-3-2: GENERAL PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Vehicles For Sale; Sale Of Merchandise From Vehicles: It shall be
unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of displaying it
for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle
merchandise is peddled.
   B.   Street Cleaning: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any public
street or portion thereof in the city at any time when such street is being
cleaned. Signs indicating that a street or portion thereof is being cleaned
shall be posted immediately before the cleaning of the street and shall be
removed after the cleaning of the street is finished. (Ord. 61-O-4, 2-8-1961)
   C.   Snow Emergency 1 :
      1.   Parking Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any
public street within the city at any time during which the mayor, or in his
absence, the chief of police, declares that a snow emergency exists. Such a
snow emergency shall be deemed to exist in the event that streets become
especially dangerous or impassible due to heavy snowfall accumulations and/or
icy conditions.
      2.   Violations: The owner or operator of any vehicle parked in violation
of this subsection may be issued a nonmoving violation ticket and, in addition
thereto or in lieu thereof, any vehicle wrongfully parked may be towed at the
owner's/operator's expense. (Ord. 78-O-46, 10-17-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  6-2-7 of this title for snow removal routes.
6-3-3: COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT PARKING AREAS:
   A.   It is unlawful for anyone to loiter or congregate or park a motor
vehicle or remain in or gather about a parked vehicle in any private parking
lot, driveway or commercial service entrance after being advised by the owner
or party in possession to leave.
   B.   1. No person shall drive a motor vehicle across any sidewalk, driveway
or pedestrian right of way for the purpose of gaining access to any commercial
establishment unless such person or the occupant of such vehicle does so for
the purpose of transacting business on the premises of said establishment. For
the purpose of this section, "the transaction of business" shall mean that one
of the purposes of any such person or occupant of the motor vehicle for
entering shall be with the intent of engaging in a transaction with the
proprietor, his agents or employees of the establishment, which transaction is
normally incidental to the business for which the public is invited and for
which the premises is being operated.
      2.   The driving of a motor vehicle into and out of such premises,
without stopping, in a manner constituting what is commonly called "cruising",
is prohibited.
   C.   No person shall leave any motor vehicle unoccupied on any commercial
parking lot, driveway or commercial service entrance, except during the time
such person is in the commercial establishment, or except with the knowledge
and consent of the operator of such establishment.
   D.   No driver of a motor vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle in
a street at or near the entrance to or exit from, or upon the entryway of any
commercial establishment parking lot, driveway or commercial service entrance
while waiting to enter the premises thereof, or otherwise, except in an
authorized and clearly marked or designated parking space adjacent to the curb
of such street, all within the boundaries of said parking area and in such a
manner as not to interfere with other vehicles upon the street.
   E.   The operator of any commercial establishment who furnishes parking for
patrons may post on the premises in a conspicuous location one or more clearly
legible signs bearing the following legend:
CRUISING IN A VEHICLE THROUGH, OR CONGREGATING AND LINGERING OUTSIDE OF A
VEHICLE ON THESE PREMISES IS UNLAWFUL.
(Ord. 75-O-11, 2-4-1975)
6-3-4: TRUCK AND EQUIPMENT PARKING:
   A.   Trucks And Semitrailers: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
licensed to operate as a tow truck or as a truck-tractor or semitrailer or any
truck with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of twelve thousand one (12,001)
pounds or greater, as defined in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, on any street
located in an area zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3 or on any public right of way that
measures less than forty feet (40') in width unless said vehicle or truck is
actively involved in loading, unloading, making a service call or relocating a
vehicle in the immediate vicinity of where such vehicle is parked.
   B.   Farm Equipment And Trailers: It shall be unlawful to park farm
tractors, implements of husbandry and trailers without motive power that are
drawn by motor vehicles on public streets except during authorized construction
or service activity. (Ord. 99-O-3, 1-5-1999)
6-3-5: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 1 :
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any parking space designated for
handicapped parking, whether in a public parking lot or privately owned parking
lot used by the general public, other than a vehicle bearing registration
plates issued to a physically handicapped person pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-616, or to a disabled veteran pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/3-609 of the Illinois vehicle code, as amended, or any
vehicle bearing a special decal of a handicapped motorist authorized by the
secretary of state pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.2.
(Ord. 82-O-4, 3-2-1982)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 6-2-15 of this title for specific designations.
CHAPTER 4
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Parking Lots Established
6-4-2: General Rules; Authority To Supervise
6-4-3: Effective Hours And Time Limits
6-4-4: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
6-4-5: Reserved Parking Spaces
6-4-6: Proceedings For Violations
6-4-7: Fines And Penalties
6-4-1: PARKING LOTS ESTABLISHED:
A system of municipal parking lots for the city is hereby established. These
lots acquired and/or maintained for the parking of vehicles in and about the
city shall be known by the following designations:
Lot Location
Lot Location
A   400 Monroe Avenue
B   500 Madison Avenue
C   Intentionally left blank
D   500 Jackson Avenue
E   600 Madison Avenue
F   800 Jackson Avenue
G   Intentionally left blank
H   600 Van Buren Avenue
 
Twenty one feet (21') on the north side of Monroe Avenue, approximately one
hundred seven feet (107') east of the centerline of the intersection of 4th
Street and Monroe Avenue. (Ord. 09-O-64, 12-15-2009)
6-4-2: GENERAL RULES; AUTHORITY TO SUPERVISE:
The municipal parking system lots now or hereafter acquired by the city shall
be under the jurisdiction of the city council. The enforcement of rules and
regulations governing the use of said lots shall be the responsibility of the
chief of police. (Ord. 09-O-64, 12-15-2009)
6-4-3: EFFECTIVE HOURS AND TIME LIMITS:
   A.   The parking time limits and charges imposed herein shall be in effect
between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. each
day. There shall be no parking time limits and charges in effect on Sundays or
legal holidays.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any parking lot for a
period of longer than twelve (12) hours in any one day, with the exception of
leased parking spaces which shall have no time limits. (Ord. 09-O-64, 12-15-
2009)
6-4-4: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
The following acts in respect to the driving, operation, control of parking of
any vehicle in any of the city parking lots are forbidden:
   A.   The placement, parking or leaving of any vehicle in any parking space
within the municipal lots beyond a period of two (2) hours unless such parking
space is a leased parking space.
   B.   The placement, parking, leaving or permitting to remain of any vehicle
so that any part of such vehicle occupies more than one parking space or
protrudes beyond the space in which its wheels are located.
   C.   To permit the parking of any vehicle in any designated parking space
other than with the front portion of said vehicle against the curbing.
   D.   The stopping, placing or leaving of any vehicle by anyone other than
the lessee or his authorized agents in any leased space.
   E.   Failure to display a valid parking permit if parked in a leased city
space. (Ord. 09-O-64, 12-15-2009)
6-4-5: RESERVED PARKING SPACES:
   A.   In parking lots A, B, D, E, F, and H, the city shall maintain the right
to designate certain parking areas and spaces as reserved parking. These spaces
shall be leased from the city upon terms and conditions from time to time set
forth by the city council pursuant to resolution. Such reserved spaces shall be
clearly designated as reserved by conspicuous signs or other types of markers.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to place, park or leave any motor vehicle in any
parking space designated as a reserved parking space excepting only the lessee
or his authorized agents.
   C.   The parking spaces reserved in the lots designated in this section,
except reserved parking lots B and F, shall be reserved commencing at six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. and shall continue to be reserved until five o'clock (5:00)
P.M., Monday through Friday. For all other hours, said municipal parking lots
shall be governed by the rules of this chapter and open to the general public.
Parking lots B and F shall be reserved for seven (7) days per week and twenty
four (24) hours per day.
   D.   The owner or operator of any vehicle parked in violation of this
section may be issued a nonmoving violation ticket and, in addition thereto or
in lieu thereof, any vehicle wrongfully parked in a leased or reserved space
may be towed at the owner's/operator's expense. (Ord. 09-O-64, 12-15-2009)
6-4-6: PROCEEDINGS FOR VIOLATIONS:
In all cases of overtime parking violations, either the registered owner or the
operator of such vehicle may be proceeded against by complaint before any judge
entitled to hear misdemeanor city cases, in addition to any other remedy herein
provided. The registered owner of the vehicle, at the time of the violation,
shall be presumed to be a violator as well as the operator thereof, and
complaint proceeded against said registered owner shall be for all overtime
parking violation tickets issued to said registered owner of the vehicle that
have not been paid as prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 09-O-64, 12-15-2009)
6-4-7: FINES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   The owner or operator of any vehicle which is parked in nonreserved
spaces in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a
fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00) if paid within forty eight (48) hours after
said violation has been written, or in the event that said violation is not
paid within forty eight (48) hours of said violation notification, said fine
shall be in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00).
   B.   The owner or operator of any vehicle which is parked in reserved spaces
not leased to that owner or operator in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine of thirty dollars ($30.00) if paid within
forty eight (48) hours after said violation has been written, or in the event
that said violation is not paid within forty eight (48) hours of said violation
notification, said fine shall be in the amount of forty dollars ($40.00).
   C.   If the violation ticket is not paid within ten (10) days of receipt of
same, the fine per violation shall be as prescribed in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 09-O-64, 12-15-2009)
CHAPTER 5
BICYCLES
SECTION:
6-5-1: Traffic Laws Apply
6-5-2: Operation Of Bicycles
6-5-1: TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY:
Bicycles and persons riding them shall be subject to all applicable traffic
laws of the City and the State, including particularly:
   A.   Reasonable speed;
   B.   Proper parking;
   C.   Observing of stop signs;
   D.   Obeying traffic signals, police officers and school patrols;
   E.   Driving on the right side of the street;
   F.   Giving proper hand signals; and
   G.   Not driving recklessly nor weaving in and out of traffic. (Ord. 63-O-
25, 11-27-1963)
6-5-2: OPERATION OF BICYCLES:
Bicycles and persons riding them shall be subject to the following special
regulations:
   A.   No bicycle shall be ridden at any time on a public sidewalk in front of
any place of business or in front of any public building.
   B.   No person of the age of twelve (12) years or older shall ride a bicycle
at any time on a public sidewalk in front of a private residence except those
persons actually delivering messages, mail, newspapers, magazines, advertising
matter or merchandise. (Ord. 63-O-25, 11-27-1963; amd. 1991 Code)
CHAPTER 6
LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLES
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definition Of A Low-Speed Gas Bicycle
6-6-2 Registration; Fees
6-6-3: Application Of Traffic Laws
6-6-4: Penalty; Impoundment
6-6-1: DEFINITION OF A LOW-SPEED GAS BICYCLE:
A 2 or 3-wheeled device with fully operable pedals and a gasoline motor of less
than one horsepower, whose maximum speed on a paved level surface, when powered
solely by such a motor while ridden by an operator who weighs 170 pounds, is
less than 20 miles per hour.
(Ord. 2022-O-36, 10-4-2022)
6-6-2: REGISTRATION; FEES:
A.   Commencing November 1, 2022, any resident within the City owning and
operating a low-speed gas bicycle within the City shall register the same with
the Police Department. The owner shall furnish the Police Department with his
or her name and address, the make and serial number of the low-speed gas
bicycle, and any other information as the Police Department may require.
B.   Such registration shall be made to the Chief of Police upon a form
provided by the Chief of Police. Upon receipt of such application, the Chief of
Police shall provide, at the expense of the city, a tag he shall cause to be
firmly attached to the frame of the bicycle in such a manner as the Chief of
Police shall prescribe. The removal of any such tag, except by proper
authority, shall be a violation of this section.
C.   The owner shall pay an annual registration fee for any low-speed gas
bicycle of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be due at the time of
registration. Any such registration payment made on or after commencement date
November 1, 2022, shall make the registration valid until December 31, 2023, at
which time the owner's annual registration form and fee shall again be due and
payable. Commencing January 1, 2024, annual registration forms and fees are due
on January 1st and expire on December 31st of each calendar year. All such
registration fee payments shall be made at the Charleston Water Department.
D.   The Chief of Police, or any official he or she shall designate, shall have
authority to inspect all low-speed gas bicycles for mechanical fitness, and may
refuse to grant or may revoke the registration of any low-speed gas bicycle
deemed to be in unsafe mechanical condition.
E.   Any person who fails to register their low-speed gas bicycle and to pay
the registration fee within the time frame required by this Chapter shall be
assessed a late fee of ten dollars ($10.00), which shall be due in addition to
the registration fee set forth herein and in addition to any penalty provided
for in Section 4 of this Chapter.
F.   It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of
any low-speed gas bicycle to report within five days of the date of such sale
or transfer to the Chief of Police, the name and address of the person to whom
the bicycle was sold or transferred. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or
transferee of such low-speed gas bicycle to apply for a transfer of the
registration thereof within five days of the sale or transfer.
(Ord. 2022-O-36, 10-4-2022)
6-6-3: APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC LAWS:
Every person riding a low-speed gas bicycle upon a roadway within the City
shall be subject to all of the provisions of this Title, as well as the laws of
this State and the Charleston City Code applicable to low-speed gas bicycles.
(Ord. 2022-O-36, 10-4-2022)
6-6-4: PENALTY; IMPOUNDMENT:
A.   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of any of the provisions of
this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of no less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such
violation. Every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate
offense.
B.   Impoundment. In addition to fines as set forth in subsection
6-6-4(A), any person who has been issued a citation for the same offense under
this Article within a twelve month period of time shall, at the time of
issuance of the second such citation for the same offense, be required to
surrender the low-speed gas bicycle to the police officer or other authorized
officer of the City who issues the citation. The surrendered low-speed gas
bicycle shall be impounded and held by the Police Department and shall be
returned to the owner only after one of the following conditions is met:
   1.   The person to whom the citation was issued has paid all outstanding
fines or registration fees related to both citations as well as an
administrative fee to the City for impoundment in the amount of $150.00.
   2.   The person to whom the citation was issued has presented to the Police
Department proof that a determination of not guilty was entered by the City
Hearing Officer for the second cited offense which resulted in the impoundment
of the low-speed gas bicycle.
C.   Failure to Retrieve Impounded Bicycle.
   1.   If a low-speed gas bicycle impounded pursuant to this Chapter is not
retrieved from the Police Department within thirty-five (35) days after the
entry of a determination of liability or non-liability by the hearing officer
with regard to the citation resulting in impoundment of the low-speed gas
bicycle, the Chief of Police shall send written notice to the owner thereof
that the low-speed gas bicycle will be deemed abandoned and disposed of by the
Police Department if it is not retrieved by the owner within thirty (30) days
of the date of said notice.
   2.   If the low-speed gas bicycle remains unclaimed thirty (30) days after
the provision of a notice as described in subsection
6-6-4(C)(1), the Police Department may dispose of said low-speed gas bicycle as
it sees fit.
   3.   Any payment received by the Police Department in exchange for the low-
speed gas bicycle will be applied to any fines and fees owed by the owner from
whom it was impounded.
(Ord. 2022-O-36, 10-4-2022)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
7-1-1: Encroachments
7-1-2: Sidewalk Access Ramps For Persons With Disabilities
7-1-3: Requirement Of Permit To Work On City Right Of Way
7-1-1: ENCROACHMENTS:
   A.   Definitions:
    CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA: That area lying between the project right of
way limits and the platted street limits within which the city, by concurrence
and the establishment of the project right of way lines, will permit the state
or other governmental entity or contractor to enter to perform all necessary
construction operations and shall specifically include "project right of way"
which is defined as those areas within the project right of way lines
established jointly by the city and state and the federal highway
administration which will be free of encroachments except as defined herein.
   ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign (permanent or temporary), or any
other structure or object of any kind (with the exception of utilities and
public road signs), which is placed, located or maintained in, on, under, or
over any portion of the right of way.
   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT: Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign, or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to
the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway; the permissible retention of overhanging signs is not to be
construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed
outside the right of way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
   RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by fee
simple for highway or roadway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary
easement during the time of the easement.
   B.   Encroachments Prohibited; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this section for any person to erect or cause to be erected, to
retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment, except a "permissible
encroachment", as defined in subsection A of this section, on rights of way
located within the corporate limits of the city.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be
punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-O-10, 2-2-1999)
7-1-2: SIDEWALK ACCESS RAMPS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   When vehicular traffic turning movements are in the direction of the
applicable corner, sidewalk access ramps shall be constructed in accordance
with standard 2356 of the Illinois department of transportation publication
"Highway Standards", as amended, three (3) copies of which said standards have
been, for more than thirty (30) days prior to the adoption of the ordinance
imposing the requirement of this section, and remain, on file and available for
public inspection in the office of the city clerk.
   B.   When vehicular traffic turning movements are not in the direction of
the applicable corner, standard 2566, type B ramp, of the Illinois department
of transportation publication, "Highway Standards", as amended, three (3)
copies of which said standards have been, for more than thirty (30) days prior
to the adoption of the ordinance imposing the requirement of this section, and
remain, on file and available for public inspection in the office of the city
clerk, may be modified such that the entire curb area along the street or
roadway and within or along the ramp proper may be eliminated in part or in
whole. (Ord. 79-O-76, 11-20-1979)
7-1-3: REQUIREMENT OF PERMIT TO WORK ON CITY RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Prior to any individual or entity other than the city of Charleston, or
its agents, performing any work upon city right of way, said individual or
entity must first obtain an application and receive permission by the city of
Charleston to perform such work on city right of way.
   B.   The application shall be maintained by the director of public works and
shall require such information as said office deems necessary.
   C.   Any individual desiring to obtain a permit to work on city right of way
must apply for said permit and receive written notification to proceed at least
forty eight (48) hours prior to commencing said project. Said project must be
completed within thirty (30) days of the date said permit is approved. Prior to
obtaining a permit to work on city right of way, the applicant must meet the
following criteria:
      1.   The applicant represents all parties in interest and shall furnish
material, do all work, pay all costs, and shall in a reasonable length of time
restore the damaged portions of right of way to a condition similar or equal to
that existing before the commencement of the described work, including any
seeding or sodding necessary.
      2.   The proposed work shall be located and constructed to the
satisfaction of the director of public works, plumbing inspector or their duly
authorized representative. No revisions or additions shall be made to the
proposed work on the right of way without the written permission of the
director of public works, plumbing inspector or their duly authorized
representative.
      3.   The applicant shall at all times conduct the work in such a manner
as to minimize hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Traffic controls
and work site protection shall be in accordance with the applicable
requirements of Illinois department of transportation standards for traffic
control and the "Manual Of Uniform Traffic Control Devices". All signs,
barricades, flaggers, etc., required for traffic control shall be furnished by
the applicant. The work may be done on any day except Sunday, and all scheduled
holidays of the city of Charleston as posted and published on an annual basis.
Work shall be done only during daylight hours.
      4.   The work performed by the applicant shall be for the bona fide
purpose expressed and not for the purpose of, nor shall it result in, the
parking or servicing of vehicles on the city right of way. Signs located on or
overhanging the right of way shall be prohibited.
      5.   The applicant, his successors or assigns, agrees to hold harmless
the city of Charleston and its duly appointed agents and employees against any
action for personal injury or property damage sustained by reason of the
exercise of this permit. All work performed on city right of way shall comply
with minimum OSHA standards for work safety.
      6.   The applicant shall not trim, cut or in any way disturb any trees or
shrubbery along the city right of way without the approval of the director of
public works or his duly authorized representative.
      7.   The permit applicant or owner of the improvement on city right of
way shall be responsible for the maintenance of the improvement on city right
of way. The city of Charleston reserves the right to make such changes,
additions, repairs and relocations within its statutory limits to the
facilities constructed under this permit or any such appurtenances to said
facilities on the right of way as may at any time be considered necessary to
permit the relocation, reconstruction, widening or maintaining of the city
right of way and/or provide proper protection to life and property on or
adjacent to the city right of way.
In the event this permit is granted to construct, locate, operate and/or
maintain utility facilities on the city right of way, the applicant, upon
written request by the city of Charleston, shall perform such alterations or
change of location of said facilities, without expense to the city of
Charleston. Should the applicant fail to make satisfactory arrangements to
comply with this request within a reasonable time, the city reserves the right
to make such alterations, to change the location, or to remove the work, and
the applicant agrees to pay for the cost incurred.
      8.   This permit is effective only if the city of Charleston has
jurisdiction and does not presume to release the applicant from compliance with
the provisions of any existing statutes or local regulations relating to the
construction of such work.
      9.   The construction of access driveways is subject to approval of the
street superintendent, the regulations listed in this code, and the "Policy On
Permits For Access Driveways To State Highways". Any reference to the state of
Illinois or Illinois department of transportation in this document shall be
interpreted to reference the city of Charleston. Any deviation from this
document shall be obtained in writing from the street superintendent or the
director of public works prior to implementation. If, in the future, the land
use of property served by an access driveway described and constructed in
accordance with this permit changes so as to require a higher driveway type as
defined in that policy or by this code, the owner shall apply for a new permit
and bear the costs for such revisions as may be required to conform to the
regulations specified in these documents.
      10.   Utility installations shall be subject to approval of the utility
superintendent, plumbing inspector, or director of public works and shall
conform to this code and the "Policy On The Accommodation Of Utilities On Right
Of Way Of The Illinois State Highway System". Any reference to the state of
Illinois or Illinois department of transportation in this document shall be
interpreted to reference the city of Charleston. Any deviation from these
documents shall be obtained in writing from the utility superintendent,
plumbing inspector, or director of public works prior to implementation.
      11.   The applicant affirms that the property lines shown on the attached
sheet(s) are true and correct and is bound and obligated to perform the
operation in accordance with the description and attached sketch and to abide
by the policy regulations.
      12.   After obtaining a permit to work on city right of way, the
applicant shall notify the city of Charleston a minimum of forty eight (48)
hours in advance of doing work on city right of way.
      13.   A blanket permit to cover all permit work on city right of way for
a period of one year is available. The permit format and requirements are the
same except the permit period will be for one year.
      14.   Prior to performing any work on city right of way, if the applicant
proposes to cut or damage the pavement, the applicant shall file a copy of a
surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit naming the city of Charleston as
the sole beneficiary in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for
each work location permitted by the city of Charleston. Surety shall remain in
place for a period of one year after the inspection and approval of the work on
city right of way.
      15.   A fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) or larger surety bond may be
required for a three (3) year period for any utility company or contractor if
determined to be necessary by the Director of Public Works.
      16.   A contractor may also provide a blanket bond good for a period of
one calendar year from January 1 through December 31 of each year for the
amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). This document shall be kept on
file by the inspection department and all bonds shall be held for a period of
one year after the work covered by the bond is complete and approved by city
personnel.
      17.   Once the appropriate blanket permit and bond are on file with the
city, notification of work and location may be made in writing or via e-mail to
the inspections department of the city of Charleston. The e-mail notification
shall be directed to cityhall@co.coles.il.us; however, no work on city right of
way shall begin until approval to begin is granted by the city's inspection
department or the director of public works and all other specifications of this
construction permit shall apply.
      18.   All work on city right of way shall comply with the preparation and
backfill requirements in subsection D of this section.
   D.   The following preparation and backfill requirements shall exist:
      1.   All pavement, curbing or sidewalks shall be saw cut in a uniform
manner.
      2.   If water or sewer pipe is undercut it must have a granular backfill
FA-06 or similar gradation compacted beneath the pipe. Granular backfill shall
be defined as FA-06 or similar gradation.
      3.   The existing pipe must be covered by at least six inches (6") of
granular backfill. The contractor shall not place backfill until a
representative of the city has inspected the trench and the work that was done
under the permit.
      4.   The remaining portion of the backfill for areas in the roadway
(street, sidewalk, or alley) and two feet (2') beyond the improved roadway
shall be compacted trench backfill material, in accordance with section 208 of
the current edition of the "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction", or a nonair entrained controlled low strength material (commonly
known as flowable fill). The trench backfill material shall be brought up to
the top of subgrade, which is to the bottom of the existing street surface, in
accordance with section 550.07 of the current edition of the "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction".
Excavations on city right of way not under the roadway shall be backfilled with
suitable material, which was excavated from the trench.
      5.   The remaining portion of the excavation, from the top of the
subgrade to the finished surface shall be replaced with at least the same
pavement cross section as the adjacent pavement, which was not disturbed. All
materials incorporated into the replaced pavement structure shall be IDOT
approved materials and mix designs.
      6.   Sidewalk areas shall be backfilled with trench backfill up to four
inches (4") below existing finished grade, and the sidewalk replaced using an
IDOT approved concrete mix design. If sidewalk is in an ingress or egress area,
the concrete thickness shall be six inches (6") instead of four inches (4").
      7.   During normal hours of operation, city personnel may be contacted at
217-345-5650.
      8.   Any emergency excavation on any public right of way or on days when
city forces do not normally work shall be reported to the city by calling the
water treatment plant at 217-345-2977. (Ord. 07-O-25, 5-1-2007; amd. Ord. 2022-
O-24, 6-7-2022)
CHAPTER 2
MUNICIPAL PARKS
SECTION:
7-2-1: Hours
7-2-2: Vehicle Operation
7-2-3: Prohibited Lighting
7-2-1: HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized personnel, to use,
or to otherwise be located within any city property utilized as a municipal
park, other than between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. (Ord. 89-O-24, 10-17-1989)
7-2-2: VEHICLE OPERATION:
Motor vehicles may travel on designated public roadways only in any property
owned by the city and/or used as a municipal park. Off road travel and use of
park trails or other grounds by motorcycles, four (4) wheel drive vehicles or
other types of motorized vehicles, other than by authorized personnel, is
prohibited. (Ord. 89-O-24, 10-17-1989)
7-2-3: PROHIBITED LIGHTING:
   A.   Definitions:
    ATHLETIC FIELD LIGHT: Athletic field light shall include any and all
lighting devices designed for the purpose of illuminating an athletic field so
as to project light and allow athletic competition in the evening hours.
   MUNICIPAL PARK: Includes Kiwanis park, Sister City park, Heritage Woods
park, Lafferty park, Lakeview park, Riverside park, North park, Reasor park,
Hall park, Messick park, VFW park and any other real estate acquired by the
city and utilized as a city park with the exception of the Lake Island tract
area.
   STREETLAMP: Streetlamp shall be defined as a lighting device which stands no
greater than fifteen feet (15') off the ground and projects a light no greater
than thirty feet (30') in diameter and shall specifically exclude any lighting
devices utilized for the purposes of illuminating athletic fields.
   B.   Prohibited Lighting In Certain Parks: There shall exist no athletic
field lighting in Kiwanis park, Sister City park or Heritage Woods park. (Ord.
92-O-37, 12-15-1992)
CHAPTER 3
LIBRARY
SECTION:
7-3-1: Library Established
7-3-2: Library Officers
7-3-3: Management
7-3-1: LIBRARY ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established within and for the city a public library and
reading room. (Ch. 56 R.O. 1902; amd. Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
7-3-2: LIBRARY OFFICERS:
The officers of said library shall be nine (9) directors to be appointed by the
mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the city council. The directors
shall serve three (3) year staggered terms and have such powers and duties as
provided by statute. (Ch. 56 R.O. 1902; amd. 1991 Code; Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-
1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
7-3-3: MANAGEMENT:
The entire management and control of the library shall be under the direction
of the directors. (Ch. 56 R.O. 1902; amd. Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-
1997)
CHAPTER 4
LAKE CHARLESTON
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Prohibited Uses, Acts And Conditions
7-4-3: Restricted Uses And Conditions
7-4-4: Swimming, Bathing And Wading
7-4-5: Proper Conduct Required
7-4-6: Revocation Of Permits And Licenses
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
CITY: The city of Charleston, Coles County, Illinois.
CUSTODIAN: Refers to any lessee of land owned by the city within the vicinity
of Lake Charleston.
DRAINAGE AREA: That entire area of land and water that drains into Lake
Charleston from the Embarras River and its tributaries upstream of Riverview
Dam.
LAKE CHARLESTON: Both the lower reservoir and the side channel reservoir
including all dams, dikes and appurtenances related to the formation of said
reservoirs.
LOWER RESERVOIR: The artificial lake and water impounded therein by means of
the Riverview Dam, commonly known as the "spillway", located across the
Embarras River.
MARGINAL LAND: The land owned or controlled by the city adjacent to the
shoreline of Lake Charleston.
SIDE CHANNEL RESERVOIR: The artificial lake and water impounded therein by
means of dike construction in a general north-south alignment across the lake
bed of Lake Charleston.
WAKE: A disturbance of water caused by a boat propelled by an internal
combustion engine in excess of five (5) miles per hour. (Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-
1982)
7-4-2: PROHIBITED USES, ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Pollution Of Waters:
      1.   No person shall, within any part of the drainage area, place, throw,
discharge, or cause to be discharged, any sewage; garbage; decayed or fermented
fruit or vegetable; offal; dead body; manure; polluted, filthy, decaying,
fermenting, putrescible or oily matter; or liquid or industrial waste, into or
so as to reach any natural or artificial watercourse or open or covered sewer,
ditch, tile or drain flowing directly or indirectly or intermittently into and
so as to pollute or tend to pollute the reservoir or other waters from which
the city obtains a water supply.
      2.   No person shall construct in the drainage area any open or covered
sewer, ditch, tile or drain, or make any change therein or connection therewith
so as to cause any pollution or polluted or oily water to flow into or reach
more quickly said reservoir or water supply of the city; nor shall any person
within the drainage area construct or cause to be constructed or use any
toilet, water closet, sink, cesspool, privy, garage, slaughterhouse or other
structure, establishment or place, which is so situated that polluted or oily
liquid therefrom may continuously or intermittently so flow as to ultimately
reach and pollute or tend to pollute the waters of said reservoir or other
waters from which the city obtains or may obtain a water supply unless there is
constructed, maintained and operated such sewage treatment and disposal units
and facilities for the treatment or disposal thereof, approved by the city or
an authorized county or state agency, whereby such polluted or oily liquid is
treated, or caused to be treated, so as not to pollute or tend to pollute or
threaten pollution of the waters of said reservoir or water supply of the city.
(Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-1982)
   B.   Disposal Of Wastes And Fertilizers: No house slop; sink waste; fruit or
vegetable refuse; offal; swill; carcass; filthy, decaying, fermenting or
putrescible matter of any kind; or unsanitary waste product, or polluted or
oily liquid or solid shall be thrown into the reservoir or placed, piled or
discharged in any manner in the drainage area, but shall be removed from the
drainage area. Manure and commercial fertilizer shall be placed, spread or used
on or in the drainage area in such quantities or in such a manner as to cause
no pollution to the reservoir nor any public or private nuisance. (Ord. 82-O-7,
4-20-1982; amd. Ord. 90-O-24, 7-17-1990)
   C.   Interment: No interment of human or animal bodies shall be made in the
drainage area.
   D.   Keeping Livestock: No livestock or poultry shall be kept on marginal
land or other portion of the drainage area owned by the city except as may be
expressly authorized by the city by lease. No animal or poultry shall be
allowed to stand, wallow, or swim or be washed or watered in the reservoir.
   E.   Damage To Side Channel Reservoir Dike: It shall be unlawful to drive
any wooden, metal, plastic or any other kind of stake, pole, form or other
penetrating instrument in any portion of the side channel reservoir dike, or
within one hundred feet (100') of said dike.
   F.   Injury To Property: No person shall wilfully, maliciously or
negligently remove, injure, damage or deface any property, real or personal,
within the drainage area, which is owned by or under the control of the city.
   G.   Trespass: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized
personnel, to climb, walk, sit or trespass in any manner on the city raw water
intake structure or the water discharge structure of the side channel
reservoir.
   H.   Billposting: The erection or maintenance of any sign or billposter, the
posting or placing of any advertising poster, placard, or card or the
distribution of any advertising matter by handbills or otherwise is hereby
prohibited in the lake area on public property. (Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-1982)
7-4-3: RESTRICTED USES AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Boating:
      1.   Internal combustion engines may be operated within the area of Lake
Charleston herein described as the side channel reservoir; provided, that no
wake is created at any time during the operation of such engines.
      2.   Rowboats, paddleboats, sailboats, canoes, rafts, and other such hand
or wind propelled craft may be operated within the side channel reservoir.
      3.   Electric trolling motors may be operated within the side channel
reservoir, provided such motors are powered by a maximum of twenty four (24)
volt batteries.
      4.   Watercraft propelled by internal combustion engines may be used
within the lower reservoir of Lake Charleston. (Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-1982)
      5.   Racing by boats propelled by internal combustion engines or motors
in any part of Lake Charleston is prohibited, except with written authority of
the city manager. (Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-1982; amd. Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff.
5-6-1997)
      6.   All boats and craft shall be subject to all boating rules and
regulations of the state.
      7.   No boat or craft shall be operated in any manner which would tend to
endanger the life or safety of any person who may be boating or swimming upon
the waters of the reservoir. No boat or craft shall be operated at a speed
greater than is safe and prudent under the circumstances.
      8.   No boat or craft shall enter any area which may be set off and
designated by the city as a bathing area.
      9.   No boat or craft of any kind or character shall be used, propelled
or operated on the reservoir unless it carries for each occupant an adequate
life preserver in good condition especially designated for that purpose and
approved for such use by the state.
      10.   Every motor craft shall carry the following lights from sunset to
sunrise:
         a.   A bright, white light aft to show all around the horizon; and
         b.   A combined lantern in the forepart of the boat lower than the
white light aft, showing green to starboard and red to port, so fixed as to
throw the light from right ahead to two (2) points abaft the beam on their
respective sides; and
         c.   Rafts, towboats, skiffs, dinghies, sailboats and canoes, when
underway or when anchored more than one hundred feet (100') from shore, shall
carry a white light visible all around the horizon from sunset to sunrise.
      11.   The business of renting boats for hire or carrying passengers for
hire on the reservoir is prohibited except as may be authorized by special
concession by the City.
      12.   No boat or craft shall be used or operated, nor any horn or sound
device sounded so as to create a nuisance, or disturb the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood within the drainage areas.
      13.   No boat or craft shall be operated within a distance of one hundred
feet (100') of the reservoir spillway, located in the southeast section of Lake
Charleston.
      14.   The City shall at all times have the power and authority to
prohibit, restrict or otherwise limit or regulate the keeping, maintenance or
operation of any or all boats and craft on the waters of the reservoir should
it become necessary to do so in the interest of the reservoir or other cause.
      15.   Any boat or craft found abandoned or adrift in the reservoir or any
unlicensed boat or craft thereon shall be taken up by the City, and the City
shall have a lien thereon for the expenses of taking, towing, keeping,
advertising, and selling of the same, and for all damages caused by such craft
to property of the City, and may enforce such lien by advertisement and sale of
such craft in like manner as chattel mortgages may be foreclosed under the laws
of this State. Nothing herein shall be construed as exonerating the owner or
operator of any boat or craft from personal injury caused by such boat or
craft. (Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-1982)
      16.   A sign setting forth the size, quantities and species of fish that
may be taken, and setting forth the wake policy, shall be erected at the boat
launch, dike and pump house road. (Ord. 89-O-3, 2-7-1989)
      17.   All boats shall travel in a counterclockwise direction around the
lower reservoir.
      18.   Rowboats have the right-of-way over sailboats.
      19.   Rowboats and sailboats have the right-of-way over motorboats.
      20.   No powerboat or sailboat shall be operated by a person under twelve
(12) years of age unless accompanied by an adult in the boat.
      21.   No craft or person shall collide with, run against, strike, injure,
deface, damage or move any buoy or any other City property on the lake.
      22.   Boat docks provided by the City adjacent to boat launching ramps
are hereby designated courtesy docks. Boats may be docked at courtesy docks for
periods not exceeding two (2) consecutive hours. Boats docked longer than two
(2) hours at courtesy docks shall be considered abandoned and may be removed by
the City in accordance with subsection A15 of this section. Boats docked at
courtesy docks shall be docked so as not to interfere with the launching and
removal of boats. (Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-1982)
   B.   Fishing And Hunting:
      1.   Fishing: Fishing in Lake Charleston, the side channel reservoir, the
lower reservoir, and water controlled by the City below the said reservoir
shall be in compliance and consistent with the rules and regulations of the
Illinois Department of Natural Resources and the laws of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 18-O-18, 6-19-2018)
      2.   Hunting: Hunting on Lake Charleston is hereby prohibited except for
the hunting of waterfowl in season in that portion of Lake Charleston north of
that portion of the lake called "the island". The privilege of hunting on the
reservoir or any part thereof may be suspended by the City, with proper notice,
whenever such suspension shall be deemed proper to conserve wildlife or to
prevent any tendency to pollute the waters of the reservoir or to promote the
improvement or convenience, maintenance or control thereof.
      3.   Duck Blinds: Floating duck blinds are permitted on any portion of
Lake Charleston, provided said blinds are licensed by the City. A fee of fifty
cents ($0.50) per year shall be charged for said license. The license furnished
by the City shall be displayed in a conspicuous place upon the floating duck
blind. Said duck blinds may only be anchored by weights or marine anchors.
Stakes and other such means of anchorage are prohibited. Platform duck blinds
of any type are prohibited in any portion of Lake Charleston. The provisions of
this subsection B3 do not apply during such time as a duck hunting lease of
Lake Charleston is in effect.
   C.   Picnicking And Camping: Any person using the drainage area for
picnicking, camping or other recreational purposes shall keep the premises neat
and clean, pick up and remove in a sanitary manner all paper, garbage, rubbish
and debris and, before leaving the premises, put out any fire made by said
person.
   D.   Business Establishments: Unless duly authorized in writing by the City,
no person shall maintain or operate any garage, restaurant, confectionery,
refreshment parlor, dance hall, hotel, inn or place of amusement for hire, or
store or stand for the sale of merchandise. Any license issued therefor by the
City shall be kept conspicuously posted in such place of business or
establishment.
   E.   Vehicular Traffic: Motor vehicles may travel on designated public roads
at Lake Charleston and Lakeview parks. Off road travel and use of park trails
by motorcycle, four (4) wheel drive vehicles or other types of motorized
vehicles is prohibited. Motor vehicles, other than City maintenance vehicles,
are prohibited on the side channel reservoir dike.
   F.   Buildings And Structures: No building or other structures, whether for
habitation or otherwise, including any dock, wharf, boathouse, or anchored or
stationary raft, shall be constructed, altered or maintained within the limits
of the lake area or marginal land. Owners of private land or leased land
adjacent to Lake Charleston may construct a dock, boathouse or similar
structure between their land and Lake Charleston, provided an application is
submitted to the building official setting forth the type of construction and
specifications and said application is approved in writing by the building
official. (Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-1982)
7-4-4: SWIMMING, BATHING AND WADING:
   A.   Swimming and wading shall be permitted in the reservoir only in buoyed
areas officially designated by the City as swimming areas. Swimming and wading
shall be lawful only when a lifeguard, hired by the City, is on duty at the
swimming area.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to walk, wade, slide or to sit on the spillway of
the dam.
   C.   No person having any communicable disease or skin infection shall swim,
bathe or wade in the reservoir.
   D.   All persons using the reservoir for swimming, bathing or wading
purposes shall use the same so as not to create any unsanitary condition in or
about the reservoir, and so as not to pollute the waters thereof, or make such
waters unwholesome or unfit for water supply purposes or injurious to the
aquatic life thereof.
   E.   The City shall, at all times, have the power and authority to prohibit
swimming, bathing or wading in the waters of the reservoir for the purpose of
preventing any pollution of, or other injury to, the reservoir or to suppress
or prevent disease or other damage to public health or human life. (Ord. 82-O-
7, 4-20-1982)
7-4-5: PROPER CONDUCT REQUIRED:
The provisions of this Code defining and establishing penalties for disorderly
conduct, breach of the peace and intoxication shall be in effect throughout the
lake area. (Ord. 82-O-7, 4-20-1982)
7-4-6: REVOCATION OF PERMITS AND LICENSES:
All permits or licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter, whether or
not they are issued for a consideration, shall be subject to revocation by the
City whenever the license holder or any permittee in any way violates or
permits the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 82-O-7,
4-20-1982)
CHAPTER 5
MOVING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
7-5-1: Permit Required
7-5-2: Bond And Insurance Required
7-5-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall move any dwelling, house, or other building over, along or upon
any street without first having obtained permission from the building official
and received instructions from the building official over what streets and in
what manner the same may be moved. (Ord., 12-21-1911)
7-5-2: BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall begin the moving of buildings referred to in section
7-5-1 of this chapter until bond shall have been given to the city in the sum
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) provisioned for the careful handling of said
buildings while in transit, and to indemnify against any damage which may
result from the moving of said buildings, and at the same time furnish to the
city proof that such person has in full force and effect liability and property
damage insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
for injuries suffered by any one person, and three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00) for injuries suffered by more than one person, and property
damage in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Before the work
referred to herein may be entered upon, said bond and insurance coverage must
have been examined and approved by the mayor and city attorney and have been
filed in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 65-O-35, 10-19-1965)
CHAPTER 6
CONSTRUCTION OF WIRELESS PROVIDER OR UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-
OF-WAY
SECTION:
7-6-1: Purpose And Scope
7-6-2: Definitions
7-6-3: Annual Registration Required
7-6-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
7-6-5: Action On Permit Applications
7-6-6: Effect Of Permit
7-6-7: Revised Permit Drawings
7-6-8: Insurance
7-6-9: Indemnification
7-6-10: Security
7-6-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
7-6-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
7-6-13: General Construction Standards
7-6-14: Public Safety And Traffic Control
7-6-15: Location Of Facilities
7-6-16: Construction Methods And Materials
7-6-17: Design And Appearance Standards
7-6-18: Vegetation Control
7-6-19: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Facilities
7-6-20: Cleanup And Restoration
7-6-21: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
7-6-22: Variances
7-6-23: Penalties
7-6-24: Enforcement
7-6-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the City's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the City
rights-of-way and the City as a whole. This chapter and its provisions are
applicable to all wireless providers, public utilities, private contractors,
owners and occupiers of land, and any individual or entity constructing
facilities on public rights-of-way within the City's jurisdiction.
   B.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the City. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the wireless provider or utility as
presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise provided in any
applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
   C.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The City, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require wireless providers or utilities
to enter into a franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of
locating their facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within the City rights-of-way. Utilities or wireless providers that are not
required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that the City enter
into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the City may provide for terms
and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
   D.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the City, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the City and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   E.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   F.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider or utility shall comply with the requirements of
this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State
laws or regulations.
   G.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The City shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may exercise the power described
in section
7-6-22 of this chapter to vary the standards, conditions, and requirements
expressed in this chapter when the City so determines. Nothing herein shall be
construed to limit the ability of the City to regulate its rights-of-way for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-
2018)
7-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of any type of wireless
communications services.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CITY: The City of Charleston.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The Municipal Code of the City of Charleston.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of- way lines of a
right-of-way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The City Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right- of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, small wireless facilities, as defined in this chapter,
and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the
term "facility" shall not include any facility owned or operated by the City.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as a monopole, utility pole, antenna, transformer, pump, or
meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
City Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the
life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of
the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the City
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more wireless providers or utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
MONOPOLE: A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and
principally used to support antennas or related equipment and that is not a
utility pole.
MUNICIPALLY-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE: Infrastructure in the public right-of-way
within the boundaries of the City, including, but not limited to, streetlights,
traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or maintained
by the City.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of- way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right-of-way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
7-6-4 and
7-6-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the City. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, State or Federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements,
in which the City has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit
the location of facilities other than those of the City. "Right-of-way" or
"rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal City property that is
not specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not
include City buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements,
regardless of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
7-6-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as defined in the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the City
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility that is not
a small wireless facility as defined in this chapter.
UTILITY POLE: An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables,
telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which are
used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
"Wireless facility" includes small wireless facilities. "Wireless facility"
does not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which
the equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or
fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structure or utility poles
or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to
or directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless service
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. "Wireless support structure" does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every wireless provider or utility that occupies right-of-way within the City
shall register on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works,
providing the wireless provider's or utility's name, address and regular
business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact
persons who can act on its behalf in connection with emergencies involving the
registrant's facilities in the right-of-way and a twenty four (24) hour
telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as required in
section
7-6-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. A
telecommunications provider that has registered under this section, shall be
deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement under section
3-2-2 of this Code. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any City
right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the City Director of Public Works and obtaining a
permit from the City therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No
permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right-of-way.
   B.   Exception: No application, approval, or permit shall be required for
routine maintenance, the replacement of small wireless facilities that are
substantially similar, the same size or smaller, if the wireless provider
notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement, or
the installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes. The City may require
a permit to work within the right-of-way for activities that affect traffic
patterns or that require lane closures.
   C.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the City may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. The
application for a small wireless facility, along with supporting information
and notices, must be submitted to the Director of Public Works.
   D.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the wireless provider or utility or the duly authorized representative and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   The applicant's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the wireless
provider or utility, its telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and
its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the wireless provider or utility has placed on file
with the City:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the City and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
7-6-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section
7-6-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
7-6-22 of this chapter); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
City.
   E.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Facilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection D of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
applicant that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" has been issued by the ICC that the applicant is
required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District or other local or State entities with jurisdiction, have been
satisfied;
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed; and
      6.   Applications for small wireless facilities must also include the
following:
         a.   Drawings and site plans for each proposed small wireless facility
covered by the application;
         b.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole will be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings;
         c.   A site specific structural analysis and engineering drawing for
each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application, prepared and
stamped by a professional engineer, which demonstrates the utility pole or
Municipally-owned infrastructure is safely capable of supporting the small
wireless facility in all reasonably foreseeable weather conditions without
creating a risk to public health and safety. The structural analysis will also
describe the method by which the facility is designed to fail and demonstrate
that any structural failure to the facility shall not cause harm to any
residential structure;
         d.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         e.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application;
         f.   Certification that the collocation complies with section
7-6-15 of this chapter; and
         g.   Applications must include the screening and stealth concealment
methods used for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the
application.
   F.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the applicant in writing to the City within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   G.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall be
accompanied by a fee in the amount of zero dollars ($0.00). No application fee
is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that is paying the
Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to title
3, chapter 2 of this Code or the optional State telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Telecommunications Municipal
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any electricity utility that is
paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
   H.   Application Fees For Small Wireless Facilities: All applications for
the collocation of a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole
or wireless support structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00). All applications for the collocation of
more than one small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless
support structure shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of three hundred
fifty dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in said
application. An application for the installation of a small wireless facility
that will require a new utility pole must be accompanied by a fee in the amount
of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
   I.   Consolidated Applications For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications
for small wireless facilities may be submitted on a consolidated basis provided
they involve the same type of small wireless facility and the same type of
structure. The City may, at its discretion, remove small wireless facility
collocations from the consolidated application and treat them separately for
purposes of deeming the application incomplete or denied. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-
2018)
7-6-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Application Deadlines For Small Wireless Facilities: Applications are
deemed complete if the City does not notify the applicant otherwise within
thirty (30) days of receipt of the application.
If the application to collocate a small wireless facility is to be placed on an
existing utility pole, the City will notify the applicant of its approval or
denial within ninety (90) days. If the City fails to notify the applicant
within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved. If the
application to collocate a small wireless facility requires the installation of
a new utility pole, the City will notify the applicant of its approval or
denial within one hundred twenty (120) days. If the City fails to notify the
applicant within that timeframe, the application will be deemed approved.
   B.   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the City Director
of Public Works on a nondiscriminatory basis. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
or regulations that concern public safety, the City Director of Public Works
shall notify the applicant of the basis for a denial, including specific code
provisions upon which the denial was based. The applicant may cure the
deficiencies and resubmit a revised application without paying additional
application fees.
When reviewing applications for small wireless facilities, the City will
approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it will be deemed approved. If the City
Director of Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the City Director of Public Works shall issue a permit.
   C.   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the City
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the City not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The City Director
of Public Works shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the
facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the City Director of Public Works fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within
either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the City by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
7-6-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on City rights-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   B.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the City
does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the
City and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
   C.   Duration: Collocation of small wireless facilities must be completed
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of the permit. If
collocation is not complete, the permit will be void. Permits for small
wireless facilities are valid for five (5) years from the time of issuance.
   D.   Annual Recurring Rates For Small Wireless Facilities: The City shall
charge an annual recurring rate for the collocation of small wireless
facilities on Municipally-owned infrastructure located in its right-of-way
equal to either two hundred dollars ($200.00) per utility pole, or the actual,
direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on
the City utility pole, whichever is greater. If the City elects to charge the
actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of
space on the Municipally-owned infrastructure, it shall adopt a fee schedule on
an annual basis. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the City within ninety (90) days
after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
7-6-22 of this chapter. If the City denies the request for a variance, then the
permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the
facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each wireless provider or utility occupying
right-of-way or constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and
maintain the following liability insurance policies insuring the wireless
provider or utility as named insured and naming the City, and its elected and
appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional insureds on
the policies listed in subsections A1 and A2 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident;
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability; and
         d.   Wireless providers must include the City as an additional insured
on the commercial general liability policy.
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits;
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident; and
      5.   Property insurance for replacement costs against all risks.
If the wireless provider or utility is not providing such insurance to protect
the contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors
and subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The wireless provider or utility shall provide copies
of any of the policies required by this section to the City within ten (10)
days following receipt of a written request therefor from the City.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the City Manager of such intent to cancel or not to
renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and in no event
later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the wireless provider or
utility shall obtain and furnish to the City evidence of replacement insurance
policies meeting the requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A wireless provider or utility may self-insure all or a
portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection
A of this section. A wireless provider or utility that self-insures is not
required, to the extent of such self-insurance, to comply with the requirement
for the naming of additional insureds under subsection A of this section, or
the requirements of subsections B, C and D of this section. A wireless provider
or utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the City evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage and limit requirements required under subsection A of this section,
such as evidence that the wireless provider or utility is a "private self-
insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Wireless Provider's Or
Utility's Liability: The legal liability of the wireless provider or utility to
the City and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the
insurance policies or self- insurance required by this section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a wireless
provider or utility shall be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the
City and its elected and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents
and representatives harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims,
demands, judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney
fees and costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to
arise out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts,
omissions, failures to act or misconduct of the wireless provider or utility or
its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in
the construction of facilities or occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in
providing or offering service over the facilities, whether such acts or
omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however, that the wireless
provider's or utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this chapter by
the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or representatives. (Ord.
18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the City occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the City must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the City in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the City, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
City. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection
shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
City and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the City of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the State
of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the City Director of Public Works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the City estimates are likely
to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the City, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the City Director of
Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The City, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the City
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund,
the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the City,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the City, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the City with respect to the
Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved
by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other
right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not be
entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which
may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   City Right To Revoke Permit: The City may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The City shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the City, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the City within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the City providing written proof of such removal
to the City within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      4.   The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this
section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the City or its
designee may, at the option of the City: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon
not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to
the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the City. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the City
for all costs of removal. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: An owner shall notify the City no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity. The new owner shall have all the
obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former owner under the permit, if
any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including this
chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in the right-of-way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City's right-of-
way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 18-O-21,
7-17-2018)
7-6-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. Adm.
Code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the City Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of
sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the City Director of Public Works shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation
of a facility in the future. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-14: PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Public Safety: The placement of any antenna, wireless facility or small
wireless facilities located in the City right-of-way may not interfere with the
frequencies used by public safety agencies for public safety communications.
Unacceptable interference will be determined in accordance with industry
standards and the Federal Communications Commission's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum. If an antenna, wireless
facility or small wireless facility causes such interference, the owner must
take all steps necessary to correct and eliminate the interference at its own
costs. The City may terminate a permit for any antenna, wireless facility or
small wireless facility based on such interference if the interference is not
corrected.
The City may reserve space on its utility pole for future public safety uses.
This reservation of space may preclude the collocation of a small wireless
facility where the City determines that the utility pole cannot accommodate
both uses.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: The City's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this Code.
   C.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The wireless provider
or utility is responsible for providing and installing warning signs,
protective devices and flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable
Federal, State, and local requirements for protection of the public and the
wireless provider's or utility's workers when performing any work on the public
rights-of-way.
   D.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   E.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the wireless provider or utility shall notify the
resident, business or institution of the approximate beginning time and
duration of such work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency
repairs pursuant to section
7-6-21 of this chapter, the wireless provider or utility shall provide such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
   F.   Compliance: The wireless provider or utility shall take immediate
action to correct any deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are
brought to the its attention by the City. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Small Wireless Facilities: The City is not required to install or
maintain any specific utility pole or to continue to install or maintain
utility poles in any location if it makes a non- discriminatory decision to
eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type. For City utility
poles with collocated small wireless facilities in place when the City makes a
decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles, the City will, at its
discretion, either maintain the utility pole or install and maintain an
alternative utility pole for the collocation of the small wireless facility, or
offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line
and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right- of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The City may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The City may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   Small Wireless Facilities:
         a.   The City may not require the placement of a small wireless
facility on a specific utility pole or category of poles. However, should the
application necessitate the installation of a new utility pole, the City may
propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility
pole or existing support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the
proposed collocation. Should the applicant reject the proposed relocated
collocation, it must provide a written certification describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternative location will
not satisfy the wireless provider's needs. The City may require any monopole,
utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be
screened from view in compliance with the appearance standards described below.
         b.   If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground
facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles,
utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same
side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
above ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be
located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
      2.   Other Facilities:
         a.   The City may restrict the location and size of any monopole,
utility pole or other freestanding facility located within a right-of-way. No
freestanding facility located within a right-of- way may be constructed or
modified so that the height of the freestanding facility is higher by more than
ten feet (10') or more than ten percent (10%), whichever is greater, than any
other existing, freestanding facility located within the right-of-way within
three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility, measured along the center
line of the respective right-of-way. Where there are no other freestanding
facilities located within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed facility,
the maximum height of the freestanding facility shall be forty five feet (45').
         b.   The City may require any monopole, utility pole or other
freestanding facility located within a right-of-way to be screened from view.
         c.   If all existing monopoles, utility poles and other aboveground
facilities are located on one side of the right-of-way, all new monopoles,
utility poles and other freestanding facilities shall be located on the same
side of the right-of-way as the existing aboveground facilities. If there exist
above ground facilities on both sides, new freestanding facilities shall be
located on the side where the above ground facilities most closely match the
scale of the new freestanding facility.
   F.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The City may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   G.   Aboveground Installation: Aboveground facilities may be installed only
if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and Municipally-owned infrastructure shall be
used wherever practicable; the installation of additional utility poles or
monopoles is strongly discouraged.
   H.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the wireless provider or utility has demonstrated that
all other means of accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means
shall include, but are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent
poles, cable supports and tower supports, all of which are completely separated
from the bridge or roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that
are volatile, flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under
significant pressure or potential, present high degrees of risk and such
installations are not permitted.
      2.   A wireless provider or utility shall include in its request to
accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting
data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or
disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway
structure will be based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the wireless provider or
utility and their comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the wireless provider or utility
service as compared to the risk involved.
   I.   Height Restrictions For Small Wireless Facilities: Small wireless
facilities are limited to a maximum height of ten feet (10') above the utility
pole or wireless structure on which it is collocated. The height limit of a new
or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure on which small
wireless facilities are collocated is limited to the higher of: 1) ten feet
(10') higher than the tallest existing utility pole within three hundred feet
(300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
that is in the same right-of-way; or 2) forty five feet (45') above ground
level. The City shall designate which intersecting right-of-way within three
hundred feet (300') of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structure
shall control the height limitation. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the City
Director of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the City to be preserved shall be bored under or around
the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe/line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the City Director of Public Works.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The wireless provider or utility shall not
trench within the drip line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the wireless provider or utility shall be responsible to
remove and restore any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of
the facility. If so ordered by the Director of Public Works, the wireless
provider or utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill
material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly compact new
backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to
the proper grades, as determined by the Director of Public Works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section
7-6-22 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the Director of Public Works.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
City.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                           Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general)   30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed 24 inches (0.6 m)
method
Gas or petroleum products                  30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                                 Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                           protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage   Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                       protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within City rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled
"Rules for Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines", and the
National Electrical Safety Code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Wireless providers or utilities shall make every reasonable
effort to design the installation so guys and braces will not be needed.
Variances may be allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guywires
are equipped with guy guards for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a City approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 - Transportation of
Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR
section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of
the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval
must be obtained from the City.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the wireless provider or
utility to the City shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved
in the construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing
facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the City, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital wireless provider or utility
services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction
are those set forth in this Code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any wireless provider or utility
proposing to construct facilities in the City shall contact JULIE and ascertain
the presence and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities
within the rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The City
will make its permit records available to a wireless provider or utility for
the purpose of identifying possible facilities. When notified of an excavation
or when requested by the City or by JULIE, a wireless provider or utility shall
locate and physically mark its underground facilities within forty eight (48)
hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with the Illinois
Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act 1 . (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
7-6-17: DESIGN AND APPEARANCE STANDARDS:
   A.   Residential Design Standards:
      1.   Purpose: Ensure visually acceptable facility design and to provide
discretion on required and preferred design of small wireless facilities.
      2.   Applicability: These design standards shall apply to each facility
located in a district zoned for residential uses:
         a.   Applicants must use architectural treatments and stealth
techniques to reduce potential visual impacts from all small wireless
facilities.
         b.   All new utility poles installed for the purpose of mounting a
facility must be stealth or camouflaged to blend into the surrounding
environment. Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are presented in figure
1 of this section.
         c.   Small wireless facilities and all ancillary equipment associated
with the facility must not emit sound.
         d.   Cables must be routed directly from the ground through the pole
and equipment enclosures must completely enclose or hide cabling. No exposed
cable is allowed.
         e.   No flashing lights or unnecessary, non-essential stickers are
allowed to be placed on any facility. Stickers must be designed in the same
color as the pole to which they are attached.
         f.   In no case shall equipment block the sidewalk or pedestrian
pathway. All installations must maintain accessibility requirements and
standards.
         g.   All newly installed equipment must be painted with graffiti-
resistant paint to match pole color and surroundings.
         h.   Colors and materials for small wireless facilities shall be
chosen to minimize the visibility of the facility.
         i.   Antennas attached to existing poles or Municipally-owned
infrastructure shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure.
         j.   Any ground-mounted facility shall be painted with non- reflective
matte finish paint using color shades that are comparable or blend with
surrounding natural elements such as soil, trees, or grasslands. Any ground-
mounted facility shall be screened from the yard of the property in front of
which it is located using year-round landscaping materials. The owner of the
ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the landscaping materials for a period
of one year from planting.
         k.   All disturbed pavement and landscaping shall be replaced and
areas of bare or disturbed soils must be re-vegetated. If replacement landscape
is determined to be infeasible the City may accept mitigation funds to use
elsewhere. The owner of the ground-mounted facility shall guarantee the
restoration work or reseeding for a period of one year.
         l.   No facility may display any signage or advertisements unless
expressly allowed by the City in a written approval, recommended under FCC
regulations or required by law or permit condition. Every facility shall at all
times display signage that accurately identifies the facility owner and
provides the facility owner's unique site number, and also provides a local or
toll-free telephone number to contact the facility owner's operations center.
All required or permitted signage must face toward the street or otherwise
placed to minimize visibility from adjacent sidewalks and structures.
FIGURE 1
SAMPLE STEALTH DESIGNS
FOR SMALL CELL UTILITY POLES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1530.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1532.gif]
 
   B.   Design Standards In Special Aesthetic/Economic Purpose Zones:
      1.   Purpose: To protect and promote the City's unique character in a
manner consistent with State and Federal laws and regulations.
      2.   Applicability: These design standards shall apply to: a) each area,
district, neighborhood or zone expressly designated in the City's Comprehensive
Plan as having special aesthetic or economic impacts on the welfare of the
community; and b) each redevelopment area designed under the Tax Increment
Allocation Redevelopment Act or the Business District Development and
Redevelopment Act:
         a.   Siting of small wireless facilities in special aesthetic/economic
purpose zones must respect the existing character or design ordinance of
established zone.
         b.   Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures
in their applications.
         c.   Effective camouflage so as to disguise the facility so that it
appears to be something other than a facility and is at the same time
compatible with its surroundings (for example, designed to look like a tree).
         d.   Small wireless facilities must be designed so that the
facilities' silhouette, mass and color are masked in such a way as to be
virtually indistinguishable from their background.
         e.   Examples of stealth or camouflage designs are presented in figure
1 of this section.
   C.   Design Standards In Historic Districts:
      1.   Purpose: To promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the City by identifying, preserving, protecting, enhancing and
encouraging the continued utilization and the rehabilitation of such areas,
properties, structures, sites and objects having a special historical interest
or value to the City and its citizens.
      2.   Applicability: These design standards apply in any historic district
or on any historic landmark:
         a.   Districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects, significant
in American history, architecture, archeology, engineering or culture, that are
listed, or are eligible for listing, in the National Register of Historic
Places are to be avoided, to the greatest extent possible. Local landmarked
buildings, properties, sites, or historic districts that are so recognized by
an ordinance that meets the requirements of the certified Local Government
Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office are also to be
avoided, to the greatest extent possible.
         b.   Applicants must include proposed stealth and concealment measures
in their applications.
         c.   Applicant must implement said City-approved design concepts, and
the use of camouflage or stealth materials as necessary in order to achieve
compliance with historic preservation review.
         d.   Prior to submitting an application, where the applicant submits
an application to site facilities in a historic district, the applicant must
meet with the City to discuss any potential design modifications appropriate
for the installation.
         e.   When siting a facility in a historic district, wireless provider
must avoid removing, obscuring or altering any historic material or significant
architectural features. Rehabilitation and make-ready work must not destroy the
distinguishing character of the property or its environment.
         f.   Deteriorated architectural features should be repaired rather
than replaced, wherever possible by means such as rust removal, caulking,
limited paint removal and reapplication of paint.
   D.   General Design Standards:
      1.   Applicability: These design standards apply to all small wireless
facilities:
         a.   All small wireless facilities not governed by the preceding
design standards must be placed so as to minimize visibility. The small
wireless facility, including all ancillary equipment and appurtenances, must be
a color that blends with the surroundings of the utility pole or Municipally-
owned infrastructure on which it is mounted and use non-reflective materials
which blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and
structures. Any wiring must be concealed within the freestanding facility or
covered with an appropriate cover.
         b.   The City may discourage the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
         c.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners.
         d.   A facility may not be installed in a manner which defeats any
existing concealment elements of the utility pole or Municipally- owned
infrastructure to which it is attached.
         e.   Facilities under common ownership or operated on the same radio
frequency shall be separated as far as practicable. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-18: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The City will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The City may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   B.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The City may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   C.   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the wireless provider or utility
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works that such
spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 18-O-21,
7-17-2018)
7-6-19: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City,
a wireless provider or utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or
permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any wireless
provider or utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate
Authorities have determined that such removal, relocation, change or
alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance,
or installation of any City improvement in or upon, or the operations of the
City in or upon, the rights-of-way. Wireless providers are required to provide
the City with written notice of its intent to sell or transfer small wireless
facilities. Such notice must include the name and contact information of the
new wireless provider.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the City, any wireless provider or utility that owns,
controls, or maintains any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances
within the public rights-of-way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any
part of such facilities or appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A
facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The City retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the wireless provider or
utility, if known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the
wireless provider or utility, if known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities:
      1.   Small Wireless Facilities: As used in this section, a small wireless
facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months
shall be considered abandoned. The owner of an abandoned small wireless
facility shall notify the City within ninety (90) days of it being abandoned
and the owner of that small wireless facility must remove the small wireless
facility within ninety (90) days after sending such written notice to the City.
The City may direct the wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the
facility if the City Director of Public Works determines that such removal will
be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. If the small
wireless facility is not removed within ninety (90) days of such notice, the
City may remove or cause the removal of the facility pursuant to the terms of
its pole attachment agreement for City utility poles or through whatever
actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by other law for removal and
cost recovery.
      2.   Other Utility Facilities: As used in this section, a facility that
is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be
considered abandoned. Upon abandonment of a facility within the rights-of-way
of the City, the utility shall notify the City within ninety (90) days. The
owner of the abandoned facility must remove the facility within ninety (90)
days after sending such written notice to the City. The City may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the City Director of
Public Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. If the facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of the
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for City
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-
2018)
7-6-20: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the wireless
provider or utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain in a timely manner and to the satisfaction of the City. This includes
restoration of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall
be made using materials and methods approved by the City Director of Public
Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-
of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to
the commencement of the project. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-21: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by the wireless provider or utility
in a manner satisfactory to the City and at the wireless provider's or
utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the wireless provider or utility shall take immediate steps to
provide all necessary protection for traffic on the highway or the public on
the right-of-way including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If
a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is
such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the wireless provider or utility shall, as soon as
possible, notify the City Director of Public Works or his or her duly
authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have
been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to
make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to
interfere with the free movement of traffic, the City police shall be notified
immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the wireless provider or utility shall use all
means at hand to complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The wireless provider or utility must file in
writing with the City a description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-
way within forty eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-
17-2018)
7-6-22: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A wireless provider or utility requesting a
variance from one or more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in
writing to the City Director of Public Works as a part of the permit
application. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from
which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The City Director of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The City Director of Public Works
may authorize a variance only if the wireless provider or utility requesting
the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the wireless
provider or utility (such as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way
line) create a special hardship that would make enforcement of the provision
unreasonable, given the public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the City Director of Public Works may require the
wireless provider or utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this
chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-
2018)
7-6-23: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the City will
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the wireless
provider or utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and
this chapter. Unless the wireless provider or utility shows that another
allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the
wireless provider or utility shall bear the City's costs of damages and its
costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the
facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or
commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the
City. Sanctions may be imposed upon a wireless provider or utility who does not
pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
7-6-24: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord.
18-O-21, 7-17-2018)
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Waterworks Fund
8-1-2: Materials Standards For Water Main And Service Construction
8-1-3: Prohibited Use Of System
8-1-4: Water Wells
8-1-1: WATERWORKS FUND:
There shall be accounts kept by the city comptroller. Said accounts shall be
denominated the "waterworks fund", and all receipts into the treasury, whether
arising from the collection of water rates, the proceeds of the sale of water
bonds, taxation, or from the sale of any property or material connected with
the waterworks, shall be placed to the credit of said fund, and all
expenditures authorized and all salaries and disbursements connected with the
management and operation of the waterworks shall be paid out of said fund.
(Ord. 89-O-1, 1-17-1989; amd. Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003)
8-1-2: MATERIALS STANDARDS FOR WATER MAIN AND SERVICE CONSTRUCTION:
All materials used to construct water mains and water services and to make
water taps must comply with the following standards and applicable federal,
state and local codes and ordinances:
   A.   Water main piping shall be ductile iron ASTM A 377/79, ANSI C600/80,
WW/P/421C/1967, and AWWA C151/76, unless alternate materials are approved by
the city engineer on a case by case basis.
   B.   Fire hydrants shall be Mueller Centurion, Kennedy Guardian or approved
equal.
   C.   Meter setters, three-fourths inch (3/4") and one inch (1") sizes, shall
be Mueller, Ford or approved equal with approved double check backflow
preventer.
   D.   Meter setters, one and one-half inch (11/2") and two inch (2") sizes,
shall be Mueller, Ford or approved equal.
   E.   Meters shall be Rockwell; type to be determined by city staff.
   F.   Meter pits shall be Sono-Loc or approved equal.
   G.   Meter pit collars and lids shall be Ford, Mueller, Tyler or approved
equal, sized so as to allow servicing and removal of meters and valves located
in the meter pits.
   H.   Tapping saddles shall be double strap brass saddle with bronze bolts as
approved by utility coordinator/superintendent. Tapping saddles for nonductile
iron piping shall be as approved by the utility coordinator/superintendent.
   I.   Corporation stops shall be Ford, Mueller or approved equal.
   J.   Fittings for water main construction shall be ductile iron, Tyler or
approved equal.
   K.   Tapping sleeves shall have end gaskets and flanges, Mueller, H613 or
approved equal.
   L.   Brass fittings shall be Ford, Mueller or approved equal.
   M.   Any material not specifically listed in this section shall be approved
by the city engineer or utility coordinator/superintendent prior to
installation. (Ord. 89-O-1, 1-17-1989; amd. 1991 Code)
8-1-3: PROHIBITED USE OF SYSTEM:
   A.   No one shall turn on a water main without the written approval of the
city utility coordinator/superintendent.
   B.   No one, other than city personnel, shall tap a city water main without
written consent of the utility coordinator/superintendent. (Ord. 89-O-1, 1-17-
1989; amd. 1991 Code)
   C.   No one, other than city personnel, shall turn a water service on or off
without the written consent of the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 89-O-1,
1-17-1989; amd. Ord. 96-O-64, 12-17-1996, eff. 5-6-1997)
   D.   No one, other than city personnel, shall operate a fire hydrant without
prior city council approval. (Ord. 89-O-1, 1-17-1989; amd. 1991 Code)
8-1-4: WATER WELLS:
   A.   Definitions:
    PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, limited
liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust,
estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
   POTABLE WATER: Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including,
but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming, washing dishes,
or preparing foods.
   B.   Wells Prohibited; Exceptions: Use of ground water as a potable water
supply within the corporate limits of the city by the installation or drilling
of wells or other means is hereby prohibited, except for such uses or methods
in existence before the effective date hereof. Furthermore, the use or attempt
to use, as potable water supply, ground water from within the corporate limits
of the city by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is
hereby prohibited.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each
violation. (Ord. 05-O-3, 4-5-2005)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Use Of Public Sewers Required; Prohibitions
8-2-2: Private Sewage Disposal
8-2-3: Building Sewers And Connections
8-2-4: Discharges Into System
8-2-5: Interceptors
8-2-6: Preliminary Treatment; Flow Equalization
8-2-7: Control Manhole
8-2-8: Measurements, Tests And Analyses
8-2-9: Special Agreements
8-2-10: Wastewater Service Charges
8-2-11: Bills For Service; Delinquencies; Accounting
8-2-11-1: Rendition Of Bills; Liability For Payment
8-2-11-2: Delinquent Payments
8-2-11-3: Lien Provisions
8-2-11-4: Disposition Of Revenues
8-2-11-5: Accounts
8-2-11-6: Notice Of Rates
8-2-11-7: Access To Records
8-2-11-8: Penalty
8-2-12: Damage To, Tampering With System
8-2-13: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-2-14: Violation; Penalties
8-2-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Discharge Of Human And Animal Wastes: It shall be unlawful for any
person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited, in any unsanitary manner
on public or private property within the city or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste other than according to standards promulgated by the city,
the Illinois environmental protection agency and the United States
environmental protection agency.
   B.   Discharges Into Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful to discharge to
any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of
the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Private Systems: Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful
to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-
1986; amd. 1991 Code)
   D.   Connection To Sewer System Required: The owners of all the houses,
buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or
other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or
right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located any
public sanitary (or combined) sewer of the city, is hereby required at his
expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within ninety (90) days after the date of official
notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within three hundred feet
(300') for a single-family residence and one thousand feet (1,000') for a
commercial or multi-family residence. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986; amd. 1991 Code;
Ord. 12-O-29, 9-18-2012)
8-2-2: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   A.   Private Systems Permitted: Where a public sanitary (or combined) sewer
is not available under the provisions of subsection
8-2-1D of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   B.   Permit Requirements:
      1.   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private
sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by
the city.
      2.   Application For Permit: The application for such a permit shall be
made on a form furnished by the city (reference appendix 2 attached to
ordinance 86-O-12), which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as deemed necessary by the city.
      3.   Inspections: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
city. The city, or its representative, shall be allowed to inspect the work at
any stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within seventy
two (72) hours of the receipt of written notice by the city.
      4.   Fee: A permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed.
   C.   Lot Location And Construction Requirements: The type, capacities,
location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all
recommendations of the state private sewage disposal licensing act and code 1
and with the state environmental protection agency. No permit shall be issued
for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption
facilities where the area of the lot is less than one thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet.
   D.   Operation Of Private System: The owner shall operate and maintain the
private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no
expense to the city.
   E.   Availability Of Public Sewer; Connection Required:
      1.   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property
served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection
8-2-1D of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
      2.   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days, and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean, bank run gravel or
dirt. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986; amd. 1991 Code)
   F.   Private Pressure Sewer System:
      1.   Definitions:
    EJECTOR PUMP: A pump which pumps the sewage from a lower level of a private
property to a higher level of a private property where a gravity sanitary
lateral sewer carries the flow to the gravity sanitary sewer main on the city
right of way. "Ejector pumps" are excluded from this section.
   PRIVATE PRESSURE SEWER SYSTEM: A sewer system in which the lateral sewer
pipe is pressurized from the pump all the way to the pressurized force main on
the city right of way and shall be regulated by this subsection.
      2.   Permit Required: A permit shall be required by the property owner
prior to the installation of a private pressure sewer system. The permit shall
be in the form designated and designed by the city. Said permit shall require
identifying information as to the type, location, and schematics of the private
pressure sewer system, at a minimum. It shall also require all information set
forth by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      3.   Inspections: The owner of the property shall contact the city
plumbing inspector or designated representative prior to performing any
maintenance or repair on the private pressure sewer system. The city shall have
the right to enter the private property to inspect the system if necessary.
(Ord. 05-O-18, 7-5-2005)
   G.   Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this section shall
be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed
by the city. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986; amd. 1991 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.
8-2-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Permit To Connect:
      1.   Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or
appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
      2.   Classes Of Permits; Applications: There shall be two (2) classes of
building sewer permits: a) for residential, wastewater service; and b) for
commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater service. In
either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form
furnished by the city (reference appendix 2 attached to ordinance 86-O-12). The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city.
      3.   Fee: A permit and inspection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
a residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at
the time the application is filed.
      4.   Conditions Of Permit:
         a.   The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must
provide information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics,
and type of activity.
         b.   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer
connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream
sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   B.   Separate Building Sewers: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building; except, that where one building stands at
the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can
be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or
driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
   C.   Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
   D.   Construction Specifications:
      1.   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of
the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, water pollution control federation
manual of practice 9, and standard specifications for water and sewer main
construction in Illinois shall apply.
      2.   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved in accordance with subsection D1 of this section, and discharged to
the building sewer.
   E.   Connections To System: The connection of the building sewer into the
public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing
Materials, water pollution control federation manual of practice 9, and
standard specifications for water and sewer main construction in Illinois. All
such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before
installation. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
   F.   Combined Sewers:
      1.   New construction tributary to a combined sewer system must be
designed to minimize inflow contribution to the combined system.
      2.   Inflow sources on the existing combined sewer system shall be
connected to the storm sewer within sixty (60) days of the time a storm sewer
becomes available.
      3.   Any new building domestic waste connection shall be separate and
distinct from the building inflow connection to facilitate disconnection of the
inflow connection if a storm sewer becomes available. (Ord. 06-O-36, 8-1-2006)
   G.   Excavations: All excavations for building sewer installations shall be
adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in
the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
   H.   Discharges Into System:
      1.   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
      2.   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff of ground
water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly
or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   I.   Inspections: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the
public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or
its representative.
   J.   Liability For Costs And Expenses: All cost and expenses incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may, directly
or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. (Ord.
86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-4: DISCHARGES INTO SYSTEM:
   A.   Storm And Surface Water Runoff; Storm Sewers:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
      2.   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the city.
      3.   Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged on approval of the city to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
      4.   The discharge of sanitary sewage and polluted industrial wastewater
into any storm sewer or natural outlet is prohibited.
      5.   Sump pumps for buildings located within two hundred fifty feet
(250') of a designated storm sewer or natural outlet shall discharge to said
storm sewer or natural outlet. Sump pump water shall not run across a public
sidewalk. (Ord. 03-O-4, 2-18-2003)
      6.   All sump pumps outletting toward city right of way shall outlet a
minimum of ten feet (10') from the right of way line and run across natural
ground before entering the city right of way. (Ord. 08-O-18, 6-17-2008)
   B.   Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to,
ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   C.   Restricted Discharges:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the city, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream;
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
city will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
         a.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
         b.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (150°F) (0° and 65°C).
         c.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city.
         d.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
         e.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the city for such materials.
         f.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
         g.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
         h.   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
         i.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005
milligrams per liter as Hg at any time, except as permitted by the city in
compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
         j.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.05 milligrams per liter at any time,
except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations.
         k.   Materials which exert or cause:
            (1)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as,
but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate).
            (2)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions).
            (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
            (4)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes
constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
         l.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
         m.   Any waters, waste or effluent, cleaning materials or deposits
from septic tanks, cesspools or any water or waste containing high
concentrations of suspended solids of any type; except, when approved by the
treatment plant superintendent, it shall be lawful to dispose the foregoing at
the city sewage treatment plant during normal business hours, at its designated
deposit point, upon the payment of the applicable fee as set forth herein, and
such other sampling cost and expense as may be required by designated
laboratory personnel.
            (1)   Any load may be required to undergo sampling and testing to
determine the nature and concentrations of the product to be dumped. In this
event additional fees may be added to recover the costs incurred by the city of
Charleston.
            (2)   In no event shall wastes be dumped which contains fats, oils,
and greases whether emulsified or not in excess of the allowable legal limits.
            (3)   In the event that a load which has been dumped causes pass-
through or any other detrimental effects to the operations of the wastewater
facilities it will be the responsibility of the hauler to mitigate any and all
expenses incurred by the city of Charleston to remediate the issue.
            (4)   All dumping fees must be paid in a timely manner; failure to
do so will results in the suspension of dumping privileges.
Regular Domestic Septic Wastes:
$30.00 per regular truckload (not to exceed 3,500 gallons).
Oversized loads will pay an additional $1.00 per 100 gallons over and above
3,500 gallons.
   Commercial Wastes:
Commercial wastes must be preapproved on a load by load basis and if permission
is granted the fee will be $100.00 per regular truckload (not to exceed 3,500
gallons).
Oversized loads will pay an additional $5.00 per 100 gallons over and above
3,500 gallons.
Fees for contracted dumping by commercial entities shall be covered by the
individual contracts. (Ord. 11-O-9, 4-19-2011)
      2.   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection C1 of this section, and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June
26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which, in the judgment of the city,
may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the city may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharges; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of section
8-2-9 of this chapter.
      3.   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city, and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
   D.   Combined Sewer Overflow: Any combined sewer overflow impacts from
nondomestic sources shall be minimized by determining which nondomestic
discharges, if any, are tributary to a combined sewer overflow in order to
control pollutants in these discharges into a public sewer and require control
of the quantities and rates of discharge. (Ord. 06-O-36, 8-1-2006)
8-2-5: INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the city, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other
harmful ingredients; except, that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-6: PRELIMINARY TREATMENT; FLOW EQUALIZATION:
Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-7: CONTROL MANHOLE:
Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole, and when required
by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer, to facilitate
observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so far as to be safe
and accessible at all times. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-8: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   A.   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge.
   B.   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but no less than once per
year, the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards is being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   C.   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of IEPA division of laboratories manual of
laboratory methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to
be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The
particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls,
whereas pHs are determined from periodic grab samples. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-9: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS:
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in accordance with section
8-2-10 of this chapter, by the industrial concern, provided such payments are
in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system. (Ord.
86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-10: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES 1 :
   A.   Basis For Wastewater Service Charges: The wastewater service charge for
the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city
shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance, plus
replacement, applicable surcharges and local capital cost charge composed of a
debt service charge and a capital improvement charge.
      1.   Debt Service Charge:
         a.   The debt service charge is computed by dividing the annual debt
service of all outstanding bonds by the number of users. Through further
divisions, the monthly and/or quarterly debt service charges can be computed;
or
         b.   The debt service charge is computed by apportioning the annual
debt service on a cost per one thousand (1,000) gallon basis; or
         c.   The debt service charge is computed as a fixed charge, plus a
charge per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
      2.   Capital Improvement Charge: The capital improvement charge is levied
on all users to provide for capital improvement, extension or reconstruction
for the sewage treatment works. The capital improvement charge is computed by
apportioning the annual amount to be accrued as a cost per one thousand (1,000)
gallons or as a fixed charge per month.
      3.   Basic User Charge:
         a.   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded
by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
domestic concentrations:
            (1)   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
            (2)   A suspended solids (SS) content of three hundred milligrams
per liter (300 mg/l).
         b.   The basic user charge shall consist of operation and maintenance
costs plus replacement and shall be computed as follows:
            (1)   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to
be treated.
            (2)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories.
            (3)   Proportion the estimated OM&R costs to each user class by
volume, suspended solids and BOD.
            (4)   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and
replacement (OM&R) costs to wastewater facility categories by volume, suspended
solids and BOD.
            (5)   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal
sewage strength.
            (6)   Compute surcharge costs per pound per one thousand (1,000)
gallons in excess of normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
      4.   Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters
exceed the normal domestic concentrations of BOD (250 mg/l) and SS (300 mg/l).
The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or
sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l) and three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l)
concentration for BOD and SS, respectively. Subsection D1 of this section
specifies the procedure to compute a surcharge.
   B.   Measurement Of Flow:
      1.   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and
surcharges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even
increments of one hundred (100) gallons.
      2.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these
other sources.
      3.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
      4.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the city.
   C.   Rates And Charges Established:
      1.   Debt Service Charge:
         a.   Local capital cost charge for consumption of less than ten
thousand (10,000) gallons per month:
Debt service charge: A debt service charge of ninety seven cents ($0.97) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons, to each user of the wastewater facility of the
city, is hereby established.
         b.   Local capital cost charge for consumption of more than ten
thousand (10,000) gallons per month:
Debt service charge: A debt service charge of eighty seven cents ($0.87) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons, to each user of the wastewater facility of the
city, is hereby established.
         c.   Local capital cost charge for consumption by Eastern Illinois
University:
Debt service charge: Effective March 1, 1986, to June 30, 1987, a debt service
charge of twenty seven cents ($0.27) per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
Effective July 1, 1987, a debt service charge of eighty five cents ($0.85) per
one thousand (1,000) gallons.
      2.   Capital Improvement Charge: A capital improvement charge will be
levied on all users as a charge of twenty six cents ($0.26) per one thousand
(1,000) gallons, to provide funds for extension, improvement or reconstruction
of the sewage treatment works.
      3.   Basic User Rate 2 : There shall be and there is hereby established a
minimum charge and a basic user rate for the use of and for service supplied by
the wastewater facility of the city. A minimum charge of one dollar forty seven
cents ($1.47) per one thousand (1,000) gallons shall be applied to all users.
      4.   Surcharge Rate 3 : The rates of surcharges for BOD5 and SS shall be
as follows:
         a.   Per pound of BOD: Fifty cents ($0.50) for users whose strength
exceeds two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
         b.   Per pound of SS: Sixty cents ($0.60) for users whose strength
exceeds three hundred milligrams per liter (300 mg/l).
   D.   Computation Of Rates And Charges:
      1.   Surcharge: The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges
shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as
often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be binding as a basis
for surcharges.
      2.   Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge shall be
computed by the following formula:
CW = CC + CD + CM + (Vu-X) CU + CS
Where
CW = Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing period.
CD = Debt service charge (subsection C1 of this section).
CC = Capital improvement charge (subsection C2 of this section).
CM = Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection C3
of this section).
Vu = Wastewater volume for the billing period.
X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge (subsection C3 of
this section).
CU = Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement (subsection C3
of this section).
CS = Amount of surcharge (subsections C4 and D1 of this section).
   E.   Effective Date Of Rates: The rates and service charges established for
user charges in subsections C and D of this section shall be effective March 1,
1986, and on bills to be rendered for the next succeeding month being effective
for the March billing date for monthly users.
   F.   Review Of And Changes To Rates And Charges: The adequacy of the
wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not less often than annually, by
certified public accountants for the city in their annual audit report. The
wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in
local capital costs or a change in operation and maintenance costs including
replacement costs.
   G.   Notice To Users 4 : The users of wastewater treatment services will be
notified monthly, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that
portion of the user charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   H.   Appeals: The method for computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges in subsections C and D of this section shall be
made available to a user within five (5) days of receipt of a written request
for such. Any disagreement over the method used or in the computations thereof
shall be remedied by the board of appeals within seven (7) days after
notification of a formal written appeal outlining the discrepancies. (Ord. 86-
O-12, 3-4-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-3-2 of this title for sewer service rates.
2 1. See also section
  8-3-2 of this title.
3 2. See also subsection
  8-3-2F of this title.
4 1. See also section
  8-2-11-6 of this chapter.
8-2-11: BILLS FOR SERVICE; DELINQUENCIES; ACCOUNTING:
8-2-11-1: RENDITION OF BILLS; LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
   A.   Rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly or quarterly
depending on the classification of service for which bills are rendered. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises, and
the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the condition
that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly
and severally liable therefor to the city. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
   B.   Water and/or sewer bills shall be billed by the office of the
comptroller according to the following schedule 1 :
      1.   Eastern Illinois University shall be billed not later than the last
day of the first week of each month.
      2.   Industrial accounts shall be billed not later than the last day of
the first week of each month.
      3.   All other water/sewer accounts shall be billed monthly. (Ord. 06-O-
19, 4-18-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  8-3-4A of this title.
8-2-11-2: DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
   A.   All sewer bills are due and payable fifteen (15) days after being sent
out. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all bills not paid by the
fifteenth day after they have been rendered.
   B.   If the charges for such services, including water services, are not
paid within ten (10) days or twenty five (25) days hereinbelow mentioned after
the rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be
discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until all
claims are settled. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-11-3: LIEN PROVISIONS:
   A.   Lien Claim And Notice Of Lien:
      1.   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for twenty five
(25) days for monthly service, the city water department shall file with the
county recorder of deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid
bill, and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for
all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
      2.   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises
and the city has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the
premises, if his address be known to the water department, whenever such bill
remains unpaid for the period of forty five (45) days for a monthly bill or one
hundred five (105) days for a quarterly bill after it has been rendered.
      3.   The failure of the city to record such lien or to mail such notice
or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right
to foreclose the lien or right to foreclosure of the lien for unpaid bills as
mentioned in subsection
8-2-11-2B of this chapter.
   B.   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charge, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity in
the name of the city. The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings in the name of the city in any court having
jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill has
remained unpaid forty five (45) days in the case of a monthly bill or one
hundred five (105) days in the case of a quarterly bill after it has been
rendered. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-11-4: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
   A.   All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in a separate water and sewer fund. All such revenues
and monies shall be held by the city separate and apart from its private funds
and separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and all of said sum,
without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the city not more than
ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as
may, from time to time, be directed by the mayor and council.
   B.   The city shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage system and
all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same
may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund
designated as the "sewerage fund of the city".
   C.   The water department shall administer such fund in every respect in the
manner provided by the revised cities and villages act 1 , effective January
1942. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-139-9.
8-2-11-5: ACCOUNTS:
   A.   The city shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct entries shall
be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and at regular
annual intervals, the city shall cause to be made an audit by an independent
auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and disbursements of the
sewerage system.
   B.   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service charges
under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-11-6: NOTICE OF RATES 1 :
Each user will be notified by the city, in conjunction with a regular bill, of
the rate and that portion of the user charges or ad valorem taxes which are
attributable to wastewater treatment services, including the financial
information of section
8-2-11-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection
  8-2-10G of this chapter.
8-2-11-7: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city
system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance
with the terms of the (special and general conditions of any state grant)
(federal regulations and conditions of the federal grant). (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-
1986)
8-2-11-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of sections
8-2-11-1 through
8-2-11-7 of this chapter shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. (Ord.
86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-12: DAMAGE TO, TAMPERING WITH SYSTEM:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 86-O-12,
3-4-1986)
8-2-13: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Authority Of City, State And Federal Personnel:
      1.   The city and other duly authorized employees of the city, the
Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection
agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
city or its representative shall have no authority to inquire into any
processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, or ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment.
      2.   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in subsection A1 of this section, the city or duly authorized employees of
the city, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the U.S.
environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to
the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless
for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the
company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain conditions as required in subsections
8-2-8A and B of this chapter.
   B.   Additional Authority Of City Personnel: The city and other duly
authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved. (Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
8-2-14: VIOLATION; PENALTIES:
   A.   Notice Of Violation; Revocation Of Sewage Permit: Any person found to
be violating any provision of this chapter, except section
8-2-12 of this chapter, shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke
any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter.
   B.   Misdemeanor Violation; Penalty: Any person who shall continue any
violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
in the amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation.
Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   C.   Liability For Violations: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the city by reasons of such violation.
(Ord. 86-O-12, 3-4-1986)
CHAPTER 3
WATER AND SEWER RATES
SECTION:
8-3-1: Water And Sewer Tapping And Connection Fees And Charges
8-3-1-1: Water Tapping And Connection Fees And Charges
8-3-1-2: Sewer Tapping And Connection Fees And Charges
8-3-1-3: Testing Of New Sanitary Sewer
8-3-2: Sewer And Water Rates
8-3-3: Water Meters
8-3-4: Billing Procedure
8-3-5: Estimated Billing For Dead Meters
8-3-1: WATER AND SEWER TAPPING AND CONNECTION FEES AND CHARGES:
8-3-1-1: WATER TAPPING AND CONNECTION FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Responsibility For Taps:
      1.   City Responsibility:
         a.   Upon application duly executed and upon payment in advance, the
department will make water taps and furnish all materials to the owner or his
plumber for owner's plumber installation. Materials to be provided shall be
meter tile, ring and cover, meter setter, corporation stop, and meter.
         b.   When a bore under the roadway is required for water service, the
owner shall have a contractor bore under the roadway. Where a bore is not
possible and cutting the pavement is necessary, the owner shall be responsible
for all costs of cutting, backfilling and patching the roadway surface.
         c.   The city shall provide the materials (except copper tubing) for
three-fourths inch (3/4") and one inch (1") taps at the cost of said materials
to the city. Materials for all other tap sizes shall be provided by the
contractor.
      2.   Owner Responsibility:
         a.   Upon application duly executed and upon payment in advance, the
owner shall provide all labor and materials, other than those listed above, to
complete a water tap.
         b.   Upon building demolition, the owner shall be responsible to
disconnect the water service by cutting the service line on the house side of
the meter setter in the meter pit, and plugging the sewer lateral at the
property line.
         c.   The owner shall be responsible for cutting, backfilling and
patching of any cuts or excavations upon the city right of way or city streets.
All areas cut and dug within the city streets or sidewalk area shall be
backfilled with sand to approximately six inches (6") below finished grade. The
owner shall further be responsible for restoring the grade back to existing,
and restoration of all landscaping which has been damaged or interfered with
during digging. The owner shall notify JULIE utility locating service in
conformance with JULIE rules and recommendations prior to any digging.
   B.   Taps And Fees:
      1.   Fees Established: The owner shall pay to the city the following
tapping fees:
3/4 inch  $100.00 plus materials from city
1 inch    175.00  plus materials from city
11/2 inch 240.001  
2 inch    275.001  
4 inch    440.001  
6 inch    510.001  
8 inch    550.001  
10 inch   590.001  
12 inch   625.001  
 
Note:
      1.      Owner to supply all materials necessary for tap.
(Ord. 09-O-37, 4-21-2009)
      2.   Taps Prohibited Outside City Limits: No water taps shall be
permitted outside the municipal corporate limits unless specifically authorized
by a preannexation agreement. (Ord. 12-O-29, 9-18-2012)
      3.   Size Of Tap: Water taps shall be sized in accordance with the
Illinois state plumbing code.
   C.   Location Of Services Charge: The city shall charge thirty three dollars
($33.00) per hour with a one hour minimum charge for all services rendered by
the city in locating water lines for individual owners.
   D.   Metered Water:
      1.   Meters Required: All water services shall be metered including those
services used solely for fire protection. Waivers may be obtained for services
solely for fire protection only upon written consent of the plumbing inspector
and director of public works upon a finding that the installation of a meter
will cause sufficient loss of pressure or volume to render a sprinkler system
unworkable.
      2.   Location Of Meters: All water meters shall be located upon the city
right of way or easement.
      3.   Meters Owned By City: Ownership of all water meters shall remain
with the city at all times.
      4.   Meter Testing Charge: Customers may request a meter test in the
event all other avenues for determining water bill fluctuations have been
explored. There shall be a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per meter
tested. Said twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be added to the customer's
water bill as a charge. In the event that following testing it is determined
that said meter is found to be "faulty", being defined as not operating within
the guidelines of the American Water Works Association, the customer's account
shall be credited for said twenty five dollars ($25.00) previously charged.
   E.   Temporary Water Services And Charges: Temporary meters shall be set on
fire hydrants by the city for a flat fee of eighty dollars ($80.00). Regular
water rates for usage shall apply. A sum of three hundred dollars ($300.00)
shall be deposited by the user prior to installation of the meter for
replacement or repair of the meter should it be damaged by other than normal
wear.
   F.   New Main Testing Fee: The city shall charge fifty cents ($0.50) per
linear foot for the testing of all new water mains. The city shall perform the
work of disinfecting, flushing, bacterial testing, and putting into service a
new water main. The city shall be notified forty eight (48) hours in advance of
needing this work. (Ord. 09-O-37, 4-21-2009)
8-3-1-2: SEWER TAPPING AND CONNECTION FEES AND CHARGES:
   A.   Responsibility For Taps:
      1.   City Responsibility:
         a.   Upon application, duly executed upon payment in advance, the
department shall perform an inspection of the sewer tap prior to the contractor
covering said tap.
         b.   All taps shall be made with a saddle and stainless steel clamp
device as manufactured by DFW Plastics, Inc., or approved equal.
      2.   Owner Responsibility: Upon application duly executed and upon
payment in advance, the owner shall provide all digging and all labor and
materials to perform a sewer tap. The owner is further responsible for all
cutting, patching, repairing of city property, streets, sidewalks, and
backfill. Repaired areas of city streets and sidewalks shall be of sand
backfill with six inches (6") of grade.
   B.   Tap Inspection Fee: There shall be a sewer tapping inspection fee of
fifty dollars ($50.00) which shall be charged for each tap into the city sewer
system.
   C.   Location Of Services Charge: The city shall charge thirty three dollars
($33.00) per hour with a one hour minimum charge for all services rendered by
the city in locating sewer lines for owners.
   D.   Cleaning Of Sewer Lines Charge: The city shall charge one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) per hour, with a minimum of one hour charged, in the event
that the city is involved in the removal of grease and other foreign matter in
sewer lines. This charge shall be linked to the individual or entity from which
said contamination originated. (Ord. 09-O-37, 4-21-2009)
   E.   Sewer Taps Outside Municipal Corporate Limits: No sewer taps shall be
permitted outside the Municipal corporate limits unless specifically authorized
by a preannexation agreement. (Ord. 12-O-29, 9-18-2012)
8-3-1-3: TESTING OF NEW SANITARY SEWER:
The developer shall perform pressure testing, mandrel testing, and videoing of
the sanitary sewer mains after construction and before City acceptance of the
mains. City personnel shall witness all testing. (Ord. 09-O-37, 4-21-2009)
8-3-2: SEWER AND WATER RATES 1 :
   A.   Water and Sewer Service within Corporate Limits: All metered users of
the City water and sewer service within the corporate limits, excepting Eastern
Illinois University, shall be charged at the following rates for said services
on a monthly basis:
 
1,000 gallons or less $18.99 minimum charge
Next 9,000 gallons    $18.99 per 1,000 gallons
Over 10,000 gallons   $18.27 per 1,000 gallons
 
   B.   Water and Sewer Service to Eastern Illinois University and to the City
of Charleston:
      1.   Water and Sewer Service to University: Eastern Illinois University
shall be charged at the following rate:
 
All usage amounts $18.27 per 1,000 gallons
 
      2.   Water and Sewer Service to City Owned Facilities: City owned
facilities and properties shall be charged at the following rate:
 
All usage amounts $0
 
   C.   Water Services only within Corporate Limits: All users of City water
service only within the corporate limits shall be charged at the following
rates for said service on a monthly basis:
 
1,000 gallons or less $17.10 minimum charge
Next 9,000 gallons    $17.10 per 1,000 gallons
Over 10,000 gallons   $16.34 per 1,000 gallons
 
   D.   Service Outside Corporate Limits: Rates for service outside the
corporate limits are established as double the amount of rates inside the
corporate limits.
   E.   Meter Serving More Than One Customer: Dwelling units or separate
business enterprises not separately metered shall be charged in accordance with
the following formula: The total charge shall be computed by dividing the
number of business and/or dwelling units by the total metered usage to derive
an average usage per unit. Said average usage per unit shall then be computed
by the above rates and multiplied by the number of businesses and/or dwelling
units to derive the total charge, excepting as follows:
   If the average water and/or water and sewer usage is less than one thousand
(1,000) gallons, the total charge shall be derived by dividing the total water
and/or water and sewer usage by one thousand (1,000) gallons and multiplying
that figure by the charge for one thousand (1,000) gallons’ usage. Fractions
thus derived shall be counted as one.
   F.   Wastes Of Unusual Strength 2 : 
      1.   For BOD in excess of three hundred (300) parts per million, a charge
of one cent ($0.01) per pound.
      2.   For suspended solids in excess of three hundred fifty (350) parts
per million, a charge of one cent ($0.01) per pound.
   G.   Rules For Determining Charges:
      1.   Metered Units: For purposes of determining metered water or water
and sewer charges, actual usage shall be rounded to the nearest one hundred
(100) gallons of usage.
      2.   Nonmetered Residential Units: Residential units with water and sewer
service which are not metered shall be charged ten dollars ($10.00) per month
for service. Residential units with water service only which are not metered
shall be charged seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50) per month for service.
      3.   Nonmetered Nonresidential Structures: Nonresidential structures
which are not metered with water and sewer service shall be charged twenty
dollars ($20.00) per month. Nonresidential structures which are not metered
with water service only shall be charged fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month for
service.
   H.   Sewer Service Only: (Rep. by Ord. 12-O-29, 9-18-2012)
   I.   Bulk Water Sales And Use:
      1.   Bulk Water Taps:
         a.   Definition: The term “bulk water tap”, as used in this subsection
I1, shall mean any water line connection of one and one-half inches (11/2") or
more, which said connection shall be used for the purpose of servicing a bulk
water dealer or provider.
         b.   Requirements: The sale or distribution of water from a municipal
water system shall be prohibited except when such sale is made incidental to
and from a bulk water tap, said tap having been issued by the office of the
city clerk and said tap conforming in all respects with the rules and
regulations of the Illinois environmental protection agency as from time to
time amended.
      2.   Commercial Resale Of Water: Water sold in bulk for commercial resale
shall be charged at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) per two hundred fifty (250)
gallons. For the purposes of this subsection I2, “water sold for resale in
bulk” shall mean any water which is subject to resale or water transported for
delivery elsewhere in any tank, vessel or carrier with a capacity in excess of
twenty five (25) gallons.
      3.   Fire Protection:
         a.   City water taken and transported by local fire protection
district units or by firefighting units from the city or by any persons or
entities assisting those units for the purpose of fighting fire outside the
corporate limits of the city fire protection district shall be charged at a
rate equal to that charged bulk water purchasers for every gallon in excess of
twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons.
         b.   Individuals or entities having interests in property for which
city water is transported outside the city limits for firefighting purposes
shall be charged by the city in accordance with this subsection I3. (Ord. 74-O-
37, 10-15-1974; amd. Ord. 79-O-59, 9-4-1979; Ord. 80-O-40, 8-11-1980, eff.
retroactive to 7-1-1980; Ord. 86-O-11, 2-18-1986, eff. 3-1986; Ord. 88-O-48,
10-18-1988; Ord. 02-O-12, 4-16-2002; Ord. 19-O-19, 4-16-2019; Ord. 20-O-10, 4-
21-2020; Ord. 21-O-8, 4-20-2021; Ord. 2022-O-12, 4-5-2022; Ord. 2023-O-09, - -
2023; Ord. 2024-O-21, 4-2-2024; Ord. 2025-O-13, 4-4-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 8-2-10 of this title for wastewater service charges.
2 In addition to the foregoing, for wastes having unusual strengths, as defined
  in chapter 2 of this title, the following charges will be made:
8-3-3: WATER METERS:
   A.   Single Occupancy Units:
      1.   All single-family dwelling units shall hereafter be metered
separately. A "single-family dwelling unit" is defined as a detached building
designed or erected for and occupied exclusively by one family or household.
      2.   All single occupancy business enterprises shall also hereafter be
metered separately. A "single occupancy business enterprise" is defined as a
detached building designed or erected for and occupied exclusively by one
business enterprise.
   B.   Multiple Occupancy Units: Multiple dwelling units within a single
structure or multiple business enterprises within a single structure may either
be metered separately or jointly. A "multiple dwelling unit or business
enterprise" is defined as a detached building designed or erected for two (2)
or more separate dwellings or businesses. Each such structure shall have at
least one meter. Multiple dwelling or business enterprise structures shall
hereafter not be jointly metered. (Ord. 74-O-37, 10-15-1974)
   C.   Installation Of Water Meters: No meter shall be installed under the
provisions of this chapter for any structure until such time as during the
course of the construction of such structure and the construction grade is
established and set. The cost of meters damaged and the repairs thereof during
the course of said construction and establishment of the final grade shall be
the responsibility of the property owner. (Ord. 78-O-22, 6-13-1978)
8-3-4: BILLING PROCEDURE 1 :
   A.   Billing Schedule: Water and/or sewer bills shall be billed by the
office of the comptroller according to the following schedule:
      1.   Eastern Illinois University shall be billed not later than the last
day of the first week of each month.
      2.   Industrial accounts shall be billed not later than the last day of
the first week of each month.
      3.   All other water/sewer accounts shall be billed monthly. (Ord. 06-O-
19, 4-18-2006)
   B.   Late Charges: A late charge of ten percent (10%) shall be assessed
against all delinquent water and/or sewer bills. Water and sewer bills shall be
considered delinquent if not paid by their due date. (Ord. 82-O-3, 3-2-1982)
   C.   Disconnection Of Water Service:
      1.   Water service shall be disconnected for any customer whose
outstanding water/sewer balance, including applicable penalties or late fees
accrued, is more than ten (10) days past due. In the event payment sufficient
to satisfy the outstanding balance, including applicable penalties or late fees
accrued, has not been made prior to the disconnect date, disconnection or any
administrative act of the water department, there shall be a twenty five dollar
($25.00) fee.
      2.   The customer has the right to a pretermination hearing as prescribed
in this section.
         a.   Request for hearing must be remitted by the customer to the
comptroller's office, either by mail or in person delivery.
         b.   The request shall be made in writing and contain the name,
address and telephone number of the person disputing a charge, identify with
particularity the amount or portion of the bill(s)/charge(s) in dispute, and
state the specific grounds or reasons the charges billed are being disputed
(the customer's ability to pay shall not be a relevant consideration or basis
for dispute).
         c.   Upon receiving a written request for a pretermination hearing, a
designee of the city shall schedule a hearing with the requestor. The
termination of water service shall be delayed until after the hearing takes
place unless undisputed balances are still outstanding. The requestor may be
subject to an administrative adjudication hearing fee.
         d.   The hearing shall provide the customer an opportunity to be heard
regarding any disputed portion of the bill. The hearing shall be open to the
public, informal, and the hearing officer shall accept evidence only pertaining
to the accuracy of the charges.
         e.   At the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall enter
findings, decision and order declaring the amount due and owing, if any, and a
copy of the findings, decision and order shall be provided to the city's
comptroller department, as well as the party(ies) requesting the hearing.
         f.   If the amount due is found to be different from the amount
originally claimed by the city in its initial notice of water service
termination, an amended notice of water service termination shall be served
upon the owner and tenants of the property in the same manner as the initial
notice, except that no further opportunity to request a hearing shall be
provided. In such cases, the date for water service termination shall be not
less than ten (10) days from the date of service of the amended notice.
         g.   Immediate termination shall be allowed if the customer fails to
appear for the scheduled hearing or the customer is unresponsive to the city's
attempt to schedule a hearing date and time.
      3.   When the water supply to a property is turned off, it shall be
unlawful for any person other than a city employee or city designee to attempt
to turn said water supply back on, or to tamper with the water meter, service
connection, service pipes, valves, shutoff boxes or any other element or
appurtenance of the city waterworks system. Any such act shall be considered a
violation of this code, attributable to the owner and/or occupant of the
subject property and a penalty shall be imposed.
      4.   Following termination of water service, such service shall be
restored to the premises following payment in full of all outstanding charges
for water/sewer services, late fees and penalties. Reconnection or resumption
of service during other than normal city business hours shall require a fifty
dollar ($50.00) fee.
      5.   There will be a twenty five dollar ($25.00) service charge for any
payment returned to the city by the financial institution or depository of a
customer for any reason.
      6.   Accounts that have been disconnected due to nonpayment for at least
ten (10) days shall be padlocked or the meters pulled/removed to prevent usage
until the account is paid in full. All meters shall be padlocked or pulled/
removed when an account is finalized and disconnected until a new resident
activates service.
      7.   Terminating water service for nonpayment shall not be the exclusive
remedy for nonpayment. The city may also record a lien for delinquent payments
and foreclose on such liens in accordance with subsection D of this section and
pursue any other collection methods available to the city by law. Any and all
such courses of action may be pursued simultaneously and shall not be mutually
exclusive to one another. (Ord. 16-O-24, 6-7-2016)
   D.   Lien For Unpaid Charges: Any unpaid water and/or sewer charges shall be
placed as a lien against the property as provided by law until said charges are
paid in full. (Ord. 80-O-63, 12-2-1980)
   E.   Property Owner Responsibility; Duplicate Bills: The owner or owners of
the property having city water and/or sewer service shall be responsible for
unpaid water and/or sewer bills. The water department shall provide, as a
service to said property owner(s), the ability to obtain duplicate billings of
water usage for which they shall be responsible. Said duplicate billings shall
be available by the property owner completing an application for duplicate
billing in the form maintained by the water department and by the paying of a
ten dollar ($10.00) annual fee, per property, for said duplicate billing
service.
   F.   Service Activation Fee: Prior to connection of water service, there
shall be paid a twenty five dollar ($25.00) activation fee. This activation fee
shall be applicable for any "new service" that requires a final meter reading
for billing purposes or turning water on at a meter that has been turned off by
the water department. This fee is further applicable for an existing customer
changing addresses of water service. (Ord. 06-O-17, 4-18-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 8-2-11 of this title.
8-3-5: ESTIMATED BILLING FOR DEAD METERS:
   A.   Definition: A "dead meter" shall be defined as any water meter located
within the city showing no consumption or less than fifty percent (50%) of the
average consumption in the same month in the year immediately preceding. A
"dead meter" shall further be defined as any water meter located within the
city showing less than seventy percent (70%) of the average consumption in the
year immediately preceding and more than fifty percent (50%) of the average
consumption in the same month and year immediately preceding; provided, that
said meter has been determined to be defective by a corporation who operates in
the business of providing and maintaining water meters. (Ord. 91-O-20, 6-18-
1991; amd. Ord. 92-O-16, 6-2-1992)
   B.   Estimate Of Charges: In the event that a water meter is determined to
be a "dead meter", as defined in subsection A of this section, the city shall
be authorized to estimate, charge and collect for water use as follows:
      1.   In the event of an industrial use, including Eastern Illinois
University, trailer parks, and community unit school district 1, the city shall
estimate water usage based upon the average of three (3) months using the month
twelve (12) months immediately preceding the dead meter estimate, the month
prior to said month twelve (12) months preceding the dead meter estimate and
the month immediately following the month twelve (12) months prior to the dead
meter month. Based upon said estimated charges, the city shall bill and shall
be paid for water usage based upon said estimated water use.
      2.   In the event of residential properties showing a "dead meter", as
defined in subsection A of this section, the bill shall be estimated by using
the three (3) months immediately preceding the month in which the dead meter is
discovered and averaging said three (3) months and charging for water usage
based upon said average.
   C.   New Meters Within Billing Cycle: When a new meter is installed in the
middle of the billing cycle, the water customer shall be charged for
consumption as last read upon the old meter and consumption as read upon the
new meter. (Ord. 91-O-20, 6-18-1991)
CHAPTER 4
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Cross Connection Prohibited
8-4-3: Where Protection Is Required
8-4-4: Backflow Prevention Devices
8-4-5: Booster Pumps
8-4-6: Thermo Expansion Control
8-4-7: Violations; Penalties
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AGENCY: Illinois environmental protection agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the city water
department.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, streams, process fluids or used water. These waters may be polluted or
contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over which
the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method or type of construction intended
to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for backflow
prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois plumbing code
and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
CLOSED WATER SYSTEM: Any water supply system which is isolated with a backflow
prevention or cross connection control device which does not allow the system,
through thermo expansion, to back up into city mains.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building plumbing system is considered to be a "customer's water system".
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
Direct Cross Connection: A cross connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substances.
Indirect Cross Connection: A cross connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE standard 1015. A "double check valve
assembly" must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the watertightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the atmosphere
between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers. The word "severe", as used to qualify "health hazard",
means a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in
death or significant reduction in the quality of life.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois plumbing
code, 77 Illinois administrative code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative code 604.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois administrative
code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a consumer's potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters.
   B.   Process waters.
   C.   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality.
   D.   Cooling waters.
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams or irrigation systems.
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension.
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in
industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per
year. A "public water supply" is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an automatic
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two (2) check
valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks shall be
less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valve at less than the supply pressure.
The unit must include tightly closed shutoff valves located at each end of the
device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at
the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
WATER SYSTEM: The combination of the "public water supply system" and the
"consumer's water system", as defined in this section. (Ord. 90-O-21, 6-5-1990;
amd. Ord. 97-O-24, 8-5-1997)
8-4-2: CROSS CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   The connection between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality is prohibited, except when and where approved cross connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested, and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   B.   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality. (Ord. 90-O-21, 6-5-1990)
8-4-3: WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
   A.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
condition or conditions exist:
      1.   Premises have an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the water treatment plant
superintendent, utility coordinator/superintendent or plumbing inspector, and
the source is approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      2.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply systems. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the water treatment plant superintendent or utility
coordinator/superintendent.
      3.   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of
the water treatment plant superintendent, utility coordinator/superintendent or
plumbing inspector, are not correctable or have intricate plumbing arrangements
which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross connections exist.
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
      5.   Premises having repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
   B.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities, unless the water treatment plant
superintendent determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, and nursing homes.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Piers, docks, and waterfront facilities.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pump stations or storm water pumping
stations.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      10.   Car washes.
      11.   Pesticide, herbicide or exterminating plants.
      12.   Farm service supplies. (Ord. 90-O-21, 6-5-1990)
8-4-4: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the city water treatment plant superintendent.
   B.   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
rules and regulations as adopted by the water treatment plant superintendent
and only as specified by said water treatment plant superintendent.
Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available on the site or upon
request by the water treatment plant superintendent. (Ord. 90-O-21, 6-5-1990)
8-4-5: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure
cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the city water
treatment plant superintendent that said device is operable. (Ord. 90-O-21, 6-
5-1990)
8-4-6: THERMO EXPANSION CONTROL:
A device for controlling thermo expansion shall be installed whenever the
building supply pressure becomes greater than the temperature and pressure
relief valve pressure settings where a backflow prevention device or check
valve is installed on the potable water supply of a building. Exception: A
structure service solely in instantaneous water heaters. (Ord. 97-O-24, 8-5-
1997)
8-4-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
   A.   The water treatment plant superintendent may deny or discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises
where any backflow prevention device required by this chapter is not installed
or maintained in a manner acceptable to the water treatment plant
superintendent, or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been
removed or bypassed, or an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises,
or if a low pressure cutoff required by this chapter is not installed and/or
maintained in working order.
   B.   Water service to such premises may be denied, at the discretion of the
water treatment plant superintendent, and not restored until the consumer has
corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with this
chapter and to the satisfaction of the water treatment plant superintendent,
and the required reconnection fee is paid. (Ord. 97-O-24, 8-5-1997)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE
(International Building Code / IBC)
SECTION:
9-1-1: Adoption Of Code
9-1-2: Amendments To Code
9-1-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which were heretofore placed on file
in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated the international
building code, 2021 edition, as published by the International Code Council,
Incorporated, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city, for the
control of building structures as herein defined, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international
building code, 2021 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set forth in this chapter, subject to the modifications,
exceptions and additional regulations set out in section
9-1-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
9-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Modifications to the text of the international building code, 2021 edition, are
as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: Insert “City of Charleston” for (name of jurisdiction).
Section 101.4.3 Plumbing: Delete the words international plumbing code and
insert the words Illinois state plumbing code. Delete the sentence “The
provisions of the international private sewage disposal code shall apply to
private sewage disposal systems” and insert the sentence “Private sewage
disposal systems shall comply with the applicable rules of the Illinois
environmental protection agency, Illinois department of public health, Coles
County health department, and the City of Charleston.”
Section 103 Code Compliance Agency is deleted without substitution.
Section109.3 Permit valuations is deleted and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   Building Permit Fee: The fee for building permits shall be four dollars and
fifty cents ($4.50) per every one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the estimated
construction cost with a minimum permit fee of twenty-five dollars $25.00. If
plans must be sent out to a professional plan review service because of the
complexity of the building design an additional permit fee equal to the cost of
the plan review will be charged. Additionally, if due to the complexity of the
building design a professional inspection service must be utilized, the owner
will be assessed an inspection fee equal to the cost of the inspection service.
The estimated construction cost shall be calculated using figures and methods
provided by the International Code Council.
   The fee for new electrical construction permits shall be $1.25 per $1,000.00
of estimated construction value as determined by the method described above,
with a minimum permit fee of twenty-five dollars $25.00.
   The fee for new mechanical construction permits shall be $1.25 per $1000.00
of estimated construction value as determined by the method described above,
with a minimum permit fee of twenty-five dollars $25.00.
   Starting Construction Without A Valid Permit: The fee shall be $100.00 per
day for every day without a valid permit.
   Sign Permits: The fees for sign permits shall be one dollar per square foot
of sign area, with a minimum permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). All
signs connected to a power source shall further be charged an electrical sign
fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   Building Demolition Permit: The fee for building demolition shall be one
dollar ($1.00) per every one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area of
the building, with a minimum permit fee of twenty-five dollars $25.00.
   Reinspection Fee: When additional inspections are necessary, due to
inaccurate or incorrect information, failure to make necessary repairs, or
faulty installations, a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be made for each
such inspection.
   Fee for Appeal: The fee for appeal shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
Section 114.4 Violation Penalties is hereby deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Section 114.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and
not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) at the discretion of the
court. Each day said violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 115.4 Failure to comply is hereby deleted and the following inserted in
lieu thereof:
   Section 115.4 Failure to comply: Any person who shall continue any work on
or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be guilty of a petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) at the discretion of the court. Each day a violation continues after
due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 202.0 General Definitions shall be modified by the insertion of the
following:
   Access Drives: Any area or drive used to provide access to a parking lot.
   Central Area Neighborhood: The geographic area of the city of Charleston
which is described as Jackson Avenue between Fifth (5th) and Eighth (8th)
Streets, Sixth (6th) Street between Madison Avenue and Van Buren Avenue, Monroe
Avenue between Fifth (5th) and Eighth (8th) Streets and Seventh (7th) Street
between Madison Avenue and Van Buren Avenue.
   Parking Lot: Any area used or designated for the use of parking motor
vehicles at any other use other than use groups R-3 (one and two family
dwellings) structures.
   The definitions contained with the international building code as to
residential use groups shall only apply to title 9, chapter 1 of the city code.
Section 429 Specific Standards For Building Improvements: Add new section,
429.1 as follows:
   Section 429.1 Specific Standards For Building Improvements: This section
shall apply whenever building improvements are to be made in the central area
neighborhood:
      a)   Covered Facades: Materials shall not be applied over building’s
upper facades, which conceal window openings or original features.
      b)   Original Building Features: The removal or alteration of original
building features, which would preclude their restoration, shall not be
permitted.
      c)   Permanent Building Projections: Additions or permanent projections
to facades shall not be constructed. When replacement of storefront materials
are required, designs which are compatible with their surroundings shall be
created and the alterations should be integrated in accordance with the general
ground rules for sensitive rehabilitation from the design guidelines, prepared
by Wallace Rapp, A.I.A., The Dearborn Associates of Chicago. Wood or other
combustible materials shall not be permitted in storefront exterior repairs or
alterations. Materials, which simulate natural materials in storefront exterior
repairs or alterations, shall not be utilized.
      d)   Metal Canopies: Permanently affixed metal and wood canopies shall
not be repaired or replaced with materials other than those allowed in
paragraph e).
      e)   Awnings: Awnings shall be of flexible fabric materials and shall be
supported by the fronts of the buildings only. Care shall be exercised to
coordinate sizes, color schemes and graphics on the awnings for a harmonious
overall effect.
      f)   Original Historic Sign: All inscriptions and identifications of
builders shall be preserved and restored. No alterations to buildings shall be
made which would cover or obscure these original markings.
      g)   Unsuitable Materials: Wood siding, wood framing or shingles shall
not be allowed to the facades and storefronts of commercial structures.
      h)   Inappropriate Alterations: Original exterior building materials
shall be maintained to prevent deterioration that necessitates reconstruction.
When major repairs are required, they shall comply with the general ground
rules for sensitive rehabilitation and preserve those qualities of the
buildings, which exemplify the architectural character of the community.
      i)   Glass Storefronts: The coverings of storefront glazing to accomplish
any new use, retail or otherwise, shall not be permitted. If blinds, drapery,
shutters, construction or devices are employed to conceal the activities within
an existing storefront, they shall be confined to the interior of the building
behind the glass surface and shall not be permanent. The height of the bulkhead
in any alteration shall not be raised above that of the neighboring properties.
Painting or otherwise rendering glass fronts opaque shall not be permitted.
      j)   Central Area Neighborhood: If the necessity for new construction is
proven, the facade must duplicate the width and heights of the existing
structure it replaces. The new facade must be built to align with the facades
of adjacent structures and shall be aligned continuously in its height. The new
facade must be integrated harmoniously with adjacent facades with regard to
continuity of floor heights, window openings, materials and colors. Facades
shall not provide openings at the ground floor level to allow vehicular access.
No curb cuts shall be allowed which might permit vehicles to cross the present
sidewalks.
      k)   General Provisions: Parking lots shall be landscaped to screen
parked automobiles from the street. Brick sides and rears of existing
buildings, which are presently unpainted, shall not be painted, except when
necessary to preserve the structural integrity of the wall or when required for
weatherproofing for the type of brick. Repainting of those previously painted
surfaces as required for maintenance shall be allowed but the use of reflective
colors shall be prohibited.
Section 430 (add new section) Drainage And Protection Of Property And Parking
Lots, as follows:
   Section 430.1 All building sites and parking lots shall be designed and
built so that the storm water run-off does not adversely affect adjoining
properties, including city streets and rights of way.
   Section 430.1.1 Design: All building sites and parking lots shall be
designed so as to discharge the design flow of a ten (10) year rain (as used in
accepted engineering practices for this area) for the undeveloped site and
detain all waters or runoff up to a one hundred (100) year rain (as used in
accepted engineering practices for this area) for the developed site. Runoff
shall be calculated using Illinois department of transportation (IDOT) design
guidelines (Q=CIA) method. Maximum runoff coefficients shall be used unless the
city approves others.
   Section 430.1.2 Plans And Approvals: Plans and calculations shall be
submitted to the city for approval. The plan shall be a minimum scale of one
inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'), the plan may be at a smaller scale when the
site is so large as to require it, approval must be given by the public works
director or city planner. The calculations shall support the design indicated
on the drawing and prove how the amount of retention area was arrived at and
indicate all assumed values, which were used in the calculations.
   Section 430.2 Protection Of Adjoining Properties: A concrete curb or a
concrete, steel, plastic bumper or other approved method shall be used to
protect adjoining properties from being damaged by traffic on the parking lot.
Section 906.1 Where required is hereby deleted and the following inserted in
lieu thereof:
   Section 906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed
in all of the following locations:
   1.   In new and existing Group A,B,E,F,H,I,M,R-1,R-2,R-4 and S occupancies.
   Exceptions:
      1.   In Group R-2 occupancies, portable fire extinguishers shall be
required only in locations specified in Items 2 through 7 where each dwelling
unit is provided with a portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of
2-A: 10 B:C.
      2.    In Group E occupancies, portable fire extinguishers shall be
required only in locations specified in Items 2 through 7 where each classroom
is provided with a portable fire extinguisher have a minimum rating of a 2-A:
10 B:C.
      3.   In storage areas of Group S occupancies where forklift, powered
industrial truck or powered cart operators are the primary occupants, fixed
extinguishers, as specified in NFPA 10, shall not be required where in
accordance with all of the following:
      3.1   Use of vehicle-mounted extinguishers shall be approved by the fire
code official.
      3.2   Each vehicle shall be equipped with a 10-pound, 40 A: 80 B:
C extinguisher affixed to the vehicle using a mounting bracket approved by the
extinguisher manufacturer or the fire code official for vehicular use.
      3.3   Not less than two spare extinguishers of equal or greater rating
shall be available on-site to replace a discharged extinguisher.
      3.4   Vehicle operators shall be trained in the proper operation, use,
and inspection of extinguishers.
      3.5   Inspections of vehicle-mounted extinguishers shall be performed
daily.
   2.   Within 30 feet (9144 mm) of commercial cooking equipment and from
domestic cooking equipment in Group I-1: I-2, Condition1; and R2 college
dormitory occupancies. .
   3.   In areas where flammable or combustible liquids are stored, used, or
dispensed.
   4.   On each floor of structures under construction, except Group R-
3 occupancies, in accordance with Section 3316.1.
   5.   Where required by the sections indicated in Table 906.1.
   6.   Special-hazard areas, including but not limited to laboratories,
computer rooms and generator rooms, where required by the fire code official.
   7.   Any other location deemed necessary by the fire code official.
Section 914.7 Special amusement areas is hereby deleted and the following
inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 914.7 Special amusement areas may comply with Sections 914.7.1 and
914.7.2 or when the fire code official requires.
   Section 914.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system is hereby deleted and the
following inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 914.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. Buildings containing special
amusement areas may equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance to Section903.1.1. or when the fire code official requires where the
special amusement area is temporary, the sprinkler water supply shall be of an
approved temporary means.
   Section 914.7.2 Automatic smoke detection is hereby deleted and the
following inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 914.7.2 Automatic smoke detection. Special amusement areas may be
equipped with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section
907.2.12 or when the fire code official requires.
   Section 1612.3 Establishment Of Flood Hazard Areas: Insert City of
Charleston for name of jurisdiction and July 18, 2011, for insert date of
issuance.
Chapter 32 Encroachments into the Public Right-Of-Way is deleted without
substitution.
Appendix F is adopted as if fully set forth in this document.
Appendix G is adopted as if fully set forth in this document. (Ord. 2024-O-36,
11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 2
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE
(International Residential Code / IRC)
SECTION:
9-2-1: Adoption Of Code
9-2-2: Amendments To Code
9-2-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which were heretofore placed on file
in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated the international
residential code, 2021 edition, as published by the International Code Council,
Incorporated, is hereby adopted as the residential building code of the city,
for the control of building one- and two-family dwelling structures as herein
defined, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of the international residential code, 2021 edition, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set forth in this
chapter, subject to the modifications, exceptions and additional regulations
set out in section
9-2-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
9-2-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Modifications to the text of the international residential code, 2021 edition,
are as follows:
Section 101.1 Title: Insert “City of Charleston” for (name of jurisdiction).
Section 103 Department Of Building Safety is deleted without substitution.
Section 105.2 exemption 1 is deleted and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   Section 105.2 exemption 1. One-story detached accessory structures used as
tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area
does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m2)
Section 108.3 Building Permit Valuations is deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Building Permit Fee: The fee for building permits shall be four dollars and
fifty cents ($4.50) per every one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of the estimated
construction cost, with a minimum permit fee of twenty-five dollars $25.00. If
plans must be sent out to a professional plan review service because of the
complexity of the building design an additional permit fee equal to the cost of
the plan review will be charged. Additionally, if due to the complexity of the
building design a professional inspection service must be utilized, the owner
will be assessed an inspection fee equal to the cost of the inspection service.
The estimated construction cost shall be calculated using figures and methods
provided by the International Code Council.
   The fee for new electrical construction permits shall be $1.25 per $1000.00
of estimated construction value as determined by the method described above,
with a minimum permit fee of twenty-five dollars $25.00.
   The fee for new mechanical construction permits shall be $1.25 per $1000.00
of estimated construction value as determined by the method described above,
with a minimum permit fee of twenty-five dollars $25.00.
   Starting Construction without a Valid Permit: The fee shall be $100.00 per
day for every day without a valid permit.
   Reinspection Fee: When additional inspections are necessary, due to
inaccurate or incorrect information, failure to make necessary repairs, or
faulty installations, a charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be made for each
such inspection.
   Fee for Appeal: The fee for appeal shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00).
Section 113.4 Violation Penalties is hereby deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Section 113.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and
not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) at the discretion of the
court. Each day said violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 114.4 Failure to comply is hereby deleted and the following inserted in
lieu thereof:
   Section 114.4 Failure to comply: Any person who shall continue any work on
or about the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be guilty of a petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) at the discretion of the court. Each day a violation continues after
due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
Table R301.2 Insert the following values in the table:
Ground snow load:                  20 pounds per square foot
Wind design                         
Speed:                             107 miles per hour
Topographic effects:               No
Special wind region:               No
Windborne debris zone:             No.
Seismic design category:           B
Subject to damage from              
Weathering:                        Severe
Frost line depth:                  32 inches
Termite:                           Moderate to heavy
Ice barrier underlayment required: Yes
Flood hazards:                     Yes, see title 9, chapter 11 of the
                                   Charleston city code
Air freezing index:                1055
Mean annual temp:                  53.4°F
 
Section 302.5.1 Opening protection is hereby deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Section 302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly
into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings
between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not
less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel
doors not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors.
Section 313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems is hereby deleted and
the following inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems. An automatic
sprinkler system may be installed in townhouses.
Section 313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic sprinkler systems. An
automatic sprinkler system may be installed in one- and two-family dwellings.
Chapters 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42
and 43 are deleted without substitution.
Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, E, and H are adopted as part of the code as if
fully set forth in this document. (Ord. 11-O-43, 10-18-2011, eff. 1-1-2012;
amd. Ord. 18-O-36, 12-18-2018; Ord. 19-O-41, 12-17-2019; Ord. 20-O-32, 12-15-
2020; Ord. 2021-O-29, 12-7-2021; Ord. 2023-O-1, 1-3-2023; Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-
2024)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE CODE
SECTION:
9-3-1: Adoption Of Code
9-3-2: Amendments To Code
9-3-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which were heretofore placed on file
in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated the international
fire code, 2021 edition, as published by the International Code Council, Inc.,
is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of the city, for the control of
buildings and structures as herein defined, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the international
fire code, 2021 edition, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set forth in this chapter, subject to the modifications,
exceptions and additional regulations set out in section
9-3-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
9-3-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Modifications to the text of the international fire code, 2021 edition, are as
follows:
Section 101.1 Title: Insert City of Charleston (Name of Jurisdiction)
Section 103 Code Compliance Agency is deleted without substitution.
Section 111.5 A new section, 111.5, shall be inserted as follows:
   Section 111.5 Fee For Appeal: Fee for an appeal shall be one hundred fifty
dollars ($150)
Section 112.3.3 Prosecution of violations is hereby deleted and the following
inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 112.3.3 Prosecution of violations: If the notice is not complied
with within the time specified by the fire code official is authorized to
request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate
legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct, or abate such
violation or to require removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the
structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or of the order or
direction made pursuant hereto.
Section 112.4 Violation penalties is hereby deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Section 112.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this Code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the fire code official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be
subject to a civil fine of not less than Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250.00)
nor more than Seven Hundred Fifty Dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A
separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues. Any such person may be further ordered to pay
restitution to the City of Charleston for any costs incurred by the City of
Charleston as a result of the violation of this Code, excluding attorney fees
incurred in the prosecution of such violation. Notwithstanding any provision in
this Code to the contrary, wherever any statute or public act of the General
Assembly shall limit the amount of any fine or penalty, the fine or penalty
imposed by this Code shall be the maximum amount permitted by such statute or
public act. Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation
of any provision of this Code by any officer, director, manager, or other agent
or employee of any person shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
person, and the person shall be punishable in the same manner as if the act or
omission had been done or omitted by him personally.
Section 113.4 Failure to comply is hereby deleted and the following inserted in
lieu thereof:
   Section 113.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as the person
is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
subject to the penalties prescribed in Section 112.4, as well as the provisions
contained within Section 112.4
Section 311.2.2 Fire protection is hereby deleted and the following inserted in
lieu thereof:
   Section 311.2.2 Fire protection. Fire alarm, sprinkler and standpipe systems
shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times
   Exceptions:
   1.   Where the premises have been cleared of all combustible materials and
debris and, in the opinion of the fire code official, the type of construction,
fire separation distance and security of the premises do not create a fire
hazard.
   2.   Where approved by the fire code official, buildings that will not be
heated and where fire protection systems will be exposed to freezing
temperatures, fire alarms, and automatic sprinkler systems are permitted to be
placed out of service and standpipes are permitted to be maintained as dry
systems (without an automatic water supply), provided the building has no
contents or storage, and windows, doors, and other openings are secured to
prohibit entry by unauthorized persons.
   3.   Were approved by the fire code official, fire alarm and automatic
sprinkler system are permitted to be placed out of service in seasonally
occupied buildings: that will not be heated; where fire protection systems will
be exposed to freezing temperatures; where fire areas do not exceed 12,000
square feet (115 m2); and that do not store motor vehicles or hazardous
materials.
   4.   As otherwise approved by the fire code official.
Section 506.1 Rapid entry key lock box system is hereby deleted and the
following inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 506.1 Rapid entry key lock box system. Where access to or within a
building, structure, or any portion thereof, is restricted because of secured
opening, or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-
fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a rapid
entry key lock box to be installed in an approved location, and such rapid
entry key lock box system shall comply with the regulations as contained within
Section 1-8B-16 of the Municipal Code of Charleston, Illinois.
Section 906.1 Where required is hereby deleted and the following inserted in
lieu thereof:
   Section 906.1 Where required. Portable fire extinguishers shall be installed
in all of the following locations:
   8.   In new and existing Group A,B,E,F,H,I,M,R-1,R-2,R-4 and S occupancies.
   Exceptions:
      1.   In Group R-2 occupancies, portable fire extinguishers shall be
required only in locations specified in Items 2 through 7 where each dwelling
unit is provided with a portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of
2-A: 10 B:C.
      2.   In Group E occupancies, portable fire extinguishers shall be
required only in locations specified in Items 2 through 7 where each classroom
is provided with a portable fire extinguisher have a minimum rating of a 2-A:
10 B:C.
      3.   In storage areas of Group S occupancies where forklift, powered
industrial truck or powered cart operators are the primary occupants, fixed
extinguishers, as specified in NFPA 10, shall not be required where in
accordance with all of the following:
      3.1   Use of vehicle-mounted extinguishers shall be approved by the fire
code official.
      3.2   Each vehicle shall be equipped with a 10-pound, 40 A: 80 B:
C extinguisher affixed to the vehicle using a mounting bracket approved by the
extinguisher manufacturer or the fire code official for vehicular use.
      3.3   Not less than two spare extinguishers of equal or greater rating
shall be available on-site to replace a discharged extinguisher.
      3.4   Vehicle operators shall be trained in the proper operation, use,
and inspection of extinguishers.
      3.5   Inspections of vehicle-mounted extinguishers shall be performed
daily.
   9.   Within 30 feet (9144 mm) of commercial cooking equipment and from
domestic cooking equipment in Group I-1: I-2, Condition1; and R2 college
dormitory occupancies. .
   10.   In areas where flammable or combustible liquids are stored, used, or
dispensed.
   11.   On each floor of structures under construction, except Group R-
3 occupancies, in accordance with Section 3316.1.
   12.   Where required by the sections indicated in Table 906.1.
   13.   Special-hazard areas, including but not limited to laboratories,
computer rooms and generator rooms, where required by the fire code official.
   14.   Any other location deemed necessary by the fire code official.
Section 914.7 Special amusement areas is hereby deleted and the following
inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 914.7 Special amusement areas may comply with Sections 914.7.1 and
914.7.2 or when the fire code official requires.
Section 914.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system is hereby deleted and the following
inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 914.7.1 Automatic sprinkler system. Buildings containing special
amusement areas may equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in
accordance to Section903.1.1. or when the fire code official requires where the
special amusement area is temporary, the sprinkler water supply shall be of an
approved temporary means.
Section 914.7.2 Automatic smoke detection is hereby deleted and the following
inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 914.7.2 Automatic smoke detection. Special amusement areas may be
equipped with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section
907.2.12 or when the fire code official requires.
Section 1103.5 Sprinkler Systems is hereby deleted
Section 1103.8.3 Power source is hereby deleted and the following inserted in
lieu thereof:
   Section 1103.8.3 Power source. Single-station smoke alarms shall receive
their primary power from building wiring, provided that such wiring is served
from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke
alarms with integral strobes that are not equipped with battery backup shall be
connected to an emergency electrical system. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal
when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a
disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.
   Exception:
      1.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery-operated in existing
buildings where construction is not taking place.
      2.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery-operated in
buildings that are not served from a commercial power source
      3.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in existing
areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in
removal of interior walls or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless
there is an attic, crawl space, or basement available that could provide access
for building wiring without removal of interior finishes.
      4.   Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in sleeping
rooms that were not previously provided with AC powered smoke alarm.
Section 1103.9 Carbon monoxide alarms is hereby deleted and the following
inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 1103.9 Carbon monoxide alarms. Carbon Monoxide detection shall be
installed in existing Group I-1, I-2, I-4 and R occupancies and in classrooms
in Group E occupancies where those units include any of the conditions
identified in Sections 915.1.2 through 915.1.6 and the (430 ILCS 135) Illinois
Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector Act. The carbon monoxide alarms shall be
installed in locations specified in Section 915.2 and the installation shall be
in accordance with Section 915.4.
   Exemptions:
      1.   Carbon Monoxide alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated
where the Code that was in effect at the time of construction did not require
carbons monoxide detectors to be provided.
      2.   Carbon monoxide alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated
in dwelling units that are not served from a commercial power source.
      3.   A carbon monoxide detection system in accordance with Section 915.5
shall be an acceptable alternative to carbon monoxide alarms.
Section 3103.3.1 Special amusement area is hereby deleted and the following
inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 3103.3.1 Special amusement area. Tents and other membrane structures
erected as a special amusement area may be equipped with an automatic sprinkler
system in accordance with Section 914.7 or when the fire official requires it.
Section 3103.8.2 Location is hereby deleted and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   Section 3103.8.2 Location. Tents or membrane structures shall not be located
within 20 feet (6096 mm) of lot lines, buildings, other tents or membrane
structures, parked vehicles or internal combustion engines, unless approved by
the fire code official. For the purpose of determining required distances,
support ropes and guy wires shall be considered as part of the temporary
membrane structure or tent.
Section 5601.1 Scope is hereby deleted and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   Section 5601.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter, along with (425 ILCS
30), Fireworks Regulations Act of Illinois, and (425 ILCS 35), Pyrotechnic Use
Act, shall govern the possession, manufacture, storage, handling, sale, and use
of explosives, explosives materials, fireworks and small arms ammunition:
   Exceptions:
      1.   The Armed Forces of the United States, Coast Guard or National
Guard.
      2.   Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States
Pharmacopoeia.
      3.   The possession, storage, and use of small arms ammunition where
packaged in accordance with DOTn packaging requirements.
      4.   The possession, storage and use of not more than 1 pound (0.454 kg)
of commercially manufactured sporting black powder, 20 pounds (9 kg) of
smokeless powder and 10,000 small arms primers for hand loading of small arms
ammunition for personal consumption.
      5.   The use of explosive materials by federal, state, and local
regulatory, law enforcement and fire agencies acting in their official
capacities
      6.   Special industrial explosive devices that in the aggregate contain
less than 50 pounds (23 kg) of explosive materials.
      7.   The possession, storage and use of blank industrial-powered load
cartridges where packaged in accordance with DOTn packaging regulations.
      8.   Transportation in accordance with DOTn 49 CFR Parts 100-185.
      9.   Items preempted by federal regulations.
Section 5601.1.3 Fireworks is hereby deleted and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   Section 5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale
handling and use of fireworks are prohibited except as authorized by (425 ILCS
30), Fireworks Regulations Act of Illinois, and (425 ILCS 35), Pyrotechnic Use
Act.
   Exceptions:
      1.   Storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in Section 5604
      2.   Manufacture, assembly, and testing of fireworks as allowed in
Section 5605.
      3.   The use of fireworks for fireworks displays as allowed in section
5608.
      4.   The possession, storage, sale, handling and use of specific types of
Division 1.4G fireworks where allowed by applicable laws, ordinances, and
regulations, provided that such fireworks and facilities, comply with the 2006
Edition of NFPA 1124, CPSC 16 CFR Pars 1500 and 1507, and DOTn 49 CFR parts
100-185, as applicable for consumer fireworks
   APPENDICES
   ADOPTION OF APPENDICES: The City of Charleston, Illinois, hereby adopts the
following Appendices as part of this Code:
   C - Fire Hydrant Location and Distribution (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 4
PLUMBING CODE
SECTION:
9-4-1: Title
9-4-2: Plumbing Inspector
9-4-3: Definitions
9-4-4: Permit Requirements
9-4-5: Plans And Specifications
9-4-6: Inspection Requirements
9-4-7: Standards To Be Met
9-4-8: Materials And Standard Of Work
9-4-9: Conflicting Provisions
9-4-10: Violation; Penalty
9-4-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the CITY OF CHARLESTON
PLUMBING CODE. (Ord. 97-O-26, 8-5-1997)
9-4-2: PLUMBING INSPECTOR 1 :
   A.   Authority: Plumbing inspector requirements pursuant to the provisions
of this Code shall be conducted under the direction and supervision of the
Office of Inspections. All such inspection shall be made by a licensed plumber
or a designated representative of the State Department of Public Health.
   B.   Restrictions: No employee of the Office of Inspections or anyone
engaged in inspection in said department shall be engaged in the occupation or
business of plumbing or be interested directly or indirectly in any firm or
corporation engaged in such business.
   C.   Duties:
      1.   The plumbing inspector shall:
         a.   Review and pass upon all plans and surveys required by this
chapter.
         b.   Be consulted as to the issuance of all notices, permits and
certificates required by the Plumbing Code.
         c.   Keep a record of the performance of his/her duties which shall
include a record of all notices issued, applications received and permits
granted.
         d.   Keep a record of violations of this chapter. He/she shall inspect
and for the purpose thereof may enter at reasonable hours all houses and other
buildings in the course of erection and all houses undergoing alterations or
repair as often as may be necessary to ensure conformance with the requirements
of this chapter. Failure to allow reasonable access to the property to the
plumbing inspector shall authorize a revocation of the permit.
         e.   Compel all work on plumbing to be performed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   2.   In addition to their other duties, the plumbing inspector shall serve
at the direction of the community development director, or their designee and
shall assist him/her in their duties. (Ord. 97-O-26, 8-5-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-
O-5, 2-18-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 1-8D-3 of this Code.
9-4-3: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words and terms are used in this chapter, they shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT: All inspections required by the provisions of
this chapter shall be made by, and all permits for plumbing issued by or under
the direction of the Community Development Department.
LICENSED PLUMBER, PLUMBER'S APPRENTICE, PLUMBING CONTRACTOR, AND CERTIFIED
PLUMBING CONTRACTOR: Shall have the respective meanings and definitions as said
terms provided in and by the Illinois Plumbing License Law 1  and the Illinois
Plumbing Contractors Certification Act of the State.
PLUMBING, PLUMBING FIXTURES, AND PLUMBING SYSTEM: Shall have the respective
meanings and definitions as provided for said terms in and by the Illinois
Plumbing Code. (Ord. 97-O-26, 8-5-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. 225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq.
9-4-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Application For Permit: Applications for permits shall be in writing
and placed upon the form provided by the Community Development Department.
   B.   Permit Restrictions:
      1.   No permit shall be issued for work to be done by any individual or
entity other than an Illinois licensed plumber or the owner/occupant of a
dwelling. The person performing the plumbing work shall be required, upon
request of the plumbing inspector, to provide a written plan, including
diagrams, specifications and materials list, to perform said work.
      2.   No permit shall be issued for work to be done by a person who has
failed to correct other defective or faulty work as directed by the plumbing
inspector until such time as the prior deficiency or faulty work has been
corrected and brought into compliance with the provisions hereof.
   C.   Expiration Of Permit: Except as may otherwise be directed by the
Community Development Department, any permit under which work has not commenced
and been reasonably prosecuted to completion shall expire six (6) months from
the date of issuance thereof.
   D.   Fees: No permit shall be issued until the fee has been paid in full.
The fee for the permit is set at seven dollars ($7.00) per plumbing fixture
installed in the structure; or a minimum of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
Plumbing fixtures shall include, but not be limited to, water closet, bathtub,
lavatory, shower bath, kitchen sink, slop sink, laundry tub, dishwasher,
garbage disposal, urinal, floor drain, clothes washer, grease trap, dental
cuspidor, soda fountain, drinking fountain, water heater, water softener, sump
pump connection, pit tank, sewage ejector pump, water heater receptacle drain,
water system expansion tank, and sill cocks. This fee does not apply to permit
applications for new one-family dwelling (single family residential dwelling)
construction, as defined in the adopted 2006 International Residential Code,
submitted to the City between February 3, 2016 and December 31, 2025. (Ord. 97-
O-26, 8-5-1997; amd. Ord. 18-O-36, 12-18-2018; Ord. 19-O-41, 12-17-2019; Ord.
20-O-32, 12-15-2020; Ord. 2021-O-29, 12-7-2021; Ord. 2023-O-1, 1-3-2023; Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-4-5: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
Depending upon the extent, complexity and nature of the work proposed to be
done as disclosed by the application, the Community Development Department may
require sketches, drawings, plans, details or specifications, or any of them,
as may be reasonably necessary to show that for which a permit is issued and to
show the same as planned will comply with the provisions hereof. Any changes or
modifications in proposed work after a permit has been issued shall be
considered as new work, and no such changes or modifications shall be installed
without obtaining the approval thereof from the Community Development
Department and securing a supplemental permit, if required, for the same. (Ord.
97-O-26, 8-5-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-4-6: INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Required Inspection:
      1.   Underground or underfloor plumbing shall be inspected prior to
covering of plumbing with floorboards or other material.
      2.   Rough-in inspection, prior to covering or enclosing said plumbing in
walls or other structures.
      3.   Final inspection, prior to occupancy of said structure.
      4.   Sewer taps, prior to the covering of said taps to the City main.
      5.   Water lines, prior to covering, both indoor and outdoor, of
structures.
   B.   Scheduling Of Inspections:
      1.   Inspections shall be requested at least one working day in advance
to the Community Development Department. Said inspections shall be made during
normal working hours of the Community Development Department.
      2.   Work shall remain uncovered until permission has been given to close
or cover said work by the Community Development Department.
      3.   Permit holder is required to notify Community Development Department
that work is ready for inspection. (Ord. 97-O-26, 8-5-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5,
2-18-2025)
9-4-7: STANDARDS TO BE MET:
   A.   Codes Applicable: All work and materials shall be in compliance with
the Illinois state plumbing code and the state of Illinois plumbing license
law1 and any other applicable codes and standards dealing with plumbing work.
   B.   Faulty Work; Defective Materials: Any defective installation or
material or apparatus which does not conform to the provisions of this code
found upon inspection or after tests shall be removed from the plumbing system,
and any such material after removal from the system or if the same has not been
incorporated therein shall be removed immediately from the site of work, and
the work shall be corrected by the replacement of proper material or apparatus
within such reasonable time as shall be prescribed by the Community Development
Department. The Community Development Department shall notify the permit holder
and the person in charge of the work and the owner or occupant of the premises
of any faulty or defective work which does not conform with the requirements of
this chapter, and any other violations of said provisions in connection with
such work, which notice shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the
fault or defect and that which is necessary to correct the same and shall
designate to the Community Development Department a reasonable time within
which correction thereof is to be made. If such defect, fault or violation is
not corrected within the time designated by the Community Development
Department and said plumbing system is connected to the city water supply
system, the inspector shall inform the city council, community development
director, or their designee thereof, in writing, and may request that said
system be disconnected and shut off from said water supply in addition to any
other remedy or penalty as may be provided in this chapter. If such plumbing
system is not connected to the city water system, such connection shall be
prohibited until such time as the defect, fault or violation is corrected.
   C.   Compliance: The construction and maintenance of all plumbing, draining,
and water service of all buildings and the ventilation of such systems shall
conform to and comply with the provisions of this chapter except where such
provisions specifically otherwise provide when hereafter constructed, repaired,
altered or remodeled. (Ord. 97-O-26, 8-5-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-4-8: MATERIALS AND STANDARD OF WORK:
   A.   All sewer taps shall be required to be performed with saddles made of
neoprene rubber or plastic with stainless steel clamps. Saddles shall be DFW
Plastic Incorporated or approved equal.
   B.   All water systems installed with a double check backflow device in the
meter yoke or anywhere within the system shall be required to have a water
expansion tank or device installed in the system. Said tank shall be installed
in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and the requirements of the
Illinois state plumbing code. Water expansion tanks shall be Therm-X-trol or an
approved equal.
   C.   All plumbing work shall also be done in accordance with the city cross
connection control ordinance 1 .
   D.   All water service lines shall be installed at least forty eight inches
(48") deep below grade.
   E.   All sewer laterals from homes shall be a minimum schedule 40 PVC pipe
or approved equal as approved by the plumbing inspector.
   F.   All water services from all structures, regardless of type of material
used for water service, the last five feet (5') before the meter, shall be type
K copper to facilitate connection at the meter. (Ord. 97-O-26, 8-5-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 4 of this code.
9-4-9: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
In case any provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance of the city or with a provision of the code
adopted by this chapter, that provision which establishes the higher standard
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail. (Ord. 97-O-26, 8-5-1997)
9-4-10: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty: Any person who violates any provision hereof shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation, and each day upon which such
violation is allowed to continue may be deemed a separate offense.
   B.   Revocation Of Permit: In addition, failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall authorize the Community Development Department
to revoke the permit.
   C.   Additional Remedies: In addition to any other penalty or action
provided or authorized hereby, the city shall institute any appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent any violation hereof and to restrain, correct or abate
such violation. (Ord. 97-O-26, 8-5-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 5
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
9-5-1: Title
9-5-2: Definitions
9-5-3: Code Enforcement Officer Powers And Duties
9-5-4: Electrical Commission
9-5-5: Permit Requirements
9-5-6: Adoption Of Code And Standards
9-5-7: Installation Specifications
9-5-8: Workmanship; Compliance With Provisions
9-5-9: Inspections
9-5-10: Inspection Fees
9-5-11: Electrical Contractors
9-5-11-1: Serviceman's Limited Registration
9-5-12: Grievance Procedure
9-5-13: Penalties
9-5-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as THE ELECTRICAL CODE. (Ord. 97-
O-32, 8-19-1997)
9-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms "electrical installations" or "electrical equipment", as used in this
chapter, mean conductors and equipment installed for the utilization of
electricity supplied for light, heat or power, but do not include radio
apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sound and signals, and do not
include apparatus, conductors, or other equipment installed for or by power
suppliers authorized by the city, public utilities, including common carriers,
which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce commission for use in
their operation as public utilities. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997)
9-5-3: CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER POWERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   The code enforcement officer is hereby authorized to inspect or cause
to be inspected or reinspected all installation, alteration and use of all
electrical equipment in or on any building or premises in the city previous to
or on completion of said work, and require that all such work be performed in
the manner herein specified. When such installation, alteration and use of
electrical equipment shall be found to be in any manner faulty or defective, or
in any other manner deemed to be unsafe to life or property, he shall have
authority to require the person doing such work or owning, operating or using
the same, to place the same in safe and secure condition and in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. The code enforcement officer shall also have
the authority, upon inspection and reinspection, to condemn all installation or
electrical equipment which may be in use that may be unsafe or hazardous to
life or property, and upon condemnation of the same, he shall serve notice upon
the person owning, using or installing the same to place the same in a secure
and safe condition and in compliance with this chapter. The code enforcement
officer shall decide all questions not otherwise provided for in this code
pertaining to the installation of electrical apparatus, wires, fixtures,
devices, appliances and attachments, and shall have the power and authority to
make and perform such rules and regulations as herein provided of a practical
and technical nature in connection therewith as may be deemed reasonable,
necessary and desirable to make all electrical installations and work of the
maximum degree of safety to life and property.
   B.   The code enforcement officer or his authorized representative shall
have the right during reasonable hours, upon probable cause, to enter any
building in the discharge of his official duties or for the purpose of making
an inspection or test of the installation or alteration of electrical equipment
contained herein, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all
electrical currents when wiring is defective and to cut or disconnect, in cases
of emergencies, any wiring where such electrical currents are dangerous to life
or property. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997)
9-5-4: ELECTRICAL COMMISSION:
   A.   Created; Composition; Appointment; Term; Compensation: There is hereby
created an electrical commission which shall consist of six (6) members, as
follows: the code enforcement officer of the city, who shall be the chairman;
one electrical contractor; one experienced electrician (minimum of 5 years’
experience); one registered professional engineer; the chief of the fire
department; and one representative of an electrical supply company. Such
members shall be appointed by the city manager, with the advice and consent of
the city council, and shall serve without compensation therefor, and shall hold
office four (4) years.
   B.   Duties: The electrical commission is charged with consulting with the
code enforcement officer and the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Meetings And Procedures:
      1.   The electrical commission shall meet at regular times at an
established place on an annual basis, or more often as circumstances shall
require.
      2.   Special meetings may be called by the code enforcement officer, or
by any three (3) members of the electrical commission.
      3.   The electrical commission shall establish its own procedures, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, which shall be in printed
form.
      4.   Forty eight (48) hours’ advance notice shall be given to all members
before a meeting.
      5.   A majority shall constitute a quorum, and a majority of members
present and voting shall be required to pass any proposition. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-
19-1997; amd. Ord. 2023-O-33, 11-7-2023)
9-5-5: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required:
      1.   Before any electrical work shall be performed in conjunction with
new construction within the city limits, the owner, or the electrical
contractor as the owner’s agent, shall apply for a permit and pay the
appropriate fee.
      2.   Before any interior premises electrical work shall be performed in
conjunction with remodeling, enlarging or alteration of an existing structure,
which requires a new service cable or cables to be installed from the service
equipment of that structure to a fixture or appliance, a permit will be
required.
   B.   Application For Permit:
      1.   Permits for the installation or alteration of electrical equipment
shall be issued only upon receipt of an application therefor, made out on a
printed form to be furnished by the office of the Community Development
Department, and upon the payment in advance of the inspection fee required in
section
9-5-10  of this chapter.
      2.   The application for permit shall contain the name of the owner or
user of the equipment to be installed or altered, the location by street and
number of such installation, and a detailed description of the equipment to be
installed or altered.
      3.   Depending upon the extent, complexity and nature of the work
proposed to be done as disclosed by an application, the building official may
require such sketches, drawings, plans, details or specifications, or any of
them, as may be reasonably necessary to show that such a permit is issued and
to show the same as planned will comply with the provisions thereof. Any
changes or modifications in the proposed work after a permit has been issued
shall be considered as new work, and no changes or modifications shall be
installed or made without obtaining the approval thereof from the community
development director, or their designee, and securing a supplementary permit
for the same.
      4.   No permit will be issued to an electrical contractor without:
         a.   Proof of current registration with the city, or with another
municipality in the state of Illinois that has at least the minimum
requirements for qualification as an electrical contractor in the city; and
         b.   Evidence of liability insurance in the minimum amount of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00) for personal injury to one person, and three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for personal injury to more than one person.
   C.   Issuance Of Permit; Expiration: The permit application shall be made to
and the permit issued by the Community Development Department or other
designated city office. Permits shall expire at the end of one year if work has
not commenced. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 16-O-44, 12-20-2016; Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-5-6: ADOPTION OF CODE AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Compliance Standard: There is hereby adopted by reference the National
Electric Code, 2020, NFPA 70, as published by the National Fire Protection
Association, Inc., and made a part of this chapter as if the same were fully
set forth herein.
   B.   Standards: The safe and practical standards and specifications for the
installation, alteration, and use of electrical equipment, also all the rules
and regulations governing the issuance of permits by the community development
director, or their designee, also the reasonable fees to be paid for the
inspection of all electrical equipment installed or altered in the city deemed
to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the health, welfare, and
safety of the community in new and rewired electrical installations, are as
provided in this chapter and as follows:
      1.   Classification Of Wiring:
         a.   Wiring classifications and installation methods shall be in
conformance with the National Electric Code, 2020, NFPA 70, as published by the
National Fire Protection Association, Inc.
         b.   Upon rehabilitation of an existing nonresidential building
(building that the use is other than a single-family or two- family dwelling),
the owner, contractor, or other person having control of the building shall
meet with the electrical inspector for a determination as to how the electrical
system within the structure shall be modified to comply with subsection B1a of
this section. As a minimum, all wiring exposed during the course of
construction shall be brought into compliance with subsection B1a of this
section. The inspector shall determine, based upon hazards to the occupants due
to the proposed use of the building, what further changes will be required to
the electrical system. (Ord. 15-O-3, 1-20-2015)
      2.   Residential Service:
         a.   Residential service capacity shall be not less than one hundred
(100) amp, twenty (20) circuit, 3-wire, 120/240 volt for residences less than
two thousand (2,000) square feet of floor space; two hundred (200) amp, thirty
(30) circuit, 3-wire, 120/240 volt for residences two thousand (2,000) square
feet or more of floor space.
         b.   Subject to advance approval by the code enforcement officer,
existing residences of two thousand (2,000) square feet or more may have one
hundred (100) amp, twenty (20) circuit, 3-wire, 120/240 volt service where the
majority of major appliances are not electric, and the proposed connected load
would justify such dispensation.
         c.   All electrically heated homes shall have a minimum two hundred
(200) amp, 3-wire, 120/240 volt service.
         d.   No main entrance smaller than one hundred (100) amp capacity
shall be installed in any building, residential or commercial, unless by
special permission in writing by the code enforcement officer and the utility
company.
      3.   Grounding: The minimum grounding approved shall be by the means of a
five-eighths inch by eight foot (5/8" x 8'0") copper clad ground rod placed at
least twenty four inches (24") from the building. Locations that are to be
covered by concrete shall have a ground field of not less than three (3) three-
fourths inch by eight foot (3/4" x 8'0") approved rods, placed at least ten
feet (10') apart and connected by an equivalent grounding wire as needed for
the type of service installed. Where ground conduit enters a concrete slab, an
expansion joint shall be used to keep the conduit from adhering to the
concrete. Additionally, all mechanical and plumbing systems shall be bonded by
6 AWG minimum sized wire to the grounding bus of the service panel.
      4.   Ceiling Outlets: All ceiling outlets must be installed with a four
inch (4") box not less than one and one-half inches (11/2") deep.
      5.   Outdoor Signs: All outdoor signs shall be controlled by an
externally operated switch, capable of being locked in an open position.
Transformers used outdoors shall be of weatherproof type and shall be enclosed
in the sign body, or in a separate metal box. The external wires on all
permanently installed outdoor signs and billboards must be enclosed in conduit.
      6.   Circuit Breakers: All services shall have either fuses or circuit
breakers of the proper interrupting capacity. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997; amd.
Ord. 04-O-44, 9-21-2004; Ord. 11-O-4, 3-1-2011; Ord. 15-O-3, 1-20-2015; Ord.
2021-O-02, 1-19-2021; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-5-7: INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS:
Meter installations are to be made in accordance with the applicable power
supplier's specifications. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997)
9-5-8: WORKMANSHIP; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
All electrical work must be done in a neat and workmanlike manner, and all
electrical construction, materials, and appliances used in connection with
electrical work and the operation of electrical appliances shall be in
conformity with the national electrical code of the National Fire Protection
Association, current edition, and such rules and regulations as are now or may
hereafter be prescribed by the city council. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997)
9-5-9: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Certification Of Inspection:
      1.   Upon the completion of the installation or alteration of electrical
equipment in any building, it shall be the duty of the person installing or
altering the same to notify the code enforcement officer, who shall inspect, or
to cause work to be inspected, within one working day after such notice is
given, and if such electrical equipment is found to be fully in compliance with
this chapter, and does not constitute a hazard to life and property, he shall
issue to such person for delivery to the owner a certificate of inspection. If
new construction, the certificate of inspection shall authorize connections to
the electrical service by the power supplier. All wires which are to be hidden
from view shall be inspected before concealment, and any person installing such
wires shall notify the code enforcement officer, giving him one working day in
which to make the required inspection, before such wires are concealed.
      2.   No utility, corporation, firm or person shall be permitted to
furnish or supply electrical energy over or through any permanent electrical
wiring system or installation as contemplated by this chapter without first
requiring from the owner of the property in which such electrical wiring has
been installed a certificate of inspection signed by the code enforcement
officer under this chapter showing that said wiring and all installations have
been installed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Subsequent Inspections: The provisions for inspection of work
authorized by the permits issued in accordance herewith shall not be construed
as prohibiting the inspection of any electrical equipment now or hereafter
installed whenever the code enforcement officer shall determine that the public
safety requires it. In case it becomes necessary to replace such electrical
equipment by reason of defects disclosed by such inspection, a permit shall be
obtained, if required, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
97-O-32, 8-19-1997)
9-5-10: INSPECTION FEES:
The fees prescribed by the city council to be paid for inspections by the
electrical inspection department of all electrical equipment installed or
altered within the city are as follows:
   A.   New Construction:
      1.   New construction shall be charged a fee of one dollar twenty five
cents ($1.25) per one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) of estimated construction
value. The estimated construction value shall be as described in section
9-1-2 of this title.
      2.   Fees for the inspection of temporary services shall be twenty five
dollars ($25.00).
   B.   Existing Buildings:
      1.   Fees for branch circuits shall not exceed the cost of new service
fees for the locations at the rate of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per circuit.
      2.   For the following rated electrical services, the fees shall be as
follows:
Service Ampere Rating Fee
Service Ampere Rating     Fee
   100   ampere serv$ 50.00
   200   ampere serv70.00
   400   ampere serv110.00
   600   ampere serv140.00
   800   ampere serv160.00
   1,000   ampere se180.00
   1,200   ampere se210.00
   1,600   ampere se280.00
   2,000   ampere se410.00
   2,500   ampere se500.00
   3,000   ampere se600.00
   4,000   ampere se720.00
   5,000   ampere se840.00
   6,000   ampere se960.00
 
Branch Circuits From Existing Panels Fee
Branch Circuits From Existing Panels Fee
Less than 60 amp                     $ 25.00
   60   amp                    25.00
   100   amp                   30.00
   200   amp                   50.00
   400   amp                   60.00
   600   amp                   70.00
   800   amp                   80.00
   1,000   amp                 120.00
 
      3.   For service ratings other than those appearing in this subsection,
the fee shall be that of the next largest size. All services larger than six
thousand (6,000) amps shall be computed at the rate of twenty five cents
($0.25) per amp.
   C.   Scope Of Fees: The foregoing fees shall cover the inspection of all
wiring complete with fixtures, devices and all associated equipment installed
by the permit holder for the wiring of the building, structure or premises.
   D.   Fee For Additional Inspections: When additional inspections are
necessary, due to inaccurate or incorrect information, failure to make
necessary repairs, or faulty installations, a charge of one hundred dollars
($100.00) shall be made for each such inspection.
   E.   Payment Of Fees: All fees as aforesaid shall be payable to the city of
Charleston and deposited with the city clerk. (Ord. 04-O-44, 9-21-2004)
9-5-11: ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS:
   A.   Definition: The term "electrical contractor", as used herein, means any
person engaged in the business of installing, altering, erecting, repairing, or
contracting to install, alter, erect or repair electrical equipment or wiring
to supply light, heat, or power, not including radio apparatus or equipment for
wireless reception of sound or signals, and not including apparatus, conductors
and other equipment installed for or by power suppliers authorized by the city,
public utilities, including common carriers which are under the jurisdiction of
the Illinois commerce commission, for use in their operations as public
utilities; but the term "electrical contractor" does not include employees by
which contractors do or supervise such work. Nothing in this subsection shall
preclude the principal owner of a single-family residence from installing and
erecting electrical equipment and wiring to supply light, heat and power in his
personal place of residence.
   B.   Registration Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
the business of "electrical contractor", as defined in subsection A of this
section, in the city, without a certificate of registration from the city,
which may be obtained in the manner as hereinafter set forth; provided,
however, that any electrical contractor registered for the current year who has
paid a registration fee in any city or village within the state of Illinois and
having at least the minimum requirements for qualification as required herein
shall be required to be registered but shall not be required to pay a
registration fee or be examined for such year by the city.
   C.   Application For Certificate; Fee: Any person not currently registered
but desirous of establishing himself in the business of electrical contractor
shall make a written application for a certificate of registration on forms
provided by the Community Development Department. Said application shall be
filed with the community development director, or their designee, together with
the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00). If the applicant is thereafter issued
a certificate of registration, the fee paid with the application shall pay for
the current year with an expiration date of December 31. If a certificate is
denied to the applicant, the fee shall be retained.
   D.   Examination Of Registrant: Before a certificate of registration shall
be issued to an applicant by the city, applicant shall be examined as to his
practical knowledge of the installation and alteration of electrical equipment
as set forth in this chapter. Such examination shall be in whole or in part in
writing and shall be of practical character, but sufficiently strict to
thoroughly test the experience and qualifications of the applicant. Applicants
tested must score not less than seventy five percent (75%) in order to receive
a certificate of registration. Reexamination may be held no sooner than thirty
(30) days. Should the applicant fail the second test, there shall be a six (6)
month waiting period from the date of the last test before being retested.
(Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997)
   E.   Registration Fee; Duration: The fee for registration as an electrical
contractor shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per annum, except as may be
exempt under subsection B of this section, and shall permit an electrical
contractor to do all phases of electrical wiring. The registration fee shall be
paid to the city of Charleston, in advance, upon filling out the application.
The certificate of registration issued thereunder shall expire on December 31
of the year in which it is issued; provided, that any business manager,
building or plant engineer or electrician who shall engage in electrical
installation work or repairs solely upon the premises of his employer shall
secure a certificate of registration without charge, which certificate shall,
however, be confined to the premises of his employment and shall not permit
engaging in such work in any place other than upon such premises.
   F.   Issuance Of Certificate: The community development director, or their
designee, shall issue a certificate of registration as an electrical contractor
to any person who shall have filed a proper application, paid the required fee,
and satisfactorily passed the examination (except as may be exempt under
subsections B and E of this section).
   G.   Nontransferability Of Certificate: The certificate of registration
issued by the city shall not be transferable or assignable.
   H.   Suspension Or Revocation Of Certificate: A certificate of registration
may, after hearing, be suspended or revoked by the city council upon
recommendation of the electrical commission for failure or refusal of the
electrical contractor to comply with this chapter or with the national
electrical code.
   I.   Penalty For No Certificate: Any person who shall engage in the business
of electrical contractor without obtaining a certificate of registration as
herein provided for, or that shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter, shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate and
distinct offense shall be regarded as committed every day on which such person
shall continue to operate contrary to the provisions of this chapter. Any
person convicted of violating any section of this chapter may have any license
previously issued to him by the city suspended or revoked by the court or by
the city council. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997; amd. Ord. 16-O-44, 12-20-2016; Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-5-11-1: SERVICEMAN'S LIMITED REGISTRATION:
   A.   Registration Certificate Permitted: The community development director,
or their designee, may issue a serviceman’s limited registration certificate
permitting the registrant to perform such electrical work as specifically
designated upon said limited registration certificate.
   B.   Application For Certificate; Fee: Any person desirous of a serviceman’s
limited registration certificate shall make written application for said
certificate on forms provided by the Community Development Department. Said
application shall be filed with the community development director, or their
designee, together with the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Said
application shall further state with specificity those areas in which the
applicant desires to perform electrical work. If the applicant is therefor
issued a limited registration certificate, the fee paid with the application
shall pay for the first year of registration with an expiration date of
December 31. Said certificate may be renewed annually for a fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00).
   C.   Examination Of Registrant: Before the serviceman’s limited registration
certificate shall be issued to an applicant by the city, the applicant shall be
examined as to his practical knowledge of the areas sought to obtain
registration on the application. Such examination shall be in whole or in part
in writing and shall be of practical character but sufficiently strict to
thoroughly test the experience and qualifications of the applicant. Applicants
tested must score not less than seventy five percent (75%) correct in order to
receive said certificate.
   D.   Ineligibility For Limited Registration: A serviceman’s limited
registration shall not be available for the following uses, and a contractor’s
registration shall be required for the following:
      1.   The installation or replacement of electrical services in residences
or commercial establishments.
      2.   The removal and/or replacement of wiring exceeding twenty five
percent (25%) of the total branch circuits in a residence or commercial
establishment. (Ord. 97-O-35, 9-2-1997; amd. Ord. 16-O-44, 12-20-2016)
9-5-12: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
Any owner, or electrical contractor as the owner's agent, having a grievance
because of any order issued by the code enforcement officer shall have the
right of review to the electrical commission. A petition to review shall be
filed with the electrical commission within ten (10) days after the order shall
have been issued. A hearing on the grievance shall be held by the electrical
commission within a thirty (30) day period. The aggrieved party shall have the
right to appear and be heard on the grievance. (Ord. 97-O-32, 8-19-1997)
9-5-13: PENALTIES:
   A.   Fine: Any person who shall fail or refuse to comply with any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not to exceed seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day a violation occurs or remains in existence.
   B.   Revocation Or Suspension Of License: Any person convicted of violating
any provision of this chapter may have any license previously issued to him by
the city revoked or suspended by the court or by the city council. (Ord. 97-O-
32, 8-19-1997)
CHAPTER 6
MECHANICAL CODE
(International Mechanical Code / IMC)
SECTION:
9-6-1: Adoption Of Code
9-6-2: Amendments To Code
9-6-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which were heretofore placed on file
in the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated the 2021
international mechanical code, as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city, for the control of
building mechanical systems as herein defined, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the 2021
international mechanical code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
thereof, as if fully set forth in this chapter, subject to the modifications,
exceptions and additional regulations set out in section
9-6-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
9-6-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Modifications to the text of the international mechanical code, 2021, are as
follows:
Section 101.1 Insert City of Charleston for (name of jurisdiction).
Section 103 Code Compliance Agency is deleted without substitution.
Section 106.5.2 Fee Schedule: Fees for all new mechanical construction shall be
one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) per every one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) of estimated construction value, with a minimum of twenty five
dollars $25.00. The estimated construction value as described in the building
code as found in title 9, chapter 1, section 2 of the city code.
   1.   Any system or structure requiring plan review by outside plan review
sources or inspections by outside or special services: actual cost charged for
services.
Section 106.5.3 Fee refunds is deleted without substitution.
Section 113.1.2 A new section 113.1.2 shall be inserted as follows:
   Section 113.1.2 Fee For Appeal: The fee for an appeal shall be one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00).
Section 115.4 Violation Penalties is hereby deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Section 115.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and
not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) at the discretion of the
court. Each day said violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
116.4 Failure to Comply is hereby deleted and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   116.4 Failure to Comply: Any person who shall continue any work in or about
the structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work
as he is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition shall be
liable to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) at the discretion of the court. Each day that
violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the
terms and conditions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 15.
The standard reference and title of ICC EC-03 international electric code shall
be deleted and the following inserted into the NFPA section: national electric
code 2020.
Insert new reference section in appendix A IDPH, Illinois Department of Public
Health, Division of Engineering and Sanitation, 535 West Jefferson Street,
Springfield, Illinois 62761.
No standard reference number title to be Illinois state plumbing code,
reference and code section number shall be 201.3, 301.8, 512.2, 908.5, 1002.1,
1002.2, 1002.3, 1005.2, 1006.6, 1008.2, 1009.3, 1101.4, 1201.1, 1206.2, 1206.3
& 1401.2.
Appendix B is deleted without substitution. (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 7
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
(International Property Maintenance Code / IPMC)
SECTION:
9-7-1: Adoption Of Code
9-7-2: Amendments To Code
9-7-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which have been and now are filed in
the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated the international
property maintenance code, 2021, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the property maintenance code of the city,
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and
all of the provisions of the international property maintenance code, 2021, are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the modifications and attachments set out in section
9-7-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
9-7-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Modifications to the text of the international property maintenance code, 2021,
are as follows:
Section 101.1 Insert City of Charleston for (name of jurisdiction).
Section 103 Code Compliance Agency is deleted without substitution.
Section 104 is deleted, with no substitution.
Section 109.3 Prosecution Of Violation is deleted with no substitution.
Section 109.4 Violation Penalties is hereby deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Section 109.4 Violation Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation, who
shall violate any provision of this code, shall, upon conviction thereof be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) at the discretion of the court. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been given, in accordance with
the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 111.4.2 is hereby deleted and the following inserted in lieu thereof:
   Section 111.4.2 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served where a copy thereof is served in accordance with one of the
following methods:
   1.   A copy is delivered personally.
   2.   A copy is sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last
known address.
   3.   A copy is delivered in any other manner as prescribed by law.
   If the certified or first-class letter is returned showing that the letter
was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the
foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the
structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.
Section 302.4 Weeds: Insert eight (8) inches for (jurisdiction to insert height
in inches)
Section 304.14 Insect Screens: Insert April 1 (date) to November 1 (date).
Section 404.4.1 Room Area is hereby deleted and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   Section 404.4.1 Room Area. Every living room shall contain at least 120
square feet (11.2m²) and every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at
least 70 square feet (6.5m²) of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more
than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6m²) of floor area for
each occupant thereof.
Section 404.5 Overcrowding is hereby deleted and the following inserted in lieu
thereof:
   Section 404.5 Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more
than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5
 
TABLE 404.5
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
SPACE              MINIMUM AREA IN SQUARE FEET
               1-2 occupants   3-5 occupants 6 or more occupants
Living Room a,b 120             120           150
Dining Room a,b No requirements 80            100
Bedrooms        Shall comply with Section 404.4
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093m²
a. See Section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces.
b. See Section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum occupancy
area for sleeping purposes.
 
Section 602.3 Heat Supply: Insert October 1 (date) to May 1 (date).
Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces: Insert October 1 (date) to May 1 (date).
Chapter 8 Referenced Standards:
Delete international plumbing code and insert current Illinois state plumbing
code.
Delete international zoning code and insert City of Charleston unified
development code.
Section 602.3 Heat supply: Insert October 1 (date) to May 1 (date).
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces: Insert October 1 (date) to May 1 (date).
(Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024; amd. Ord. 2025-O-39, 8-5-2025)
CHAPTER 8
FUEL GAS CODE
(International Fuel Gas Code / IFGC)
SECTION:
9-8-1: Adoption Of Code
9-8-2: Amendments To Code
9-8-1:   ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which have been and now are filed in
the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated the international
fuel gas code, 2021, as published by the International Code Council, Inc., is
hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city, for the control of buildings
and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the provisions of the
international fuel gas code, 2021, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the modifications and
attachments set out in section 9-8-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-
2024)
9-8-2:   AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Modifications to the text of the international fuel gas code, 2021, are as
follows:
Section 101.1 Insert city of Charleston for (name of jurisdiction).
Section 115.4 Violation Penalties is hereby deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Section 115.4 Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or
who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the code official, or of a permit
or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
petty offense, punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and
not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) at the discretion of the
court. Each day said violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord.
2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 9
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
(International Existing Building Code / IEBC)
SECTION:
9-9-1: Adoption Of Code
9-9-2: Amendments To Code
9-9-1: ADOPTION OF CODE:
That certain document, three (3) copies of which have been and now are filed in
the office of the city clerk, being marked and designated the international
existing building code, 2021, as published by the International Code Council,
Inc., is hereby adopted as the existing building code of the city, for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each and all of the
provisions of the international existing building code, 2021, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the modifications and attachments set out in section
9-9-2  of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-O-36, 11-1-2024)
9-9-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Modifications to the text of the international existing building code, 2021,
are as follows:
Section 101.1 Insert city of Charleston for (name of jurisdiction).
Section 103 Code Compliance Agency is deleted without substitution.
Section 113.4 Violation Penalties is hereby deleted and the following inserted
in lieu thereof:
   Section 113.4 Violation Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation, who
shall violate any provision of this code, shall, upon conviction thereof be
subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) at the discretion of the court. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been given, in accordance with
the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2024-
O-36, 11-1-2024)
CHAPTER 10
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
SECTION:
9-10-1: Purpose
9-10-2: Definitions
9-10-3: Historic Preservation Commission
9-10-4: Landmark Designation Applications
9-10-5: Historic District Designation
9-10-6: Certificate Of Appropriateness
9-10-7: Certificate Of Economic Hardship
9-10-8: Natural Destruction Or Demolition
9-10-9: Violation; Penalty
9-10-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation, and use of improvements of special character or historical
interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, and
welfare of the people of the city by:
   A.   Providing a mechanism to identify and preserve the historic and
architectural characteristics of Charleston which represent elements of the
city's cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history.
   B.   Promoting civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past as represented in Charleston's landmarks and historic districts.
   C.   Stabilizing and improving the economic vitality and value of
Charleston's landmarks and historic areas.
   D.   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the city to house
buyers, visitors and shoppers and thereby supporting business, commerce,
industry, and providing economic benefit to the city.
   E.   Fostering and encouraging preservation, restoration of structures,
areas, and neighborhoods and thereby preventing future urban blight. (Ord. 04-
O-51, 10-19-2004)
9-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases in this chapter
shall be interpreted giving them the same meanings as they have in common usage
and so as to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ADDITION: Any act or process which changes one or more of the "exterior
architectural features" of a structure designated for preservation by adding
to, joining with or increasing the size or capacity of the structure.
ALTERATION: Any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior
architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to, the
erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure.
AREA: A specific geographic division of the city of Charleston.
BUILDING: Any structure created for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to
the land.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate from the historic preservation
commission authorizing plans for alterations, construction, removal or
demolition of a landmark or site within a designated historic district.
COMMISSION: Charleston historic preservation commission.
COMMISSIONERS: Voting members of the Charleston historic preservation
commission.
CONSTRUCTION: The act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the
erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Charleston.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark or
site within a historic district.
DESIGN GUIDELINE: A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the
historic and architectural character of a structure or area.
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE: The chairman, vice chairman and secretary of the
Charleston historic preservation commission.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE: The architectural and general composition of
the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to, the kind and the
texture of the building material, and the type, design and character of all
windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: Any area designated as a historic district by ordinance of
the city council and which may contain, within definable geographic boundaries,
one or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other properties
or structures that, while not of such historic and/or architectural
significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the
overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the
historic district.
LANDMARK: Any building, structure or site which has been designated as a
landmark by ordinance of the city council, pursuant to procedures prescribed
herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because
of its historic and/or architectural significance to the city of Charleston.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person, corporation, or other legal entity listed as owner
on the records of the county recorder of deeds.
REHABILITATION: The process of returning a property to a state of utility,
through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary
use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are
significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.
REMOVAL: Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.
REPAIR: Any change that does not require a building permit that is not
construction, relocation or alteration.
STRUCTURAL CHANGE: Any change or repair in the supporting members of a
building, structure, roof or exterior walls which would alter the building in
height, width or bulk.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, buildings, fences, gazebos, advertising signs,
billboards, backstops for tennis courts, radio and television antennas,
including supporting towers, swimming pools, satellite dishes, solar panels and
wind generation. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004)
9-10-3: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION:
   A.   Composition; Appointment: The Charleston historic preservation
commission shall consist of seven (7) voting members, residents of the city,
appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. Nonvoting, ex officio
members may be appointed to the commission by the mayor with the recommendation
of the commission chairman. Ex officio members may serve any number of one year
terms and need not be residents of the city.
   B.   Qualifications: The members shall be appointed on the basis of
expertise, experience or interest in the area of architectural history,
building construction or engineering, finance, historical and architectural
preservation, neighborhood associations, or real estate. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-
2004)
   C.   Terms Of Office; Vacancies; Compensation: Members of the commission
shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. Of those members first taking
office, two (2) shall be appointed for one year, three (3) for two (2) years,
and two (2) for three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term only, and members shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 12-O-17, 5-1-
2012)
   D.   Officers: Officers shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, and a
secretary, elected by the preservation commission, who shall serve a term of
one year and shall be eligible for reelection, but no member shall serve in the
same capacity for more than two (2) consecutive years. The chairman shall
preside over meetings. In the absence of the chairman, the vice chairman shall
perform the duties of the chairman. If both are absent, a temporary chairman
shall be elected by those present. The secretary shall take minutes of each
preservation commission meeting, and shall prepare and submit to the city
council a complete record of the proceedings before the preservation commission
on any matter requiring council consideration. In addition, the secretary shall
have the following duties: (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004; amd. Ord. 06-O-49, 11-7-
2006)
      1.   Be responsible for publication and distribution of copies of the
minutes, reports, and decisions of the preservation commission to the members
of the preservation commission.
      2.   Give notice as provided herein or by law for all public hearings
conducted by the preservation commission.
   E.   Meetings And Procedures:
      1.   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All decisions
or actions of the historic preservation commission shall be made by a majority
vote of those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists.
      2.   Meetings shall be held the third week of the month or at regularly
scheduled times to be established by resolution of the commission at the
beginning of each calendar year or at any time upon the call of the chairman.
There shall be a minimum of four (4) meetings per year.
      3.   No member of the historic preservation commission shall vote on any
matter that may materially or apparently affect the property, income or
business interest of that member. No action shall be taken by the commission
that could in any manner deprive or restrict the owner of property in its use,
modification, maintenance, disposition, or demolition until such owner shall
first have had the opportunity to be heard at public meeting of the
preservation commission, as provided herein.
      4.   The chairman, and in his absence the acting chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the preservation
commission shall be open to the public.
      5.   The preservation commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the preservation commission and shall be a public
record.
   F.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   To adopt its own procedural regulations.
      2.   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant properties, structures and areas.
      3.   To investigate and recommend to the city council the adoption of
ordinances designating properties or structures having special historic,
community, or architectural value as landmarks.
      4.   To investigate and recommend to the city council the adoption of
ordinances designating properties or structures having special historic,
community or architectural value as historic districts.
      5.   To keep a register of all properties and structures that have been
designated as landmarks or historic districts, including all information
required for each designation.
      6.   To determine an appropriate system of markers and make
recommendations for the design and implementation of specific markings of the
streets and routes leading from one landmark or historic district to another.
      7.   To advise owners of landmarks and property or structures within
historic districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation,
renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the
State or National Register of Historic Places.
      8.   To inform and educate the citizens of Charleston concerning the
historic and architectural heritage of the city by publishing appropriate maps,
newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and/or by holding programs and seminars.
      9.   To hold public hearings and to review applications for construction,
alteration, removal, or demolition affecting properties for which preliminary
determinations have been approved for historic designation or designated
landmarks or structures or historic districts and issue or deny certificates of
appropriateness for such actions. Applicants shall be required to submit plans,
drawings, elevations, specifications, and other information as may be necessary
to make decisions.
      10.   To develop and recommend to the council specific guidelines for the
alteration, demolition, construction or removal of landmarks or property and
structures within historic districts.
      11.   To review proposed zoning amendments, applications for conditional
use permits or variances that affect properties for which a preliminary
determination of historic significance has been made or designated landmarks
and historic districts. Applications should be forwarded by the city to the
commission upon receipt. Such review shall be made prior to the date of the
hearing by the board of zoning appeals and planning. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004)
      12.   To administer on behalf of the city, upon request, any property, or
full or partial interest in real property, including a "conservation right" as
that term is used in 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq., which the
city may have or accept as gifts or otherwise. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004; amd.
2006 Code)
      13.   To accept and administer on behalf of the city, upon request, such
gifts, grants and money as may be appropriate for the purpose of this chapter.
      14.   To call upon available city staff members as well as other experts
for technical advice.
      15.   To testify before all boards or commissions, including the board of
zoning appeals and planning, on any matter affecting historically and
architecturally significant property and landmarks. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004)
      16.   To periodically review the Charleston unified development code and
to recommend to the board of zoning appeals and planning and the city council
any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks or
property and structures within historic districts. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004;
amd. 2006 Code)
   G.   Surveys And Research: The historic preservation commission shall
undertake an ongoing, comprehensive survey and research effort in the city to
identify neighborhoods, areas, sites, structures, and objects that may have
historic, community, architectural, or aesthetic importance, interest or value.
As part of the survey, the historic preservation commission shall review and
evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or private
organization and compile appropriate descriptions, facts, and photographs. The
historic preservation commission shall identify potential landmarks and adopt
procedures to nominate them in groups based upon the following criteria:
      1.   The potential landmarks in one identifiable neighborhood or defined
geographical area of the city.
      2.   The potential landmarks associated with a particular person, event,
or historical period.
      3.   The potential landmarks of a particular architectural style or
school, or of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer or craftsman.
      4.   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the preservation commission
to assure systematic survey and nomination of all potential landmarks within
the city. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004)
9-10-4: LANDMARK DESIGNATION APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: Any person, group of persons or association,
including, but not limited to, the Charleston historic preservation commission,
may apply to the Charleston historic preservation commission for the
designation of a landmark. Nominations shall be made to the historic
preservation commission on a form provided by the commission and available at
city hall. A filing fee may be required. Persons wishing guidance or advice
prior to completing an application may contact the chair of the historic
preservation commission. At a minimum, the application for landmark designation
shall include the following:
      1.   The name and address of the property owner.
      2.   The legal description and common street address of the property.
      3.   A written statement describing the property and setting forth
reasons in support of the proposed designation. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004)
      4.   Documentation that the property owner has been notified of the
application for designation. (Ord. 06-O-48, 11-7-2006)
      5.   A list of significant exterior architectural features in the case of
private property, or interior and exterior features in the case of public
property, that should be protected.
      6.   Photographs of the landmark. The photos shall include front, side,
and rear elevations and photos showing context (building and surroundings,
photos of the site).
   B.   Criteria: The commission shall, upon investigation as it deems
necessary, make a preliminary determination as to whether a property,
structure, or area possesses the integrity of design, workmanship, materials,
location, setting and feeling and meets one or more of the following criteria:
      1.   Significant value as part of the historic, heritage, or cultural
characteristics of the community, county, state or nation.
      2.   Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the community, county, state or country.
      3.   Representative of the distinguishing characteristics of architecture
inherently valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction or
use of indigenous materials.
      4.   Notable work of a master builder, designer, architect or artist
whose individual work has influenced the development of the community, county,
state or country.
      5.   Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make
it an established or familiar visual feature.
      6.   Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a
utilitarian structure, including, but not limited to, farmhouses, gas stations,
or other commercial structures, with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance.
      7.   Area that has yielded or may be likely to yield information
important in history or prehistory.
   C.   Landmark Designation Procedure:
      1.   Preliminary Determination: The commission or the executive committee
of the commission shall make a preliminary determination as to whether a
property, structure, or area meets one or more of the foregoing criteria within
fifteen (15) days of filing of a nomination with the commission. If the
preliminary determination concludes that the nomination does not merit further
consideration, the commission will decline the nomination. If the preliminary
determination concludes that the nomination does merit further consideration,
the city planner, property owner, and the submitter will be notified. (Ord. 04-
O-51, 10-19-2004)
      2.   Hearing:
         a.   The commission shall schedule a public hearing within thirty (30)
days after the filing of an application at city hall.
         b.   Notice of date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing
shall be sent by mail to owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s) as well as
to the adjoining property owners, not less than fifteen (15) nor more than
thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing. A public hearing notice also
shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the city. The
notice shall state the location of the property and a statement summarizing how
the proposed landmark meets the criteria set forth in landmark designation
criteria. The nominator shall bear the cost of legal notice publication in the
local newspaper. City staff shall prepare and deliver said notice to local
newspaper for publication; nominator shall bear cost of publication.
         c.   During the public hearing, the commission shall review and
evaluate the application according to the criteria established by ordinance.
(Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004; amd. Ord. 06-O-48, 11-7-2006)
      3.   Certificate Of Appropriateness: A certificate of appropriateness
shall be required for alteration, construction, removal or demolition of
properties for which an application for landmark designation has been approved.
      4.   Decision: A decision shall be made at the closing of the public
hearing. If the commission decides that the landmark should be designated, it
shall do so by a resolution passed by a majority of the commission. The owner
(s) of record shall be notified promptly by letter of the commission’s
decision. Following the public hearing, the commission shall prepare the
commission’s evaluation, recommendation, and all available information for
submission to the city council within ten (10) days. A simple majority vote by
the city council is necessary for approval of a landmark designation. If the
city council approves the application for a designation, a notice will be sent
to the property owner, the community development director, or their designee,
and the office of the city clerk, and recorded with the county recorder of
deeds. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-10-5: HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION:
   A.   Criteria: The following criteria shall be utilized by the Charleston
historic commission in determining the designation of historic districts:
      1.   The historic district contains one or more landmarks along with such
other buildings, places or areas within its definable geographic boundaries,
which, while not of such historic significance to be designated as landmarks,
nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark
or landmarks located in such district; and/or
      2.   A significant number of structures meeting any of the standards
under landmark designation criteria; and/or
      3.   Establishing a sense of time and place unique to the city; and/or
      4.   Exemplifying or reflecting the cultural, social, economic, political
or architectural history of the nation, the state or the city.
   B.   Application: Any person, group of persons or association, including,
but not limited to, the Charleston historic preservation commission, may apply
to the Charleston historic preservation commission for the designation of a
historic district. Nominations shall be made to the historic preservation
commission on a form provided by the commission and made available at city
hall. A filing fee may be required. Persons wishing guidance or advice prior to
completing an application may contact the chair of the historic preservation
commission. At a minimum, the application for historic district designation
shall include the following:
      1.   The names and addresses of the properties and property owners.
      2.   A map delineating the boundaries of the area to be designated.
      3.   A written statement describing the area and properties within the
historic district and setting forth reasons in support of the proposed
designation.
      4.   A list and photographs of significant exterior architectural
features of all contributing properties in the district.
      5.   Documentation that property owners have been notified of the
application.
      6.   Legal description of the proposed district.
   C.   Historic District Designation Procedure:
      1.   Preliminary Determination: A preliminary determination by the
commission or its executive committee as to whether a property, structure, or
area meets one or more of the foregoing criteria shall be made within thirty
(30) days of filing of a nomination with the commission. If the preliminary
determination concludes that the nomination does not merit further
consideration, the submitter of the nomination will be notified of the reason
(s) for denial.
      2.   Hearing:
         a.   The commission shall schedule a public hearing to be held within
thirty (30) days after preliminary approval of the application. (Ord. 04-O-51,
10-19-2004)
         b.   Notice of date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing
shall be sent by mail to owner(s) of record and to the nominators, as well as
to the adjoining (those properties abutting the proposed district) property
owners, not less than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to the
date of the hearing. A notice of public hearing also shall be published in a
newspaper having general circulation in the city. The notice shall state the
location of the property and summarize how the proposed district meets the
criteria set forth in historic district criteria. City staff shall prepare and
deliver notice to local newspaper. The nominator shall bear the cost of legal
notice publication in local newspaper. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004; amd. Ord. 06-
O-48, 11-7-2006)
         c.   During the public hearing, the commission shall review and
evaluate the application according to the criteria established by ordinance.
(Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004)
      3.   Decision: A decision shall be made at the closing of the public
hearing. Following the public hearing, the commission shall prepare its
evaluation, recommendation and all available information for submission to the
city council within ten (10) days. If the commission decides that the proposed
historic district should be so designated, it shall do so by resolution passed
by a majority of the commission. The owner(s) of record shall be notified
promptly by letter of the commission’s decision. A simple majority vote by the
city council is necessary for approval of a historic district designation. If
the city council approves the application for such a designation, a notice will
be sent to the property owner, nominators, the community development director,
or their designee, and the office of the city clerk, and recorded with the
county recorder of deeds, indicating the area has been designated as such and
that buildings located within the boundaries of the historic district shall be
subject to issuance of certificates of appropriateness. If the city council
denies the petition, the application may be resubmitted in accordance with the
application process. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004; amd. Ord. 06-O-48, 11-7-2006;
Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-10-6: CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS:
   A.   Scope: Buildings designated as historic landmarks or included within
the boundaries of a designated historic district or properties for which a
preliminary determination of eligibility has been made shall be subject to
issuance of certificates of appropriateness.
   B.   Certificate Required: A certificate of appropriateness issued by the
commission shall be required before a building permit, moving permit, or
demolition permit is issued for any designated historic landmark or any
building, structure or site or part thereof in the historic district. A
certificate of appropriateness is required if the building, structure or site
will be altered, extended, or repaired in such a manner as to produce a major
change in the exterior appearance of such building or structure. Such major
changes include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Major changes by addition, alteration, maintenance, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, renovation or repair.
      2.   Any new construction and demolition in whole or in part requiring a
permit from the city.
      3.   Moving a building.
      4.   Any construction, alteration, demolition, or removal affecting a
significant exterior architectural feature as specified in the ordinance
designating the landmark or historic district.
   C.   Exemptions From Certificate:
      1.   An exception to the certificate of appropriateness shall be made if
the applicant shows to the city planner that a failure to grant the permit will
cause an imminent threat to life, health or property.
      2.   A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required for paint,
landscaping, fencing, or driveways; provided, that said landscaping, fencing or
driveway work or repair does not alter the location of said landscaping,
fencing or driveways, and does not result in an alteration of the footprint of
the structure, landscape area or fence or driveway location. In the event there
is an effect on the landscape area or fence or driveway, then the certificate
of appropriateness is at the discretion of the city planner in consultation
with the chairman of the commission.
   D.   Application: Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
made available at city hall. Such applications shall be completed and submitted
to city hall and shall be forwarded to the Charleston historic preservation
commission. Every application affecting a designated historic landmark or any
building, structure or site or part thereof in a historic district for a
demolition permit, a building permit, or a moving permit, including plans and
specifications, shall be forwarded by the planning department to the historic
preservation commission within seven (7) days following receipt of the
application by city hall. The application for issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness must include:
      1.   Street address of property involved.
      2.   Legal description of the property involved or plat designation (such
as is available from the assessor's office or from a tax bill).
      3.   Brief description of the present improvements situated on the
property.
      4.   A detailed description of the construction, alteration, demolition
or use proposed, together with any architect drawings or sketches if those
services have been utilized by the applicant, and if not, a sufficient
description of the construction, alteration, demolition, and use to enable the
commission to determine what final appearance and use of the real estate will
be.
      5.   Owner's name.
      6.   Developer's name, if different from owner. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-
2004)
      7.   Name of architect/engineer, if used.
   E.   Standards: In making a determination whether to approve or deny an
application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Charleston historic
preservation commission shall be guided by the secretary of the interior's
"Standards For Rehabilitation".
The standards are to be applied to specific rehabilitation projects in a
reasonable manner, taking into consideration economic and technical
feasibility. Said standards being:
      1.   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site and environment.
      2.   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and
spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
      3.   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other
buildings, shall not be undertaken.
      4.   Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
      5.   Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.
      6.   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement
of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or
pictorial evidence.
      7.   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of the
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible.
      8.   Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken.
      9.   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its environment.
      10.   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
(Ord. 06-O-48, 11-7-2006)
   F.   Design Guidelines: Design guidelines for applying the criteria for
review of certificates of appropriateness shall, at a minimum, consider the
following architectural criteria:
      1.   Height: The height of any proposed alteration or construction should
be compatible with the style and character of the landmark or of contributing
structures within a designated district and with surrounding structures in a
historic district.
      2.   Proportions Of Windows And Doors: The proportions and relationships
between doors and windows should be compatible with the architectural style and
character of the landmark or of contributing structures within a designated
district.
      3.   Relationship Of Building Masses And Spaces: The relationship of a
structure within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining
structures should be compatible.
      4.   Roof Shape: The design of the roof, fascia, and cornice should be
compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark or of
contributing structures within a designated district.
      5.   Scale: The scale of the structure after alteration, construction, or
partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and
character and with surrounding structures in a historic district.
      6.   Directional Expression: Facades in historic districts should blend
with other structures with regard to directional expression. Structures in a
historic district should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical
expression of surrounding structures. The directional expression of a landmark
after alteration, construction, or partial demolition should be compatible with
its original architectural style and character.
      7.   Architectural Details: Architectural details, including types of
materials, colors, and textures, should be treated so as to make the landmark
compatible with its original architectural style and character of a landmark or
of contributing structures within a designated district.
      8.   New Structures: New structures in a historic district shall be
compatible with the architectural styles and design in said district.
   G.   Issuance Of A Certificate Of Appropriateness: Upon approval of the
application, the commission shall direct the recording secretary to issue the
signed certificate of appropriateness to the applicant with copies forwarded to
the community development director, or their designee. A certificate of
appropriateness shall be invalid if changes in the plans reviewed by the
commission are necessary in obtaining a building permit or if the building
permit issued for the same work becomes invalid. The certificate of
appropriateness remains valid for the same period of validity as the building
permit.
   H.   Appeals: In the event of denial of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, the applicant may amend the application to accommodate
commission objections or request the application be forwarded to the city
council. Negative recommendations forwarded to city council require a four-
fifths (4/5) majority vote by council to overrule the commission. (Ord. 04-O-
51, 10-19-2004; amd. Ord. 06-O-48, 11-7-2006; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-10-7: CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP:
   A.   Scope: Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter to the
contrary, the commission may issue a certificate of economic hardship to allow
the performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness has been
denied. Applicants claiming economic hardship shall be required to seek
rehabilitation assistance. The eligibility for and availability of financial
aid shall be considered by the commission in making its decision.
   B.   Required Information: An applicant for a certificate of economic
hardship may submit any or all of the following information in order to assist
the commission in making its determination on the application:
      1.   The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the party
from whom purchased (including a description of the relationship, if any,
between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased).
      2.   The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according to
the two (2) most recent assessments.
      3.   Real estate taxes for the previous two (2) years.
      4.   Remaining balance on mortgage, if any, and annual debt service, if
any, for the previous two (2) years.
      5.   All appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the
owner or applicant in connection with purchase, financing or ownership of the
property.
      6.   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers
received, if any.
      7.   Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for
the property.
      8.   If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous two (2) years, itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two (2) years, and annual cash flow before and after
debt service, if any, during the same period; form of ownership or operation of
the property, whether sole proprietorship, for profit or not for profit
corporation, limited partnership, joint venture or other.
      9.   Any other information, including income tax bracket of the owner,
applicant or principal investors in the property, reasonably necessary for a
determination as to whether the property can be reasonably used or yield a
reasonable return to present or future owners.
   C.   Delay Of Application: If the commission finds that without approval of
the proposed work, the property owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic
return therefrom, then the application shall be delayed for a period not to
exceed three (3) months. During this period of delay, the commission shall
investigate plans and make recommendations to the city council to allow for
reasonably beneficial use or a reasonable economic return, or to otherwise
preserve the subject property. Such plans and recommendations may include, but
are not limited to: a relaxation of the provisions of this chapter, a reduction
in real property taxes, financial assistance, building code modifications and/
or changes in zoning regulations.
   D.   Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate: If, by the end of the three (3)
month period, the commission has found that without approval of the proposed
work, the property cannot be put to a reasonable beneficial use, or the owner
cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom, then the commission shall
issue a certificate of economic hardship approving the proposed work. If the
commission finds otherwise, it shall deny the application for a certificate of
economic hardship.
   E.   Appeals: When a certificate of economic hardship is approved or denied
for either a landmark or a structure within a historic district, the applicant
or any interested party may, within thirty (30) days, appeal the commission’s
decision to the city council. The council may receive comments on the contents
of the record, but no new matter may be considered by the council. The council
may affirm the decision or recommend changes by a majority vote of the council
after due consideration of the facts contained in the record submitted to the
council by the commission. A four-fifths (4/5) majority is required to overturn
a negative recommendation of the commission. If the council decides that a
certificate of economic hardship should be issued, the secretary shall notify
the applicant and the community development director, or their designee within
seven (7) days of the council’s decision, and the community development
director, or their designee then shall issue the permit within fifteen (15)
days. If the council concurs with the commission’s decision not to issue a
certificate of economic hardship, the secretary shall notify the applicant and
the community development director, or their designee within seven (7) days.
(Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-10-8: NATURAL DESTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION:
In the case of partial or complete natural destruction or demolition of a site
within a historic preservation district or of a landmark, the owner will be
required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the commission prior
to reconstruction. Although exact duplication of the previous structure may not
be required, the exterior design of the property shall be in harmony with:
   A.   The exterior design of the structure prior to damage if the structure
was partially damaged; and
   B.   The character of the historic preservation district. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-
19-2004)
9-10-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who undertakes or causes an alteration, construction, demolition, or
removal of any designated landmark or property within a designated historic
district without a certificate of appropriateness shall be guilty of a quasi-
criminal offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Every day such violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a
separate violation. The preservation commission may request that the city
council institute an appropriate action or proceeding to enjoin, correct or
abate any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 04-O-51, 10-19-2004)
CHAPTER 11
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
9-11-1: Purpose
9-11-2: Definitions
9-11-3: Base Flood Elevation
9-11-4: Duties Of The Community Development Director
9-11-5: Development Permit
9-11-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
9-11-7: Protecting Buildings
9-11-8: Subdivision Requirements
9-11-9: Public Health And Other Standards
9-11-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
9-11-11: Variances
9-11-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
9-11-13: Penalty
9-11-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
9-11-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city by
the Illinois municipal code 1  in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   A.   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   B.   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   C.   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   D.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   E.   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   F.   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   G.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
9-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
9-11-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank
that is principally aboveground including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
   A.   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   B.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   C.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   D.   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   E.   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   F.   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   G.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Charleston, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Charleston, or that may be annexed
into the city of Charleston, that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The floodplains of the Riley Creek, Cassel Creek, Town Branch Creek, and
Kickapoo Creek are generally identified as such on panel number(s) 200, 300,
305, 310, and 350 of the countywide flood insurance rate map of Coles County
prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated July 18, 2011.
Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by the
community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Coles County that are within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Charleston or that may be
annexed into the city of Charleston are generally identified as such on the
flood insurance rate map prepared for Coles County by the federal emergency
management agency and dated July 18, 2011.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   C.   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
   D.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois department of natural resource office
of water resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary area of
six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the floodway of
any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred (6,400) acres
or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a permit from
the department (Illinois administrative code title 17, part 3700.30). The
department may grant approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a
statewide permit which meets the standards defined in section
9-11-6 of this chapter.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
9-11-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced or
after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
   A.   Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
   B.   Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
   A.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
   B.   Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of
historic places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
9-11-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Riley Creek, Cassel
Creek, Town Branch Creek, and Kickapoo Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the countywide flood insurance study of Coles County
prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated July 18, 2011.
   B.   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone"
or "AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide
flood insurance rate map of Coles County.
   C.   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Coles
County shall be according to the best data available from federal, state or
other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   D.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Coles County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city of Charleston, or that may be annexed into the city of Charleston,
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance
study of Coles County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and
dated July 18, 2011. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
9-11-4: DUTIES OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
The community development director, or their designee shall be responsible for
the general administration of this chapter and ensure that all development
activities within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city of
Charleston meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-11-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the community development director, or their designee.
The community development director, or their designee shall not issue a
development permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirements
of this chapter.
   A.   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
9-11-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   B.   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the community
development director, or their designee shall compare the elevation of the site
to the base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown
by survey elevation to be below the base flood elevation. Any development
located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than the current
base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date of the site’s
first flood insurance rate map is not in the floodplain and therefore not
subject to the requirements of this chapter. In addition, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected to a flood source, but not identified as floodplain on the current
flood insurance rate map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   The community development director, or their designee shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first flood insurance rate map identification.
   The community development director, or their designee shall be responsible
for obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this
type of activity. The community development director, or their designee shall
not issue a permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been
obtained. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-11-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of water
resources statewide permit number 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit
number 5;
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, signposts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   B.   Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section
may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
9-11-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   A.   In addition to the state permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
9-11-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage
occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
9-11-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation,
         b.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation,
         c.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure,
         d.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         e.   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         a.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters,
         b.   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation,
         c.   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         d.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage,
            (2)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed,
            (3)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (4)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         a.   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy,
         b.   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade,
         c.   The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade,
         d.   The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point,
         e.   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event,
         f.   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         g.   Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   C.   Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu
of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   D.   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection B of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile
home tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section
870.
   E.   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection D of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck,
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times,
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches,
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling,
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet,
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated,
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain,
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick disconnect,
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         a.   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         b.   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   F.   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24 feet x 24 feet).
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
9-11-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The Charleston city council shall take into account hazards, to the extent that
they are known, in all official actions related to land management use and
development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
9-11-6 and
9-11-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
9-11-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   A.   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
9-11-6 and
9-11-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
9-11-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      4.   New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   B.   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not
to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-
2011)
9-11-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the city of Charleston shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
9-11-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Charleston board of zoning
appeals and planning for a variance. The Charleston board of zoning appeals and
planning shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit
its recommendation to the Charleston city council. The Charleston city council
may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to
further the intent of this chapter.
   A.   Conditions: No variance shall be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain,
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted,
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary,
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance,
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities,
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
   B.   Notification By Board: The Charleston board of zoning appeals and
planning shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of the building protections standards of section
9-11-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   C.   Historic Structures:
      1.   Variances to the building protection requirements of section
9-11-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
9-11-6 and
9-11-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
         a.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
         b.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure
being removed as a certified historic structure.
   D.   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to
public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any
variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at grade and
wet floodproofed:
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in zone A only as identified on the community's flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood resistant materials in accordance with
section
9-11-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
9-11-7 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
9-11-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection
9-11-7B of this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
9-11-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the floodplain administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
9-11-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city of Charleston or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-21-2011)
9-11-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the community development
director, or their designee may determine that a violation of the minimum
standards of this chapter exists. The community development director, or their
designee shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days’ notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The city of Charleston shall make application to the circuit court
for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other
order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter,
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense,
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The city of Charleston shall record a notice of violation on the
title of the property.
   B.   The community development director, or their designee shall inform the
owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood
damages and therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy
to be suspended.
The building code official is authorized to issue an order requiring the
suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be in writing,
indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary,
to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the board of zoning appeals and planning. Written notice of
such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board of zoning appeals
and planning shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   C.   Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Charleston from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 11-O-28, 6-
21-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-11-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city of
Charleston to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program
including: ordinance 89-O-29 dated November 21, 1989. However, this chapter
does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve
eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair
any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and
other ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 11-O-28,
6-21-2011)
CHAPTER 12
INCENTIVES FOR BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
9-12-1: Definitions
9-12-2: Incentives
9-12-3: Potential For Greater Incentives
9-12-4: Authorization; Eligibility; Incentives Nontransferable
9-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the terms of this chapter:
ESTIMATED CONSTRUCTION COST: In accordance with section
9-1-2 of this title, the estimated construction cost shall be determined by the
Charleston community development director, or their designee, using figures and
methods provided by the International Code Council.
EXISTING EXPANDING BUSINESS: All businesses that possess a FEIN and that employ
at least one employee that transacted business at or from a location within
Charleston at the time of passage of this chapter that undertakes to enlarge or
substantially modify its operation with the intent of drawing or serving more
customers or employing more persons within the city of Charleston.
EXISTING STRUCTURE: A commercial, residential, professional, industrial, or
storage building constructed prior to the date of this chapter for which a
certificate of occupancy had been issued prior to May 1, 2017, that is properly
zoned, or can be rezoned, for business, commercial and/or industrial uses.
NEW NONRETAIL BUSINESS: All nonretail businesses, including, for example, but
without limitation, industrial and professional businesses, that possess a FEIN
and that employ at least one employee that either did not previously exist or
that did not transact business at or from a location in Charleston.
NEW RETAIL BUSINESS: All businesses subject to the Illinois retailers'
occupation tax act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq., that either
did not previously exist or did not previously conduct retail business
transactions from a physical location in Charleston.
PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT: Any of the authorized abatements of the city's property
taxes found at 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 200/18-165 et seq.
SALES TAX: The tax known as the Illinois retailers’ occupation tax, set forth
in 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq. (Ord. 17-O-16, 4-18-2017; amd.
Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
9-12-2: INCENTIVES:
The city of Charleston hereby authorizes, and may offer to all new businesses,
or existing expanding businesses in an existing structure located in any area
of the city and any other eligible developers, one or more of the following
financial incentives, payable (where applicable) from the respective utility
enterprise or general fund accounts into which said funds were paid, or with
payments from the general fund subject to the limits of general fund
appropriations, or refunded or abated as per Illinois law:
   A.   All or a portion of the sales taxes collected by the new retail
business or existing expanding business otherwise payable to the city for a
period of up to two (2) years from the date approved by the city council
subject to such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the city council.
   B.   All or a portion of the sales taxes due to the city paid by a new
retail business, a new nonretail business, or an existing expanding business on
the purchase of construction materials used to improve an existing structure
for said new retail business, new nonretail business, or existing expanding
business, provided such sales taxes were paid within six (6) months of such
business being established, enlarged, or substantially modified. For purposes
of this subsection, "construction materials" shall include concrete, lumber,
floor coverings, wall coverings and paint. The reimbursement of paid sales
taxes on construction materials set forth in this subsection shall be approved
by the city council after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Businesses located on properties that are receiving tax increment financing
benefits are not eligible for the reimbursement provided for in this
subsection.
   C.   All or a portion of the property taxes payable to the city on "eligible
properties" for up to two (2) years from the date approved by the city council.
The property tax abatement set forth in this subsection C will not be provided
to any business located on property that is receiving tax increment financing
benefits. For purposes of this subsection C, "eligible properties" means those
properties within Charleston that were vacant for a period of at least twenty
four (24) continuous months prior to being occupied by the new retail business
or the new nonretail business. The aggregate total of the abatement will not
exceed four million dollars ($4,000,000.00). The corporate authorities of the
city may abate its taxes according to the following schedule:
      1.   Estimated construction cost between $1.00 - $2,500,000.00: The
corporate authorities of the city may abate up to ninety percent (90%) of the
property taxes due to the city from the property for two (2) tax years
following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
      2.   Estimated construction cost between $2,500,001.00 - $5,000,000.00:
The corporate authorities of the city may abate up to sixty percent (60%) of
the property taxes due to the city from the property for two (2) tax years
following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
      3.   Estimated construction cost greater than $5,000,000.00: The
corporate authorities of the city may abate up to thirty percent (30%) of the
property taxes due to the city from the property for two (2) tax years
following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
   D.   The corporate authorities of the city may discount building permit fees
for permits for a new retail business, a new nonretail business, or an existing
expanding business, for building permits that are issued after the date of
adoption hereof and according to the following schedule:
      1.   Estimated construction cost between $1.00 - $2,500,000.00: The
corporate authorities of the city may discount up to fifty percent (50%) of the
total building permit fees for the project.
      2.   Estimated construction cost between $2,500,001.00 - $5,000,000.00:
The corporate authorities of the city may discount up to forty percent (40%) of
the total building permit fees for the project.
      3.   Estimated construction cost greater than $5,000,000.00: The
corporate authorities of the city may discount up to thirty percent (30%) of
the total building permit fees for the project. (Ord. 17-O-16, 4-18-2017)
9-12-3: POTENTIAL FOR GREATER INCENTIVES:
This chapter in no way limits the ability of the city council to offer
incentives over and above those outlined in this chapter if the economic
development project is of such size or importance to deserve greater
incentives. (Ord. 17-O-16, 4-18-2017)
9-12-4: AUTHORIZATION; ELIGIBILITY; INCENTIVES NONTRANSFERABLE:
The city council may adopt guidelines, rules, and procedures governing requests
made pursuant to this chapter which may include confirmation in writing from
the business proving the amount of the taxes paid by the business before
authorizing the payments set forth in section
9-12-2 of this chapter. Such confirmation would include copies of applicable
retailers' occupation tax returns to the state of Illinois and real estate tax
bills, with appropriate receipts. A business must be, and remain, current with
all payments to the city of Charleston as a condition to be eligible for any
incentives under this chapter. The incentives awarded pursuant to this chapter
are nontransferable and are void with the transfer of ownership of the
business. (Ord. 17-O-16, 4-18-2017)
TITLE 10
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Authority
10-1-3: Purpose
10-1-4: Jurisdiction
10-1-5: Compliance With Provisions
10-1-6: Subdivision Exemptions
10-1-7: Application During Local Emergency
10-1-8: Interpretation Of Provisions
10-1-9: Coordination With Other Regulations And Plans
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as the CHARLESTON, ILLINOIS UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE,
hereinafter referred to as "this title". (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-1-2: AUTHORITY:
The authority to establish this title is done, at the option of the city
council of this city, in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-1-3: PURPOSE:
In accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes and the city's adopted
comprehensive plan, the purpose of this title is to:
   A.   Promote public health, safety, comfort, order and general welfare;
   B.   Conserve and protect property values;
   C.   Protect private property rights;
   D.   Promote orderly development and use of land and natural resources;
   E.   Protect the quality and quantity of prime agricultural land;
   F.   Facilitate safe and economical provision of streets, water, wastewater
disposal, schools, parks and other public requirements; and
   G.   Regulate the density of population and the location and use of
buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence or other
purposes. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-1-4: JURISDICTION:
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes authorizes the city to adopt and enforce
regulations governing zoning, planning and subdivision, and building within all
or any portion of the corporate city limits and within all or any portion of
the unincorporated area extending one and one-half (11/2) miles outward from
the corporate city limits. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-1-5: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
   A.   Use Of Land: Except as specifically provided hereinafter:
      1.   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed,
moved or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used, except
for a use permitted in the district in which such building or land is located
unless in a manner prescribed by this title.
      2.   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which such building is located.
      3.   No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered except in conformity with the area regulations of the
district in which such building is located.
      4.   No building shall be erected or structurally altered except in
conformity with the off street parking and loading regulations of the district
in which such building is located.
      5.   Every building erected or structurally altered hereinafter shall be
located on a "lot" as defined in section
10-2-3 of this title, and in no case shall there be more than one principal
building on one lot except as provided in chapter 8 of this title.
      6.   All inhabited manufactured homes shall be located in a manufactured
home park, except as otherwise provided for in this title. The temporary use of
a manufactured home or a temporary building in conjunction with construction
work shall be permitted. No manufactured home or mobile home may be used as an
accessory structure in a residential district.
      7.   No structure or land shall be occupied or used without first
obtaining a certificate of occupancy from the community development director,
or their designee, as specified in section
10-4-2  of this title.
   B.   Subdivision Of Land:
      1.   All divisions or subdivisions of land into two (2) or more parcels
or lots that are within the jurisdiction of the city shall be subject to the
procedures and requirements of chapter 4 of this title.
      2.   No subdivision plat, as defined in this title, shall be filed for
record or recorded in the office of the county recorder of deeds unless and
until the approval of the council is endorsed thereon by the city.
      3.   No parcel of land in a subdivision created after January 1, 1969,
shall be transferred, sold, or offered for sale, nor shall a building permit be
issued for any structure thereon, nor shall a certificate of occupancy for the
use of any land or structure thereon be issued until a plat of subdivision has
been recorded with the county recorder of deeds in accordance with this title.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-1-6: SUBDIVISION EXEMPTIONS:
The following divisions of land shall be exempt from compliance with the
subdivision procedures established in section
10-4-3 of this title:
   A.   Exceptions to the plat act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1(b) and
(c).
   B.   The public acquisition of land for the widening of existing streets or
for constructing other public works.
   C.   Any lot, parcel or tract of land located within the area governed by
this title which has been legally subdivided or resubdivided by map or deed
prior to the effective date hereof.
   D.   Cemetery lots.
   E.   An interest in oil, gas, minerals or building materials, which is now
or hereafter severed from the surface ownership of real property.
   F.   The creation of a leasehold for a space within a multi- occupant
building or a commercial building site; provided, that the property is a part
of an approved subdivision or addition and regulated in accordance with the
site plan requirements of the city.
   G.   The creation of a leasehold for agricultural use of the subject
property; provided, that the use does not involve the construction of a
building(s) to be used as a residence or for any purpose not directly related
to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. (Ord. 03-
O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-1-7: APPLICATION DURING LOCAL EMERGENCY:
The city council shall have the authority to waive certain standards of this
title during local emergencies declared by federal, state or local officials.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-1-8: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: In interpreting and applying the provisions of
this title, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion
of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, or general
welfare.
   B.   Abrogation: It is not intended by this title to interfere with or
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between
parties; provided, however, that where this title imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings or requires
larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules,
regulations or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this
title shall govern 1 .
   C.   Values Not A Standard: Minimum values are not intended to be target or
standard values.
   D.   Severability: It hereby is declared to be the intent of the city that
the provisions of this title shall be severable. If any provision is declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the
legislative intent that:
      1.   The effect of such decision shall be limited to that provision or
provisions which are expressly stated in the decision to be invalid; and
      2.   Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this title as a
whole or any other part thereof, but the rest of this title shall continue in
full force and effect. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-1-9D of this chapter.
10-1-9: COORDINATION WITH OTHER REGULATIONS AND PLANS:
   A.   City Code Provisions: The use of buildings and land within the city
shall be subject to all other applicable provisions of this code as well as
this title, whether or not such other provisions of this code are specifically
cross referenced in this title. Cross references to other provisions of this
code are for the convenience of the reader; lack of a cross reference should
not be construed as an indication that other provisions of this code do not
apply.
   B.   Consistency With Comprehensive Plan:
      1.   This title, and any amendment to or actions pursuant to this title,
are intended to implement the goals and policies of the Charleston
comprehensive plan and are hereby deemed to be consistent with and in
accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan for the city.
      2.   An amendment to the text of this title is consistent with the
comprehensive plan if it complies with the goals and policies stated in the
plan. An amendment to the zoning map is consistent with the comprehensive plan
if the map amendment is consistent with the future land use map contained in
the plan.
   C.   Conflicts: Whenever any provision of this title or any other applicable
law, rule, contract, resolution or regulation of the city, county, state or
federal government contains certain standards covering the same subject matter,
the more restrictive requirements or higher standards shall govern.
   D.   Relationship To Private Agreements 1 : This title is not intended to
abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or any other
private agreement or legal relationship; provided, however, that where the
regulations of this title are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the
regulations of this title shall govern.
   E.   Development Under Prior Regulations:
      1.   Existing Uses: Existing legally established uses may continue as
long as they are in compliance with this title. Legal nonconforming uses may
continue pursuant to chapter 6 of this title.
      2.   Nonconforming Lots: Subject to the provisions of chapter 6 of this
title, existing legal lots that do not meet minimum area requirements may be
developed as nonconforming lots, but unless the plat specifies building
setbacks, development of vacant lots shall comply with new setbacks to the
greatest extent possible. A variance shall be obtained from the board of zoning
appeals and planning to deviate from the standards of this title.
      3.   Development Under Review: Development under prior regulations shall
be allowed, provided the city has issued a valid permit, and the permit has not
expired. Any permit issued under prior regulations shall expire twelve (12)
months after the effective date hereof unless the applicant completes the work.
      4.   Development Of New Uses: Any use previously permitted by right under
the zoning district regulations in effect immediately prior to the effective
date hereof, may be established within six (6) months of the effective date
hereof, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit for the use pursuant to
subsection
10-4-3D of this title.
   F.   Relationship To Other Regulations And Codes: This title establishes
many, but not all, of the standards and procedures for development. Other
portions of this code, as well as other standards shall apply to development,
including, but not limited to, adopted building codes, fire codes, utility,
street and drainage design and construction standards. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  10-1-8B of this chapter.
CHAPTER 2
RULES AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Terms Defined And Not Defined
10-2-2: Rules Of Construction
10-2-3: Definitions
10-2-1: TERMS DEFINED AND NOT DEFINED:
Words contained in this chapter are those having a special meaning relative to
the purposes of this title. Words not listed in this chapter shall be defined
by reference to: a) the building code adopted by the city or, if not defined
therein (or no building code has been adopted), in b) the Webster's Third New
International Dictionary, unabridged, 1993, or if not defined therein, in c)
the Illinois Compiled Statutes, which documents are hereby incorporated by
reference as if set forth in their entirety herein. The words and terms listed
in section
10-2-3 of this chapter and used in this title have the meanings set out in said
section
10-2-3, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words and terms not
defined in this chapter but defined elsewhere in this title shall be given the
meanings set forth therein. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-2-2: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the interpretation of this title, the provisions and rules of this section
shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly requires
otherwise:
   A.   The specific controls the general.
   B.   Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
singular include the plural; and words of one gender include all other genders,
unless the context clearly indicates the contrary within the time frame subject
to extensions provided herein.
   C.   The word “shall” is always mandatory; the word “may” is permissive and
is at the discretion of the city council, board of zoning appeals and planning
or the community development director, or their designee, as the context may
require.
   D.   The word "person" includes individuals, firms, corporations,
associations, trusts and any other similar entities.
   E.   The word "city" shall mean city of Charleston, Illinois.
   F.   The word "board" shall mean the board of zoning appeals and planning of
the city of Charleston.
   G.   The words "plan commission" shall mean the city of Charleston board of
zoning appeals and planning.
   H.   The words "recorder" and "recorder of deeds" shall mean the county
clerk.
   I.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this title and any caption, illustration, or table, the text shall control.
   J.   All provisions of this title shall be construed to be in addition to
all other applicable laws, ordinances and rules of the federal government, the
state of Illinois, and the city of Charleston, and in case of any conflict
between this title and any such other law, ordinance or rule, the more
restrictive shall prevail.
   K.   The words "include" and "including" mean include or including by way of
illustration and not by way of limitation.
   L.   The phrase "used for" includes the phrases "arranged for", "designed
for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
   M.   Any reference to "this title" shall mean the unified development code.
   N.   References to the Illinois Compiled Statutes or to this code are
applicable as of the effective date hereof. Subsequent changes to those
sections, including renumbering, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein.
   O.   The terms "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include
"building" and "use of building".
   P.   The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel".
   Q.   Unless otherwise specifically provided, the time within which an act is
to be completed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last day, unless it is Saturday, Sunday or city recognized holiday, which shall
be excluded from the computation of time. All acts must be completed within the
time frame, subject to extensions. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5,
2-18-2025)
10-2-3: DEFINITIONS:
AASHTO: American association of state highway and transportation officials.
ABUTTING: Lying immediately next to, sharing a common wall or lot line, or
separated by only a public roadway.
ACCESSORY BUILDING/STRUCTURE AND USE: A subordinate building, not attached to
the main structure, and located on the same lot as the main building, the use
of which is naturally and normally incidental to that of the dominant use of
the main building or land. An "accessory use" is one which is naturally and
normally incidental to the main use of the premises. Exhibit 2-1 provides
examples.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1534.gif]
 
ACTIVITY CENTER: A focal point within the context of a larger, contiguous area
surrounding it. It is an area of concentrated activity that attracts people
from outside its boundaries for purposes of interaction within that area.
ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES: Facilities determined to be capable of supporting
and servicing the physical area and designated intensity of the proposed
improvement as determined by the city council based upon specific levels of
service adopted by the city. (See chapter 9 of this title.)
ADJACENT: Abutting or located within one hundred feet (100') of the property
from which adjacency is determined, exclusive of land within the public rights
of way or easements.
ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESS: See chapter 12 of this title.
ADVERTISING DEVICES: Banners or streamers affixed to poles, wires or ropes;
wind operated devices; flashing lights and other similar contrivances.
ADVERTISING SIGNS: Signs pertaining to the name of the establishment, or to
products and services sold or offered on or off the premises.
AGRICULTURE: Agricultural purposes include, without limitation, the art or
science of cultivating the ground, including harvesting of crops, grains and
seed crops; the science and art of growing, developing, processing,
conditioning, or selling of hybrid seed corn, seed beans, seed oats, and other
farm seeds; tillage; husbandry; farming, production, keeping, or maintenance of
plants and animals useful to man, including, but not limited to, forages and
sod crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products;
livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules, goats,
bees or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding, feeding and
grazing of any or all such animals; bees and apiary products; furbearing
animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, nuts and berries;
vegetables; nursery, floral, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands
devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program including, to a
variable extent, the preparation of these products for human use.
AIRPORT: A place where airplanes can take off and land, usually equipped with
hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for
passengers.
ALIQUOT: A fractional part of a section within the United States public land
survey system. Only the fractional parts one-half, one-quarter, one-half of
one-quarter, or one-quarter of one- quarter shall be considered an "aliquot"
part of a section.
ALLEY: A public right of way designed to serve as a secondary access to the
side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on a street.
AMUSEMENT PARK: A facility, primarily outdoors, that may include structures and
buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment including rides,
booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, buildings for shows and
entertainment, restaurants and souvenir sales.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of rooms contained in a multiple dwelling structure
intended, designed or used as a residence by a single family.
APPLICANT OR DEVELOPER: A person who files an application for any permit or
approval for development required by this title.
AREA, GROSS: The entire area within the boundary lines of the property proposed
for subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for
street and alley rights of way and for public uses.
ARTERIAL STREET, MAJOR: A highway or public roadway so designated on the
adopted street plan for the purpose of expediting the movement of through
traffic to major traffic generators and from community to community.
ARTERIAL STREET, MINOR: A continuous street, so designated on the adopted
street plan, that is intended to carry high volumes of traffic through the
community.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: Residences, for the frail elderly or for the
sheltered care of persons with special needs, that provide rooms, meals,
personal care and supervision of self- administered medication. Facilities may
provide a combination of services such as recreational activities, financial
services, social and personal counseling and transportation.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP: Any premises used to equip, service or repair cars and
light trucks, including the rebuilding, replacing and the installing of motors,
transmissions, drive trains, exhaust systems, upholstery, brakes and radiators,
but not including the dismantling or extended storage of wrecked vehicles or
tire recapping establishments.
BASEMENT: A story, partly underground, and having at least one- half (1/2) of
its height above the average level of the adjoining ground as shown in exhibit
2-2. A "basement" shall be counted as a story if subdivided and used for
dwelling or business purposes, other than for the quarters of a watchman or
janitor.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1536.gif]
 
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT 1 : A bed and breakfast (or B&B) establishment
is a small lodging establishment that offers overnight accommodation and
breakfast. Bed and breakfast establishments are private homes with five (5) or
fewer guestrooms. Bed and breakfast establishments are classified as either: a)
bed and breakfast home or b) bed and breakfast inn and as further defined in 50
Illinois Compiled Statutes 820/1 et seq.
BERM: A mound of earth or the act of pushing earth into a mound; also used as a
verb to describe the act of building a mound of earth for screening or a
landscape buffer. Exhibit 2-3 of this definition depicts a "berm".
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1538.gif]
 
BIG BOX STORES: A classification of land use that includes big box stores,
supercenters, superstores and big box retailers that occupy buildings with at
least sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of floor area, and generate hundreds
of trips per hour. They are often a single retail store that may enclose
smaller stores within the superstore building which exceeds a specified square
footage, and which stocks and sells large quantities of items.
BILLBOARD: See definition of Off Premises Sign.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, waterways or boundary lines
of the corporate limits of the city.
BOARDING HOUSE OR LODGING HOUSE: A building where, for compensation and by
arrangement, lodging (in not more than 5 lodging rooms) and meals are provided
for persons in addition to the resident family.
BOND: Financial instrument guaranteeing the construction, completion,
maintenance, removal or some other action affecting a public or private
improvement.
BUFFER YARD, BUFFER AREA, BUFFER STRIP 2 : A landscaped area intended to
separate and partially obstruct the view between two (2) adjacent land uses or
properties from one another or to shield or block noise, lights, or other
nuisances.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for
support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or
property of any kind.
BUILDING FACE: The walls, windows, parapets or other vertical structural
components of a building, but not including mansard roofs and screens for roof
mounted equipment.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade (the average level of
the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the structure) to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of mansard roof, or to
the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs
(see section
10-8-1 of this title).
BUSINESS PARK/INDUSTRIAL PARK/OFFICE PARK: An area developed under single
ownership or unified control, including one or more separate business
establishments and/or tenants.
BUSINESS SERVICE: Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to
business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and
mailing; building maintenance; employment services; delivery and dispatch
services; management and consulting services; protective services; equipment
rental and leasing; commercial research; development and testing; photo
finishing; and personal supply services.
CANNABIS: "Cannabis" as set forth in section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, as amended.
CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A "cannabis business establishment" as defined
in section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, and such
other cannabis business establishments authorized under the Act, as amended.
CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A "craft grower" as defined in section 1-10 of the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A "cultivation center" as defined in section 1-10
of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A "dispensing organization" and "dispensary" as defined in
section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
CANNABIS INFUSER: An "infuser organization" or "infuser" as defined in section
1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
CANNABIS PROCESSOR: A "processing organization" or "processor" as defined in
section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
CANNABIS TRANSPORTER: A "transporting organization" or "transporter" as defined
in section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
CANOPY: A roof construction or cantilevered roof, free of enclosing walls, over
an entrance to a building or a gasoline pump island.
CANOPY TREE: Trees with an irregular or umbrella canopy providing shade,
screening or background such as a shade tree.
CAR WASH: A structure, or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
private passenger vehicles using automatic methods with a chain conveyer,
blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical devices; or providing space
and equipment for the washing, cleaning or polishing of passenger vehicles,
whether by customer or the operator; but not including truck wash facilities.
CELLAR: That story of a building that has more than one-half (1/2) of its
height below grade, as illustrated in exhibit 2-4.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1540.gif]
 
CITY COUNCIL: City council of Charleston.
CLINIC: An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are
admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, or
other members of the healing arts practicing together.
CLUB: A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person or persons for social, educational or
recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service
which is customarily carried on as a business.
CLUSTER SUBDIVISION: A form of development that provides reduced lot area while
maintaining the same number of lots and overall density. Buildings are
concentrated on a part of the site, permitting the remaining land area to be
devoted to open space, active recreation areas, environmentally sensitive land
preserves or agriculture. Exhibit 2-5 illustrates a sample cluster subdivision.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1542.gif]
 
COLLECTOR STREET: Those streets so identified in the city's adopted
thoroughfare plan.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS: The C-1, C-2 and C-3 zoning districts as defined in
chapter 5 of this title.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: An open space area within or connected to a developed site,
which is managed and designed for the use, benefit or enjoyment of all
residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A facility licensed by the state for developmentally
disabled residents requiring custodial care, such as family homes and elderly
homes.
COMPATIBLE: Buildings, structures, activities or uses that can coexist without
infringing on the normal use and enjoyment of the adjacent properties.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the city of
Charleston for the coordinated physical development of Charleston and environs.
CONE OF LIGHT: The area directly illuminated by a light source, not including
light reflected from inside the hood or shade of a light fixture; diffused
light that is less than fifty percent (50%) as bright as the areas directly
illuminated by the light source from an equivalent distance; or other reflected
light that is less than fifty percent (50%) as bright as the areas directly
illuminated by the light source from an equivalent distance.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying the architect, contractor,
subcontractor, material supplier or others involved in construction on the
property on which the sign is located.
CONTIGUOUS: In contact with, abutting, adjoining, or touching another parcel or
structure.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A store serving persons in adjacent areas and limited to the
sale of limited grocery items, magazine, newspapers and other limited items
where gasoline sales may or may not be permitted. A "convenience store" does
not include an indoor or outdoor restaurant where the consumption of food
products on the premises is encouraged.
COTTAGE INDUSTRY: An intensive home occupation subject to the regulations in
section
10-7-6 of this title.
CUL-DE-SAC: A dead end street that includes a circular turnaround at its
terminus.
DOT: Department of transportation.
DAYCARE CENTER: A "daycare center", as defined in 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 10/2.09, receiving eight (8) or more children for care during all or
part of a day.
DAYCARE HOME: As defined in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/2.18, a home
where daycare is provided for more than three (3) children but not more than
twelve (12) children.
DECIBEL: A unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound.
A sound level meter is calibrated in "decibels".
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units divided by the area of the subdivided
portion of a parent tract.
DENSITY, GROSS: The number of dwelling units located or proposed to be located
on a parcel divided by the gross area of the parcel.
DEVELOPER OR APPLICANT: A person who is responsible for any undertaking that
requires any permit from the city for the development of land.
DEVELOPMENT: Includes any of the following activities:
   A.   A change in the use of any land, building or structure for any purpose,
and shall include the carrying out of any building, engineering construction or
other operation in, on, over or under land, or the construction, addition or
alteration of any building or structure;
   B.   The construction, erection or placing of one or more buildings or
structures on land or the making of an addition or alteration to a building or
structure; or
   C.   The subdivision, resubdivision or change in property boundaries or the
improvement of land.
DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT: A written agreement executed by the city and
the developer in which the provision and installation of public improvements is
addressed.
DISTRICT: Any section of the city of Charleston or territory within one and
one-half (11/2) miles of the city of Charleston for which the zoning
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of
buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that provides or is designed to
provide, either wholly or in part, parking of patrons' automobiles from which
the occupants may watch entertainment, purchase goods or services, or transact
business.
DRIVE-THROUGH ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment that provides or is designed to
provide goods or services to persons in their cars at a window in an area
through which cars must pass.
DRIVEWAY: Private accessway leading from a street or alley to a dwelling unit
or building.
DWELLING, ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling unit having its own ground floor
entrance, joined to one or more dwelling units by common walls, or other
horizontally unifying structural element, being self-sufficient and designed
for occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY: A self-sufficient dwelling designed to be
separated on all sides and to be occupied by a single family.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A structure including three (3) or more dwellings.
DWELLING OR DWELLING UNIT: Any building or portion thereof that is designed for
or used exclusively for long term residential purposes by a single family,
which includes a kitchen and at least one bathroom and is mounted on or
attached to a foundation set in a fixed location.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by one
family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX): A building consisting of two (2) dwellings, with
each dwelling unit having its own ground floor entrance, joined to only one
other dwelling unit by a common wall, or other horizontally unifying structural
element.
EASEMENT: A strip of land for which rights have been granted for a specified
use or purpose, including, but not limited to, access, utilities, drainage,
conservation, agriculture or other specified activity or impact.
ERECT: To build, construct, reconstruct, alter, place or relocate any
structure, including the preparation for such activity, such as excavating,
grading, drilling, piling, cribbing, filling or draining land.
FEMA: Federal emergency management administration.
FACE: That area of a sign containing the advertising information, painting,
drawing or message intended or used to advise or inform, but excluding
structural supports.
FAIR MARKET VALUE: The price of a building and/or land that would be agreed
upon voluntarily in fair negotiations between a knowledgeable owner who is
willing, but not forced, to sell and a knowledgeable buyer who is willing, but
not forced, to buy.
FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, occupying
a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit and doing their own cooking
on the premises, including not more than two (2) boarders or lodgers.
FARM: The land, buildings and machinery used in agricultural production of farm
products.
FLAG LOT: A lot fronting on or abutting a public road and where access to the
public road is by narrow, private right of way.
FLASHING SIGNS: Any sign, the illumination of which is not constant in
intensity when in use. Electronic message signs approved by the board of
appeals and planning that indicate the date, time or temperature shall not be
considered "flashing signs".
FLOODPLAIN: An area subject to inundation during an identified storm event.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline
of common walls, but not including garages, unenclosed porches, and cellar or
basement space.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: Gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot
area (floor area/lot area = floor area ratio).
FOUNDATION, PERMANENT: A structural building support extending from below the
frost line up to the structure and made of cast in place concrete, concrete
blocks mortared together or other material approved by the community
development director, or their designee.
FRONTAGE: The dimensions of a lot measured along the abutting street right of
way.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of not
more than four (4) motor driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the
building to which it is accessory, and not storing more than one commercial
vehicle or any vehicle which exceeds a two (2) ton capacity.
GENERAL SERVICES: Establishments primarily engaged in providing assistance, as
opposed to products, to individuals, business, industry, government and other
enterprises, including hotels and other lodging places; personal business,
repair and amusement services; health, legal, engineering and other
professional services; educational services; membership organizations; and
other miscellaneous services.
GRADE, FINISHED: The average level of the finished surface of the ground
adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
GRADE, NATURAL: The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state,
before any development, except agricultural operations.
GUN CLUB: A facility that provides an indoor or outdoor shooting range and
practice facility for gun enthusiasts and skeet and trap shooting.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any waste as defined in 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/2-4.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: A facility or institute, whether public or private,
principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnoses or
treatment of human disease, pain, injury, deformity or physical condition,
including, but not limited to, a general hospital, special hospital, mental
hospital, public health center, diagnostic center, treatment center,
rehabilitation center, extended care facility, skilled nursing home, nursing
home, intermediate care facility, outpatient clinic, dispensary, home
healthcare agency, and bio- analytical laboratory or central services facility
serving one or more institutions but excluding institutions that provide
healing solely by prayer.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the average grade of the base of
the structure at ground level to its highest point and including the main
structure and all attachments thereto or as otherwise provided in section
10-8-1 of this title.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business, occupation or profession conducted within a
dwelling unit by a person residing within that dwelling unit which is clearly
incidental to the primary residential use of the structure. See section
10-7-6 of this title.
HORTICULTURE: The use of land for the growing or production of fruits,
vegetables, flowers, nursery stock, including ornamental plants and trees, and
cultured sod.
HOTEL, MOTEL, OR MOTOR HOTEL: An establishment containing guestrooms,
exclusively for occupancy by transient guests, and that provides customary
hotel services such as a maid, telephone and secretarial, bellboy and desk
services, and the use and upkeep of furnishings and laundry of linens.
HOUSEHOLD LIVING: Persons living together acting as a single housekeeping unit
in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and having common use of all
living and eating areas, and other areas and facilities for the preparation and
serving of food within the dwelling unit.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign whose copy is limited to the identification of a
home, apartment, townhouse, or manufactured home project, and all other
permitted uses.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC: Street work, utilities including, but not limited to,
water, sewer, electric, gas and storm drainage, or other public facilities
(e.g., library, park, school, etc.).
INCIDENTAL SIGN: An informational sign, attached or freestanding, that has a
purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, that guides or
directs pedestrian or vehicular traffic such as "no parking", "entrance", "exit
only", or "loading only", or provides a warning, an address or similar
directive language. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position
off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered "incidental".
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit
establishment for public use.
INSTITUTIONAL AND CIVIC USE: Nonprofit, civic, religious or public uses such as
libraries, public or private schools, hospitals, government owned or operated
building, structure or land used for public purposes.
JUNK: Dismantled and inoperable vehicles, machinery, and appliances, or parts
of such vehicles, machinery or appliances; scrap copper, brass, rope, rags,
batteries, paper, rubber debris, iron, steel or other metals; and any object
which does not function as the manufacturer intended. An "inoperable vehicle"
shall mean any motor vehicle that lacks a current registration or a registered
vehicle that lacks two (2) or more wheels or any other component parts, the
absence of which renders the vehicle illegal for use on the highway.
JUNKYARD OR SALVAGE YARD: Any place where waste or discarded or salvaged
material or equipment is bought, sold, exchanged, baled or packed,
disassembled, kept, stored, or handled, including house wrecking yards, auto
wrecking activities, used lumberyards and places or yards for storage of
salvaged building materials and structural steel materials and equipment, but
not including areas where such uses are conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building.
LANDSCAPED AREA: An area that is permanently devoted and maintained for the
growing of shrubbery, grass and other plant material.
LANDSCAPING: A. Any combination of trees, shrubs, flowers, grass or other
horticultural elements, decorative stonework, paving, screening or other
architectural elements, all of which are designed to enhance the visual amenity
of a property and/or to provide a screen to mitigate any objectionable aspects
that may detrimentally affect adjacent land.
   B.   Changing or modifying natural features of a site so as to make it more
attractive and desirable by adding lawns, trees, shrubs, ornamental plantings,
fencing, walks, drives or other structures and materials as used in landscape
architecture.
   C.   Changing, rearranging or adding to the original vegetation or scenery
of a piece of land to produce an aesthetic effect appropriate for the use to
which the land is put. It may include reshaping the land by moving the earth,
as well as preserving the original vegetation or adding vegetation.
LAUNDROMAT: An establishment providing washing, dry cleaning, drying or ironing
machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
LETTER OF CREDIT: Financial instrument guaranteeing the construction,
completion, maintenance, removal or some other action affecting a public or
private improvement.
LOADING SPACE: A space within the main building or on the same lot therewith,
providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks.
LODGING ROOM: Any habitable room, or group of not more than two (2) habitable
rooms forming a habitable unit, occupied or intended to be occupied by not more
than two (2) persons for living and sleeping, but not used for cooking
purposes.
LOT:
   A.   A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land established for
transfer of ownership or for building development, whether immediate or future.
   B.   A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a use, including
principal and accessory buildings, the open spaces and parking spaces required
by this title, and having its principal frontage upon a street or upon an
officially approved place. Exhibit 2-6 illustrates examples of various types of
lots.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1544.gif]
 
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE OR THROUGH: A lot having a frontage on two (2)
nonintersecting streets as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been
legally recorded.
LOT WIDTH: The lesser of the width of a lot at the front building line or back
building line.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A legally enforceable agreement guaranteeing the
maintenance of a public or private improvement for a specified period of time.
MANUFACTURED HOME: As defined in 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/2.1 and
which is manufactured or constructed under the authority of 42 USC section 5403
and is to be used as a place for human habitation.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK: Any site, lot, or tract of land upon which two (2) or
more occupied manufactured homes are harbored, either free of charge, or for
revenue purposes.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT: The assembly, fabrication or processing of goods and
materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes,
odors, glare or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where
such assembly, fabrication or processing takes place. Such processes are housed
entirely within a building, and the area occupied by the outdoor storage of
goods and materials used in such processes does not exceed twenty five percent
(25%) of the floor area of all buildings on the property. "Light manufacturing"
generally includes processing and fabrication of finished products,
predominantly from previously prepared materials.
MARKET VALUE: Value as determined by the Coles County assessor or other
qualified real estate appraiser.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign affixed to a marquee over the entrance or on the face of
a building and supported by and projecting from the building.
MASTER SIGNAGE PLAN: A site plan that provides the graphic and written details
of signage to be incorporated within a specific area.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A "cultivation center" as defined in
section 10 of the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as
amended.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSARY: A "cultivation center" as defined in section 10 of
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended.
MENU SIGN OR MENU BOARD: Any sign that provides information on the selection
and/or price of goods offered for sale at a business.
MESSAGE BOARD SIGN: See definition of Sign, Electronic Message.
MINIWAREHOUSE/SELF-STORAGE: A building or group of buildings that contains
individual compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers for the
dead storage of the customer's goods or wares.
MOBILE BILLBOARD: A sign which is placed upon or applied to the surface or
attached to a motorized vehicle that has more than one axle and is driven for
the purpose of promoting and attracting attention to the product or service
being advertised on the surface of the structure transported by the motorized
vehicle.
MOBILE HOME: A movable or portable unit which is eight (8) body feet or more in
width and is thirty two (32) body feet or more in length, and constructed to be
towed on its own chassis (comprised of frame and wheels) from the place of
construction to the location or subsequent locations, subject to the provisions
of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-101 et seq., and designed to be used
without a permanent foundation and connected to utilities for year round
occupancy, with or without a permanent foundation. The term shall include: a)
units containing parts that may be folded, collapsed, or telescoped when being
towed and that may be expanded to provide additional cubic capacity; and b)
units composed to two (2) or more separately towable components designed to be
joined into one integral unit capable of being separated again into the
components for repeated towing. The term shall include units designed to be
used for residential, commercial, educational or industrial purposes,
excluding, however, recreational vehicles.
MODULAR HOME: As defined by the state of Illinois.
MOTEL, MOTOR COURT, MOTOR LODGE, OR TOURIST COURT: Any building or group of
buildings containing guestrooms or dwelling units, some or all of which have a
separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building with garage
or parking space conveniently located on the lot, and designed, used, or
intended, wholly or in part, for the accommodation of automobile transients.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY RESIDENCE: A structure, including one or more dwelling
units, intended to accommodate either single-family or nonfamily households.
NIGHTCLUB: An establishment dispensing liquor and meals and in which music,
dancing and/or entertainment is conducted.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of a structure or of land that was lawful at the time
of construction either by being constructed prior to the effective date hereof
or prior zoning ordinances or consistent with this title or prior zoning
ordinances at the time of construction but which use is now prohibited or
restricted under the provisions of this title, as amended. A "nonconforming
use" does not include a use that is inconsistent with this title and was
inconsistent with this title or prior zoning ordinances at the time of its
creation.
NUISANCE: The interference with the normal enjoyment and use of property.
"Nuisances", as referred to in this title include smoke, odors, liquid wastes,
solid wastes, radiation, noise, vibration, glare or heat.
NURSERY: An area or business devoted to the raising and care of trees, shrubs
or similar plant materials.
NURSING HOME: Any facility, whether proprietary or nonprofit, that provides
twenty four (24) hour a day accommodation, board and supervision by a nurse to
three (3) or more unrelated residents.
OFF PREMISES SIGN: A sign directing attention to or advertising a business,
commodity, service, product or property not located, sold or conducted on the
same property or site as that on which the sign is located.
OFFICE: A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a nonretail
business, profession, service industry or government and generally furnished
with desks, tables, files and communications equipment.
ON-PREMISES CANNABIS CONSUMPTION ESTABLISHMENT. A cannabis dispensary or retail
tobacco store (as defined in section 10 of the Smoke Free Illinois Act)
authorized or permitted to allow the on-premises consumption of cannabis.
ON PREMISES SIGN: Any display, device, figure, plaque, poster, or other outdoor
advertising maintained or used to advertise or to inform or to direct the
attention of the public to a business or activity conducted upon the premises
upon which such sign is located, or to a product or service sold or rendered
thereon.
100-YEAR FLOOD: A flood, the magnitude of which has a one percent (1%) chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year or which, on the average, will
be equaled or exceeded at least once every one hundred (100) years.
ORDER BOX LOUDSPEAKER: Any electronic speaker used to communicate with
customers outside of a building.
ORDER WINDOW: A window used by drive-through or drive-in facilities where
orders are placed.
OUTDOOR ADVERTISING: An outdoor sign, display, device, figure, painting,
drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing designed, intended
or used to attract attention, advertise or inform, any part of the advertising
or information contents of which is visible from any point of any public right
of way.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY: The display of products for sale outside of a building or
structure, including vehicles, garden supplies, gas, tires and motor oil, boats
and aircraft, farm equipment and produce, burial monuments, building and
landscaping materials and lumberyards, but not including outdoor storage.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The keeping, in an enclosed area, of any goods, junk,
material, merchandise or vehicles, in the same place for more than twenty four
(24) hours, but not including the temporary outdoor display of seasonal goods
or merchandise for sale.
OWNER: Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation,
trust, or any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided, to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide
the same under this title.
PARCEL: Any existing area of land under single ownership that may be
transferred according to applicable laws and ordinances without further
surveying or platting being required.
PARKING LOT/AREA: An open, unoccupied space used or required for use for
parking of automobiles exclusively and in which no gasoline or automobile
accessories are sold or no other business is conducted.
PARKING SPACE: An area permanently reserved for the temporary storage of one
automobile and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway that
provides ingress and egress for automobiles.
PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT: Development that promotes use by pedestrians
and bicyclists as evidenced by limited setbacks, parking in the side and rear
yards, bicycle facilities, pedestrian walkways and other pedestrian amenities
such as awnings, covered entries and other areas, outdoor benches and tables
and patios.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services
involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel.
"Personal services" include, but are not limited to, laundry, including
pressing and cleaning service, linen supply, diaper service, beauty shops,
barbershops, shoe repair, funeral services, steam baths, reducing salons and
health clubs, clothing rental, locker rental, porter service, and domestic
services.
PLACE OF WORSHIP: Churches, chapels, temples, parish halls, mosques and
synagogues, including offices for administration of the religious institution,
convents, seminaries, monasteries, rectories, parsonages and parish houses.
PLANS: All drawings, including general plans, cross sections, profiles, working
details and specifications, that the applicant is required to prepare to show
the character, extent and details of proposed improvements.
PLAT: A map or drawing showing the lot and street arrangement or other features
or details of the area being subdivided as required in this title for
preliminary and final approval and recording.
POLITICAL SIGN: Any sign that is used during a political campaign to advertise
or refer to a local, state or national election, referendum or initiative.
PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed
to the ground or building, including signs on trailers, mobile billboards,
sandwich boards, A-frame signs and spring signs.
PRESCHOOL: A school for children usually younger than those attending
elementary school or kindergarten.
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE: The predominant use of land or structures as
distinguished from an accessory use or structure.
PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITY: A recreational facility operated by a nonprofit
organization and open only to bona fide members and guests of the organization.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES: See definition of Business Service.
PUBLIC HEARING: A meeting announced and advertised in advance and open to the
public, with the public given an opportunity to speak and participate pursuant
to state and local laws.
PUBLIC NOTICE: The advertisement of a public hearing in a paper of general
circulation, and through other media sources, indicating the time, place and
nature of the public hearing and where the application and pertinent documents
may be inspected.
RADIO/TELEVISION BROADCAST STATION: An establishment engaging in oral and
visual programs for presentation to the public and that consists of a studio,
transmitter and antenna.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which it is
located as being for sale, rent or lease.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular unit mounted on wheels, designed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use and of such
size or weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by
a motorized vehicle, and with a living area of less than three hundred twenty
(320) square feet, including built in equipment (such as wardrobes, closets,
kitchen units or fixtures) and bath and toilet rooms.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER PARK: An area used or offered for use in
whole or in part, with or without charge, for the parking of occupied travel
trailers, pickup campers, converted buses, motor homes, tent trailers, tents or
similar devices used for temporary, portable housing.
RESIDENTIAL SIGNS: Signs that are customarily associated with residential use,
such as signs identifying names or numbers or signs on mailboxes, and are not
of a commercial nature, except for home occupation signs.
RESTAURANT: An establishment whose sole business is the sale of food or
beverages to customers for consumption on the premises. The food is consumed
only on the premises, and all dishes are cleared by the staff of the
establishment in preparation for the next customer.
RESTAURANT, CARRY OUT: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of
food or beverages to the customer, in the ready to consume state, for
consumption off the premises.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of
food or beverages in the ready to consume state, all or part of which is served
directly to the customer in a motor vehicle.
RETAIL SERVICES: Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed
to products, to the general public for personal or household use, including
eating and drinking places, hotels and motels, finance, real estate and
insurance, personal services, health, educational and social services, museums
and galleries.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription
or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad,
electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm
sewer, and other similar uses.
RIGHT OF WAY LINE: See definition of Street Line.
ROADSIDE STAND: A retail store where the products sold, i.e., fruit,
vegetables, etc., are raised or grown on the premises where the stand is
located. Meat, fish, poultry or live animals shall not be sold at a "roadside
stand".
SCHOOL: Any building or part thereof that is designed, constructed or used for
education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. The category includes
public and private schools at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high or
high school level that provide state mandated basic education.
SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY OR SECONDARY: Public and private schools at the primary,
elementary, middle, junior high or high school level that provide state
mandated basic education. The category does not include colleges, universities,
and professional schools.
SCREEN: To visually shield or obscure any abutting or nearby structure or use
from another by fencing, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation.
SETBACK LINE: A line that is roughly parallel to the front, side or rear lot
line establishing the minimum space to be provided as the front, side or rear
yard.
SHADE TREE: Any tree with a canopy spread equal to a width of at least fifty
percent (50%) of the height of the tree.
SHOPPING CENTER: A separate and distinct commercially used area under single
ownership or unified control, including one or more separate business
establishments.
SIGHT TRIANGLE: A triangular shaped portion of land established at street
intersections in which nothing is erected, placed or planted, or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists
entering or leaving the intersection.
SIGN: Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, consisting of
any letter, figure, character, mark, point, plane, marquee sign, design,
poster, pictorial, picture, stroke, stripe, line, trademark, reading matter or
illuminating device, which is constructed, attached, erected, fastened or
manufactured in any manner so that the same shall be used for the attraction of
the public to any place, subject, person, corporation, firm, public
performance, article, machine or merchandise, and displayed in any manner for
recognized advertising purposes. Exhibit 2-7 illustrates different types of
signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1546.gif]
 
SIGN AREA: The entire area of the actual message or copy area. (See section
10-10-4 of this title.)
SIGN, AWNING: Advertising, symbols, emblems or images placed on any part of an
awning.
SIGN, BACK TO BACK: An advertising structure with two (2) signs located within
thirty six inches (36") of each other and facing in opposing directions that
are parallel or within ten degrees (10°) of being parallel.
SIGN, BANNER: Attention getting devices in various flexible shapes and made of
cloth, paper, plastic like, or other flexible material hung either with a frame
or with a frame on no more than two (2) sides.
SIGN, CABINET: Any sign consisting of a box like or case like frame, enclosing
a sign face (or faces) fabricated as a single plane of translucent or opaque
material.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: Any sign which is designated solely for the purpose of
traffic or pedestrian direction and placed on the property to which or on which
the public is directed.
SIGN, DIRECTORY: A series of two (2) or more names or addresses only, within a
common cabinet or face area, which identifies occupants on the premises where
displayed.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE: A message board or sign that changes its message
automatically via a lampbank or other mechanical means.
SIGN FACE: The area of a sign on which information is placed. (See subsection
10-10-4B of this title.)
SIGN, FLAT: A sign erected parallel to and attached to the outside wall of a
building and extending a limited distance from such wall, with messages or copy
on the face side only.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign that is not attached to a building but is supported
by a structure or supports placed on, anchored in, or extending from and
permanently attached to the ground. Such signs may be referred to as a pole
sign, pylon sign, monument based sign or ground sign.
SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL: Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained for
any official governmental purpose.
SIGN, GROUND: A permanent business sign supported by uprights or braces set in
the ground in concrete, in or upon the ground surface.
SIGN, MOBILE BILLBOARD: A billboard sign incorporated into a motor vehicle or
trailer, the sole purpose of which is to provide mobile advertising.
SIGN, MONUMENT: A ground based sign that is freestanding and supported by a
solid base attached to the ground as opposed to a sign supported by and
attached to poles or braces.
SIGN, MOVING: Any sign which moves, appears to move, or has moving parts.
Electronic message signs that indicate the date, time, and temperature shall
not be considered "moving signs".
SIGN PERMIT: Written authorization issued by the city for the erection,
installation or display of a specific sign on any property within the city in
accordance with the regulations of subsection
10-4-2F and chapter 10 of this title.
SIGN, POLE: A detached sign erected and maintained on a freestanding mast or
pole and not attached to any building.
SIGN, POLITICAL: Any sign that supports the candidacy of any candidate for
public office or urges action on any other issue of a noncommercial nature.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon or extending
above the roof of any building.
SIGN, STREET BLIMP: Any inflatable sign.
SIGN, TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION: Any temporary sign erected on the premises of an
existing construction project and designating the architect, contractor,
designer or builder, or developer, or the name and nature of the project.
SIGN, TEMPORARY REAL ESTATE: A sign which provides information concerning the
rent, lease or sale of the property on which it is located.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign affixed to a window in view of the general public. This
term does not include merchandise on display.
SITE PLAN: A scale drawing showing the relationship between the lot lines and
their uses, buildings or structures, existing or proposed on a lot, including
such details as parking areas, access points, landscaped areas, building areas,
setbacks from lot lines, building heights, floor areas, densities, septic tank
tile fields, utility lines and currents, or a special or particular use.
SNIPE SIGNS: Temporary signs or posters made of paper, plastic, vinyl or
similar material attached to telephone poles, trees and the like.
SPECIALIZED LIVING FACILITY: As defined in 405 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/
1 et seq., an intermediate care facility for fifty (50) to one hundred (100)
residents with developmental disabilities.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar or basement (except one
used for business or residence), included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there is no floor above it, then
the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF: A story with walls no greater than eight feet (8') in height that
includes less than one-half (1/2) the floor area of the ground floor.
STREET: A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting properties and whether designated as a freeway, expressway,
thoroughfare, highway, road, parkway, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, circle,
cul-de-sac, arterial, collector, local, or however otherwise designated.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designated as a collector on the adopted street
plan of the city or a street in a proposed subdivision which is intended to
collect traffic from the minor streets within a neighborhood or a portion
thereof and to distribute such traffic to arterial thoroughfares, in addition
to providing access to properties abutting thereon.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street having only one end open for vehicular
traffic and with the other end permanently terminated by a circular turnaround.
STREET, DEAD END: A street having only one end open to vehicular traffic; also
referred to as a "court".
STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and an
abutting street.
STREET, LOCAL OR MINOR: A street, other than an arterial or collector street,
that is intended primarily for providing low volume access to abutting
properties.
STREET, MAJOR: A collector or arterial street or a state or federal highway.
STREET, STUB: A street that is temporarily terminated but is planned for future
continuation.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS: Any change in the supporting members of a structure,
such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or doors, other than a change
in windows or a minor alteration which affects primarily the appearance and not
the life of the structure or overall dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings,
advertising signs, billboards, swimming pools, porches and fences.
SUBDIVIDE: The process of dividing any parcel into two (2) or more tracts or
adjusting property boundaries between two (2) or more tracts.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation,
trust, or any other legal entity dividing or proposing to divide land so as to
constitute a "subdivision" as defined in this section and including any agent
of the subdivider.
SUBDIVISION: Either: a) the division of land into two (2) or more parcels, any
of which is less than five (5) acres, except for subdivision defined herein as
a "minor subdivision"; or b) the establishment or dedication of land for all of
or a portion of a road, highway, street or alley upon a tract of land
regardless of size.
SUBDIVISION DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A temporary sign providing direction to a block
of lots within a developing residential subdivision.
SUBDIVISION SIGN: An entry sign that is monument based and is intended to
provide identification of a residential subdivision by name only.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES: Any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas
and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or
reception of information as authorized by the federal communications
commission.
TEMPORARY SIGN: An on premises sign or advertising display constructed of
cloth, canvas, fabric, plywood, or other light material and designed or
intended to be displayed for a short period of time, including a sign erected
on a parcel on which a temporary activity is authorized and limited to the
duration of the activity.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: A structure that has no permanent foundation or footings
and is intended to remain for a limited time, terminating upon expiration of a
specified time period.
TEMPORARY USE: A use of limited duration with the intent to terminate upon
expiration of a time period.
TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS: A report analyzing anticipated traffic and roadway
conditions within and near an applicant's development.
TRAFFIC SIGNS: Signs erected within public right of way designed to inform
motorists of traffic regulations, to warn motorists of hazards, or to provide
directions or locational information.
TRANSITIONAL YARD: That yard which must be provided on a zoning lot in a
nonresidential district that adjoins a zoning lot in a residential district.
TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis and designed
to be used for temporary occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation use.
TRIP: A single or one-way motor vehicle movement, either to or from a subject
property.
TRIP ENDS: The total of trips entering or leaving a specific land use or site
over a designated period of time.
TRIP GENERATION: The number of trip ends produced by a specific land use or
activity during a designated period of time.
TRUCK SERVICE CENTER: An establishment engaged in the service or repair of
automobiles, trucks, all size of commercial or private vehicles of more than
twelve thousand (12,000) pounds and reconditioning and repair of parts and
accessories of such vehicles. Service and repair may include general repair,
rebuilding or reconditioning of engines; vehicle collision service; body repair
and frame straightening; painting and upholstering; vehicle steam cleaning; and
undercoating and machining of parts.
TRUCK WASH: A structure or portion thereof containing facilities for washing,
cleaning or polishing autos, trucks, buses or other commercial vehicles using
automatic methods with a chain conveyer, blower, steam cleaning device or other
mechanical devices, or providing space and equipment for the washing, cleaning
or polishing of autos, trucks, truck trailers, buses or other commercial
vehicles, whether by the customer or the operator.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designated, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied, utilized or
maintained.
USE, PERMITTED: A public or private use which, of itself, conforms with the
purposes, objectives, requirements, regulations and performance standards of a
particular zoning district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from
subordinate or accessory uses.
UTILITIES: Systems for the distribution or collection of water, gas,
electricity, wastewater and stormwater.
VARIANCE: A modification of the requirements of this title where such variance
will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property, a literal enforcement of the requirements would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
VEHICLE:
   A.   Self-propelled devices used for transporting people or goods over land
surfaces and licensed as a motor vehicle;
   B.   Off road vehicles designed for use on a variety of unimproved surfaces,
dune buggies, snowmobiles, trail bikes and motorbikes;
   C.   Passenger vehicles with not more than two (2) axles and four (4) tires;
   D.   Trucks with two (2) or more axles and four (4) or more tires;
   E.   Recreational vehicles; and
   F.   Trailers.
VIOLATION: The failure of a use, structure or development to fully comply with
this title.
VISUAL CLEAR ZONE (VCZ): See definition of Sight Triangle.
WALL SIGN: Any sign that is permanently attached to a wall of any building.
WETLANDS: Natural areas, identified by the federal government as "wetlands",
that are normally covered in water for all or part of the year, which result in
a rich combination of environmental features which contain a wide variety of
plants and wildlife.
YARD: An open space between a building and the adjoining lot lines as shown in
exhibit 2-8 of this definition. The size of a yard is measured as the shortest
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1548.gif]
 
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured
between the front lot line and the closest point of the building (or any
projections thereof other than the projections of the usual covered steps,
uncovered balconies, or uncovered porches) to the front lot line.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured
between the rear lot and the closest point of the building (or any projections
thereof other than the projections of the usual covered steps, uncovered
balconies, or uncovered porches) to the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and measured
between the side lot line and the closest point of the building to the side lot
line.
ZERO SIDE YARD LOT: A lot with no side setback on one side of the property as
shown in exhibit 2-9 of this definition.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1550.gif]
 
ZONING DISTRICT: Chapter 5 of this title lists the zoning districts of the city
of Charleston.
ZONING LOT: A single tract of land, which (at the time of filing for a building
permit) is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used,
developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. Zoning
lot lines shall not cross zoning district boundary lines unless otherwise
permitted in this title. Therefore, a "zoning lot or lots" may or may not
coincide with a lot of record.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007; Ord. 08-O-28,
10-7-2008; Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010; Ord. 15-O-9, 1-20-2015; Ord. 20-O-22, 6-16-
2020; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 7 of this code.
2 1. See also section
  10-8-5 of this title.
CHAPTER 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-3-1: City Council
10-3-2: Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning
10-3-3: Community Development Director
10-3-4: Public Works Director
10-3-5: Coordination Among Officials
10-3-6: Fees
10-3-7: Violations
10-3-8: Separate Offenses
10-3-9: Civil Remedies And Enforcement Powers
10-3-10: Civil Penalties
10-3-11: Notification Procedures
10-3-12: Remedies Cumulative
10-3-1: CITY COUNCIL:
The powers of the council shall be as authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/3.1-40-5 through 5/3.1-40-55, and this code. Any action to overturn
an unfavorable recommendation of the board of zoning appeals and planning or to
delete a condition of approval recommended by the board shall require the
affirmative vote of at least four-fifths (4/5) of the city council. Specific
responsibilities described in this title include the following:
   A.   Appoint members to the board of zoning appeals and planning.
   B.   Decide all requests for amendments to the comprehensive plan and future
land use map upon receipt of recommendations from the board of zoning appeals
and planning.
   C.   Decide all requests for amendments to the zoning map and the text of
this title upon receipt of recommendations from the board of zoning appeals and
planning.
   D.   Decide all requests for planned unit developments and conditional use
permits upon recommendation of the board of zoning appeals and planning.
   E.   Decide all appeals to actions of the board of zoning appeals and
planning as provided for in this title.
   F.   Consider and adopt fees and authorize waivers to fees.
   G.   Other responsibilities assigned by state law. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-3-2: BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS AND PLANNING:
   A.   Board Established; Composition; Appointment: There is hereby
established a board of zoning appeals and planning. Said board shall consist of
seven (7) members appointed by the mayor and subject to the approval of the
council. Of the seven (7) members, one shall serve for a period of one year,
one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, one for
five (5) years, one for six (6) years, and one for seven (7) years, and
successors shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years. The community
development director, or their designee, shall serve as staff to the board.
   B.   Vacancies And Removals: Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for
unexpired terms only. Members may be removed by the council, after hearing, on
good cause shown.
   C.   Compensation: Each member shall be paid the sum of twenty two dollars
($22.00) for each regular meeting attended.
   D.   Officers: Upon appointment, the board of zoning appeals and planning
shall select one member as its chair and another as its vice chair, each for a
term of one year, subject to reelection. The chair, or in his absence the vice
chair, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The board
shall also select one member as secretary to keep minutes and maintain the
records of the board.
   E.   Responsibilities: The board of zoning appeals and planning shall act in
an advisory capacity to the city council in conformance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-4 through 5/11-12-12. The board of zoning appeals and
planning shall have the following powers:
      1.   Conduct public hearings and recommend action on variances,
conditional uses, planned unit developments, and zoning amendments.
      2.   Recommend changes and amendments to the zoning map and the code
text.
      3.   Hear and act on all appeals of any order, requirement, decision or
determination by officials of the Community Development Department.
      4.   Make recommendations upon all other items referred to it by the city
council.
   F.   Procedures:
      1.   Rules Of Procedure: The board of zoning appeals and planning shall
adopt rules of procedure consistent with the provisions of this title.
      2.   Chairperson Administer Oath: The chairperson, or in the absence of
the chairperson, the acting chairperson, shall administer oaths and compel
attendance of witnesses.
      3.   Notice Of Meetings: Publication of the notice of public hearing and
notification of affected property owners shall be done in conformance with
chapter 4 of this title. The agenda for the meeting shall be posted in the city
clerk’s office forty eight (48) hours prior to the scheduled meeting.
      4.   Conduct Of Meetings:
         a.   All meetings of the board of zoning appeals and planning shall be
open to the public.
         b.   The board of zoning appeals and planning shall meet at least once
a month, and more often if necessary, for the transaction of business.
      5.   Minutes:
         a.   The board of zoning appeals and planning shall keep minutes of
its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions.
         b.   The minutes shall be filed in the office of the community
development director, or their designee and shall be public record.
      6.   Conflict Of Interest: A member of the board shall inform the board,
before the commencement of the public hearing, of any interest in the proposed
action being reviewed by the board. The board member shall not participate in
any discussion or voting on any item for which the board member or board
member’s mother, father, children, siblings or in-laws has an interest. If a
board member votes on a recommendation in which the board member has a conflict
of interest, the member’s vote shall be voided.
      7.   Quorum:
         a.   No meeting shall be held unless a quorum of the board is present.
(2006 Code)
         b.   The affirmative vote of the majority of the board members shall
be required before the board shall approve a development request or make a
recommendation to the city council. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code;
Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-3-3: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR:
In addition to the requirements promulgated in this code, the community
development director, or their designee shall have the responsibility and
authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this title. (Ord. 2025-O-
5, 2-18-2025)
10-3-4: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
In addition to the requirements promulgated in this code, the public works
director shall have the responsibility to administer and enforce certain
provisions of this title, as stated herein, and including, but not limited to,
the following powers and duties:
   A.   Assist the community development director, or their designee, with
development review responsibilities.
   B.   Review subdivisions, vacations or abandonment of streets, easements or
plats and make recommendations to the board of zoning appeals and planning.
   C.   Review development improvement agreements and determine the amount of
the letter of credit, cash escrow or surety bond required for the construction
of public improvements. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-3-5: COORDINATION AMONG OFFICIALS:
The public works director, chief of police, fire chief and city attorney shall
assist the community development director, or their designee, in the
enforcement of this title.They shall be members of any committee established
for the review of development applications. Officials of public utility
companies also may be included in any plan review committee in order to
determine that utilities will be available for the proposed development and
will be sufficient to meet the needs of the new residents or utility users.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-3-6: FEES:
   A.   Fees Required And Established: A schedule of fees, charges and expenses
for matters pertaining to this title is hereby established. No permit,
certificate, variance or amendment shall issue unless and until such costs,
charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken
on proceedings before the board of zoning appeals and planning (BZAP) unless
and until preliminary charges or fees have been paid in full. The schedule of
fees listed below shall be posted in the office of the city planner and the
clerk and may be altered or amended only by the council.
      1.   Amendments: Petition to amend zoning title or for variance,
conditional use or zero lot line: One hundred dollars ($100.00).
      2.   Major Subdivision Plat: Major subdivision plat approval or planned
unit development (PUD): Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
      3.   Appeals: Appeal to board of zoning appeals and planning (BZAP):
Fifty dollars ($50.00).
      4.   Continuances: Continuances granted to the petitioner due to
petitioner not being ready to proceed: One hundred dollars ($100.00) per
meeting.
      5.   Notices: Petitioner shall bear the cost of the legal notice
publication in the local newspaper. City staff shall draft and prepare said
legal notice, notify petitioner, and petitioner delivers to the local newspaper
and arranges for publication.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: All fees shall accompany the application, shall be
made payable to the city comptroller and shall be submitted to the community
development director, or their designee.
   C.   Exemptions And Waivers:
      1.   No fee is required for an application filed in the public interest
by members of the city staff, city council or the board of zoning appeals and
planning.
      2.   The city council shall decide on all requests for fee waivers. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-3-7: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The remedies provided in this section for violations of any provision
of this title, whether civil or quasi-criminal, shall be cumulative and shall
be in addition to any other remedy provided by law. Except as otherwise
provided in this title, any development or use initiated after the effective
date hereof, or maintained in violation of this title, which is not in
compliance with the provisions of this title is prohibited and shall be
referred to herein as an "unlawful" development or use.
   B.   Any of the following shall be a violation of this title and shall be
subject to the remedies and penalties provided for in this title:
      1.   Use, Structure Or Sign Without Permit Or Approval: To place any use,
structure or sign upon land that is subject to this title without all of the
approvals required by this title.
      2.   Activities Inconsistent With This Title: To erect, construct,
reconstruct, remodel, alter, maintain, move, or use any building, structure or
sign, or to engage in development or subdivision of any land in contravention
of any zoning, subdivision, sign or other regulation of this title.
      3.   Activities Without Permit Or Approval: To engage in any subdividing,
development, construction, remodeling or other activity of any nature upon land
that is subject to this title without all of the approvals required by this
title.
      4.   Activities Inconsistent With Permit: To engage in any development,
use, construction, remodeling, or other activity of any nature in any way
inconsistent with the terms and conditions of any permit, approval, certificate
or other form of authorization required in order to engage in such activity.
      5.   Activities Inconsistent With Conditions: To violate, by act or
omission, any term, condition, or qualification placed by a decision making
body upon any permit or other form of authorization.
      6.   Making Lots Or Setbacks Nonconforming: To reduce or diminish any lot
area so that the size, setbacks or open spaces shall be smaller than prescribed
by this title.
      7.   Increasing Intensity Of Use: To increase the intensity of use of any
land or structure, except in accordance with the procedural requirements and
substantive standards of this title.
      8.   Removing Or Defacing Required Notice: To remove, deface, obscure or
otherwise interfere with any notice required by this title.
      9.   Failure To Remove Signs Or Other Improvements: To fail to remove any
sign or other improvement installed, created, erected or maintained in
violation of this title, or for which the sign permit has lapsed. (Ord. 03-O-9,
3-18-2003)
10-3-8: SEPARATE OFFENSES:
Each day that a violation remains uncorrected, after receiving notice of the
violation from the city, shall constitute a separate violation of this title.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-3-9: CIVIL REMEDIES AND ENFORCEMENT POWERS:
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of this title, the city, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful
erection, maintenance, or use to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. The following
remedies and enforcement powers may be used to administer and enforce this
title:
   A.   Withhold Permit: The city may deny or withhold all permits,
certificates or other forms of authorization on any land or structure or
improvements thereon upon which there is an uncorrected violation of a
provision of this title or of a condition or qualification of a permit,
certificate, approval or other authorization previously granted by the city.
This enforcement provision shall apply regardless of whether the current owner
or applicant is responsible for the violation in question.
   B.   Permits Approved With Conditions: Instead of withholding or denying a
permit or other authorization, the city may grant such authorization subject to
the condition that the violation be corrected.
   C.   Revoke Permits:
      1.   Any development permit or other form of authorization required under
this title may be revoked when the community development director, or their
designee, determines that:
         a.   There is departure from the plans, specifications, or conditions
as required under terms of the permit;
         b.   The development permit was procured by false representation or
was issued by mistake; or
         c.   Any of the provisions of this title are being violated.
      2.   Written notice of such revocation shall be served upon the owner,
the owner’s agent or contractor, or upon any person employed on the building or
structure for which such permit was issued, or shall be posted in a prominent
location, and thereafter, no such construction shall proceed.
   D.   Stop Work: With or without revoking permits, the city may stop work on
any building or structure on any land on which there is an uncorrected
violation of a provision of this title or of a permit or other form of
authorization issued hereunder, in accordance with its power to stop work under
this title.
   E.   Revoke Plan Or Other Approval: Where a violation of this title involves
a failure to comply with approved plans or conditions to which the approval of
such plans was made subject, the city council may, upon notice to the applicant
and other known parties in interest (including any holders of building permits
affected) and after a public hearing, revoke the plan or other approval, or
condition its continuance on strict compliance with this title, the provision
of security to ensure that construction is completed in compliance with
approved plans, or such other conditions as the city council may reasonably
impose.
   F.   Injunction And Abatement: The city, through its authorized agents,
including the community development director, or their designee , may initiate
injunction or abatement proceedings or other appropriate action in the district
court against any person who fails to comply with any provision of this title,
or any requirement or condition imposed pursuant to this title, to prevent,
enjoin, abate, or terminate violations. The city may seek a court order in the
nature of mandamus, abatement, injunction or other action for proceeding to
abate or remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to
the condition which existed prior to the violation. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003;
amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-3-10: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   It shall be illegal to sell any lot, tract or property that does not
conform to the requirements and regulations of this title, and every such sale
or attempt to sell shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each lot or tract. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
   B.   Any person, firm or entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this title shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd.
Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
   C.   Every such action shall be brought before the circuit court. In the
event a private cause of action for violation is brought, the prevailing party
in such suit is entitled to recover judgment against any person failing to
comply with provisions of this title for reasonable attorney fees in an amount
determined by the court. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-3-11: NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES:
Whenever a violation of this title occurs, the community development director,
or their designee, or other authorized representative, shall give written
notice of such violation, either personally or by regular United States mail,
to the owner(s) of such premises, or to the person(s) responsible for such
violation and shall post such notice on the premises. The letter shall direct
that, within ten (10) days following receipt of the written notice, the
violation shall be corrected. If, after such time, but within five (5) days,
the violation continues or ever occurs again, the city may issue a general code
complaint. If the violation is abated, but occurs again at a later date, the
city is not required to renotify the same violator of the same violation. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-3-12: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
The remedies and enforcement powers established in this title shall be
cumulative. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Procedures Common To All Applications
10-4-2: Staff Issued Permits
10-4-3: Major Development Applications
10-4-1: PROCEDURES COMMON TO ALL APPLICATIONS:
Any person proposing a land use or development shall comply with the procedures
of this section. Table 4-1 summarizes the procedures and decision makers
involved in the development proposal process.
TABLE 4-1: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW PROCEDURES SUMMARY
Development Order Recommending Decision Maker Application Applicable Section
                  Agency                      Process
Development Order      Recommending    Decision Maker  Application Applicable
                       Agency                          Process     Section
Staff issued permits   Staff           Staff1          Type 1      10-4-2
Comprehensive plan     Board of zoning
amendment              appeals and     City council    Type 3      10-4-3A
                       planning2
UDC text and zoning    Board of zoning
map amendments         appeals and     City council    Type 3      10-4-3B
                       planning2
                       Board of zoning
Conditional use permit appeals and     City council    Type 3      10-4-3D
                       planning2
Planned unit           Board of zoning                  
development            appeals and     City council    Type 3      10-4-3C
   Preliminary plan planning2                       Type 2
   Final plan
Site plan review       Corridor review
corridor development   committee       City council    Type 3      10-5-4-12
district
PUD plan major         Board of zoning
amendment              appeals and     City council    Type 3      10-4-3C
                       planning2
PUD plan minor         -               Staff           Type 1      10-4-3C
amendment
Major subdivision      Board of zoning
concept plan3          appeals and     City council    Type 3      10-4-3E
                       planning
Subdivision            Board of zoning
preliminary plat       appeals and     City council    Type 3      10-4-3E
                       planning2
Subdivision            Staff           Staff           Type 1      10-4-3E
construction plans
Subdivision final plat Staff           City council    Type 2      10-4-3E
Subdivision - minor4   Staff           City council    Type 2      10-4-3F
Conveyances and plat
adjustments or         Staff           City council    Type 2      10-4-3G
corrections
Vested rights          Staff           City council    Type 2      10-4-3M
determination
Vacations/             Staff           City council    Type 2      10-4-3H
abandonments
Improvement agreements Staff           City council    Type 2      10-4-3I
                       Board of zoning
Variances              appeals and     City council    Type 3      10-4-3J
                       planning2
Appeals to staff                       Board of zoning
actions                Staff           appeals and     Type 4      10-4-3L
                                       planning
 
Notes:
      1.   Board of zoning appeals and planning approval required for site
plans in conformance with subsection
10-4-2B4 of this chapter.
      2.   The community development director, or their designee, is
responsible for receiving and submitting a staff report relating to the
application for development approval prior to the formal recommendation or
decision, as applicable.
      3.   Major subdivisions involve the division of a tract into 5 or more
parcels or more than 1 division of a tract of land.
      4.   Minor subdivisions involve the division of a tract into 4 or fewer
parcels, or any subsequent division after 1 initial minor subdivision of a
tract.
   A.   Application Process: The following procedures apply to all
applications, except as modified for specific procedures:
      1.   When Required: Unless indicated as optional, applicants shall meet
with the staff to discuss the nature of the proposed application, application
submittal requirements, the procedure for action and the standards for
evaluation of the application.
      2.   Application Requirements: Current application materials shall be
made available in the office of the community development director, or their
designee. Such applications shall be filed in advance of any public hearing or
public meetings required pursuant to this title. The community development
director, or their designee, may establish a schedule for filing any
application for development approval requiring action by the board of zoning
appeals and planning or the city council, which schedule shall provide adequate
time for notice and/or publication consistent with the Illinois Compiled
Statutes or otherwise applicable requirements. Completed applications shall be
filed and processed according to the schedule. At the preapplication
conference, the community development director, or their designee, may
determine that additional information is necessary to provide for an adequate
assessment of the project. At any time during the processing of any
application, additional information may be required by the decision maker to
respond to issues or concerns that may not have been evident at the
preapplication conference. The results of the preapplication conference,
prepared by staff, shall be made part of the development file upon submittal of
an application.
      3.   Streamlining Development And Permitting Process: The community
development director, or their designee, and the public works director, as
applicable, shall be authorized to shorten the time required to process
applications for development, provided there is no conflict with statutory
requirements.
      4.   Staff Review: The staff shall review the application and determine
if the application is complete. If the application is incomplete or submitted
prematurely, the community development director, or their designee, shall
return it to the applicant to be resubmitted in conformance with this title.
All applications shall be reviewed by city staff and other appropriate agencies
for compliance with city codes and policies. The staff may forward copies of
the applications to various agencies for their review of the material
submitted. Review agencies may request additional time for review, which may be
granted by the decision maker if good cause is shown and if such request is
made within the review time. The agencies’ review will be advisory and does not
constitute approval or denial. Upon completion of staff review, the staff will
provide its comments in writing to the applicant.
      5.   The community development director, or their designee, or Public
Works Director Decision: After the applicant has had the opportunity to respond
to the comments of staff and other agencies, the community development
director, or their designee, or the public works director, as applicable, shall
recommend approval or denial of the application based on the applicable review
criteria. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
      6.   Appeals: Appeals to the community development director, or their
designee’s, or the public works director’s decision, as applicable, shall be
filed within thirty five (35) days of the date when the decision sought to be
amended was served upon the party affected by the decision as defined in 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-103.
      7.   Amendments: Unless otherwise stated, a permit shall be amended
through the process it was originally approved.
      8.   Validity: Unless otherwise stated, all permits and approvals shall
expire within one year of issuance or approval; provided, that the decision
maker may approve an extension of up to twelve (12) months upon receipt of an
application providing evidence that the applicant can proceed with the initial
permit in conformance with currently adopted codes and policies.
      9.   Enforcement And Revocation: The community development director, or
their designee, or the public works director, as applicable, may revoke any
permit for failure to comply with the conditions of the permit.
   B.   Notice And Public Hearing Provisions:
      1.   General Provisions:
         a.   The content of public hearing notices and method of giving notice
for public hearings shall be done in conformance with the requirements in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-2, 5/11-13-14, 5/11-13-3, 5/11-13-1.1 and 5/
11-13-7, and this title as applicable. The applicant shall pay all costs for
notification, shall ensure its timely delivery to the newspaper, shall provide
the “certificate of publication” to the community development director, or
their designee, shall post signs and deliver appropriate notice as detailed
below.
         b.   A public hearing shall be held by the board of zoning appeals and
planning in accordance with this title and any rules established by the board
before any action to change or amend this title, the zoning map, and any
decision on a conditional use permit, variance, vacation/abandonment of public
easements or right of way and the Charleston comprehensive plan.
      2.   Timing Of Notice: As specified in table 4-2 (subsection B7 of this
section), notice shall be published, hand delivered or mailed and posted by
sign not more than thirty (30) days nor fewer than fifteen (15) days before the
applicable hearing. For staff issued permits, signs shall be posted for the
duration of work being done pursuant to the permit.
      3.   Published Notice: In any instance in which a public hearing is
required, a notice setting forth the date, time, place and purpose of such
hearing, the name of the applicant and identification of the subject property
must be published at least once in the Charleston Times-Courier, or its
successors.
      4.   Notice Of Public Hearing: Notice of a public hearing, as required in
table 4-2 (subsection B7 of this section), shall be hand delivered and attested
to by signed affidavit or sent by the applicant by first class U.S. mail to
every owner of property within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the subject
property. The notice shall be hand delivered or mailed, to each affected
property owner at the mailing address listed in the official records of the
Coles County assessor.
         a.   The point at which the distance is measured for the hand
delivered or mailed notice shall begin at the property boundary line that
completely encompasses the subject property. The distance shall be measured, in
a straight line from the subject property boundary.
         b.   Mailed notice shall be in postcard form stating the date, time
and place of the hearing, a general description of the proposal, the location
of the property which is the subject of the hearing, and other such
requirements as further specified in this title. The mailed notice must also
include a statement explaining that members of the public may be heard at the
public hearing.
         c.   The failure of a property owner to receive the notice by hand
delivery or mail, if timely sent and properly addressed to the current owner of
record, shall not be grounds for invalidating any action taken by the
responsible decision making body.
      5.   Property Sign: When required by table 4-2 (subsection B7 of this
section), the applicant shall post city approved signs giving notice of the
pending application. The applicant shall post at least one sign on the subject
property prior to the hearing, on or before the date of the published notice.
At least one sign shall be visible from street abutting the subject property.
The sign(s) shall remain posted on the property until after the close of the
final public hearing.
      6.   Agenda Notice: Notice shall be posted at city hall at least forty
eight (48) hours prior to any public hearing.
      7.   Table 4-2:
TABLE 4-2: SUMMARY OF NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
            Notice
Application Publication Mail Or Hand Delivery Sign
                                       Notice
Application                            Publication Mail Or Hand Delivery Sign
Staff issued permits                   -           -
Comprehensive plan
   Text amendment                               -                     -
   Map amendment
UDC text                                           -                     -
Zoning map amendments
Conditional use permit
Site plan review-C/D district
Planned unit development
   Preliminary plan
   Final plan                       -           -                     -
PUD plan amendment
   Major
   Minor                            -           -                     -
Subdivision concept plan               -           -                     -
Subdivision preliminary plat           -           -
Subdivision construction plans         -           -                     -
Subdivision final plat                 -           -                     -
Subdivision - minor                    -           -
Conveyances and plat adjustments or    -           -                     -
corrections
Vested rights determination vacations/
abandonment
Development improvement agreements     -           -                     -
Variances, appeals to staff actions
 
(Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
   C.   Application And Public Hearing Procedures:
      1.   Application Review: All applications shall be reviewed as a type 1,
type 2, type 3 or type 4 application in accordance with table 4-1 (located at
the beginning of this section). These processes are illustrated in exhibit 4-1
(subsection C9 of this section). Timelines shown in exhibit 4-1 are maximums
unless otherwise noted or prescribed by state law.
         a.   Type 1: Type 1 applications shall be reviewed and decided upon by
staff. Decisions may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals and planning in
accordance with subsection
10-4-3L of this chapter.
         b.   Type 2: Type 2 applications shall be reviewed by staff, which
shall make a recommendation to the city council. The city council may accept
the staff recommendation on a consent agenda or conduct a hearing on the staff
recommendation and then approve the application, approve the application with
conditions or deny the application.
         c.   Type 3: Type 3 applications shall be reviewed by staff, which
shall make a recommendation to the board of zoning appeals and planning. The
board shall conduct a public hearing as required, and make a recommendation to
the city council. The city council may approve the application, approve the
application with conditions or deny the application. The city council may add
or modify conditions of approval recommended by the board by a simple majority
vote, but a three-fourths (3/4) majority of the council is required to overturn
any recommendation made by the board.
         d.   Type 4: Type 4 applications shall be reviewed by staff, which
shall prepare findings of fact for review by the board of zoning appeals and
planning. The board shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
render a decision based on its own findings of fact from the application, staff
findings and testimony during the hearing.
      2.   Purpose Of Hearing: The purpose of a public hearing is to allow the
applicant and all other interested parties a reasonable and fair opportunity to
be heard, to present evidence relevant to the application, and to rebut
evidence presented by others.
      3.   Conduct Of Hearing: Public hearings shall be conducted in
conformance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes.
      4.   Applicant Not Present: If the applicant is not present at the public
hearing of the board of zoning appeals and planning, then the board may elect
to take no action on the application. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
      5.   Record Of Proceedings: The proceedings of all public hearings shall
be recorded in conformance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
120/2.06. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code)
      6.   Continuance Of Proceedings:
         a.   Continuances may be granted in accordance with applicable board
or city council policy.
         b.   The record shall indicate the reason such continuance was made
and any stipulations or conditions placed upon the continuance.
         c.   If the board of zoning appeals and planning or city council,
continues a public hearing on its own motion, it may direct the community
development director, or their designee, to advertise the continuance of the
public hearing.
         d.   If the continuance of a public hearing is made at the request of
an applicant, the board of zoning appeals and planning or city council may
direct the applicant to advertise the continuance of the public hearing at the
applicant's expense.
         e.   Where an applicant is required to advertise the continuance of
the public hearing, the applicant shall submit a certificate of publication to
the community development director, or their designee, indicating that such
publication has occurred.
      7.   Action On Applications Requiring Notice: The decision maker may take
any action on an application that is consistent with the notice given,
including approval of the application, conditional approval of the application
or denial of the application. The decision maker may allow amendments to the
application if the effect of the amendments is to reduce the density or
intensity of the original application, reduce the impact of the development, or
reduce the amount of land involved from that indicated in the notices of the
hearing.
      8.   Notice Of Final Determination: Within ten (10) days of the final
determination on the development application, written notification of the
decision shall be mailed to the applicant, stating the action taken and
including all conditions imposed and times established for satisfaction of such
conditions, if any. If the decision maker denies the application, a written
statement setting forth the basis for the denial shall be included.
      9.   Exhibit 4-1:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1552.gif]
 
   D.   Postdecision Proceedings:
      1.   Appeals Of Action By Final Decision Maker: Any appeal to a final
action by the city council or board of zoning appeals and planning shall be
filed within thirty five (35) days of the action being appealed, unless
otherwise provided by law.
      2.   Amendments And Revisions: The community development director, or
their designee, may approve adjustments and revisions to the terms of approval
of an application for development. Minor revisions must be authorized in
writing by the community development director, or their designee, and are
subject to appeal to the board of zoning appeals and planning pursuant to
subsection
10-4-3 L of this chapter. Minor revisions that may be authorized are technical
corrections to improve clarity discovered after the decision on the development
application by the applicant or the community development director, or their
designee. Minor revisions shall not result in higher densities, additional
units or floor area, abandonment of easements or variance from the minimum
standards of this title. Major amendments and revisions of a development
proposal shall be reviewed by the approving body after a public hearing in
accordance with the provisions of this section and other applicable sections of
this title.
      3.   Stay Of Action: An appeal or protest stays all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed unless the community development director,
or their designee, certifies to the decision maker, after notice of appeal has
been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in the community development director’s, or their designee’s, opinion,
cause imminent peril to life or property.
   E.   Expiration Of Development Approval:
      1.   Time Of Expiration: Unless otherwise provided, development
applications shall automatically expire, and all activities pursuant to such
approval thereafter shall be deemed in violation of this title, when:
         a.   The applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed as
part of the original or revised approval of the development application, or
that was made pursuant to the terms of any development agreement, including the
failure to abide by specified time limits established therein; or
         b.   The applicant fails to present a subsequent development
application as required by this title within the time required. If no time
limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the original or revised
approval of the development application, the time shall be presumed to be one
year from the date of approval.
      2.   Extension Procedures: Unless otherwise prohibited by this title, the
community development director, or their designee, may extend a staff issued
permit for a period not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days from the
original date of expiration.
   F.   Revocation Of Permit Approval:
      1.   Duties Of community development director, or their designee, and
Public Works Director: If the community development director, or their
designee, or the public works director determines that there are reasonable
grounds for revocation of a development permit or approval, the community
development director, or their designee, or the public works director, as
applicable, shall set a hearing before the final decision maker. If the
original permit approval being revoked was made by the community development
director, or their designee, or the public works director, the hearing shall be
conducted by board of zoning appeals and planning. All other revocations shall
be reviewed by the city council. If the city council was the original decision
maker, the council may, at its sole discretion, refer the proposed revocation
to the board of zoning appeals and planning for a recommendation prior to its
action.
      2.   Notice And Public Hearing: Notice of the revocation hearing shall be
given in the same manner as required for the original application. A public
hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures of subsection B of
this section.
      3.   Decision And Notice: After the conclusion of the hearing, the
decision maker shall render a decision to revoke the permit or allow the
applicant to retain the development permit.
      4.   Effect And Appeals: A decision to revoke a development permit shall
become final fifteen (15) days after the date the decision is rendered, unless
appealed. After the effective date of revocation, any activities continuing
pursuant to the permit shall be deemed to be in violation of this title.
      5.   Right Cumulative: The city's right to revoke a development permit,
as provided in this section, shall be cumulative to any other remedy allowed by
law.
   G.   Transfer Of Land; Building Permit: No parcel of land in a subdivision
created after the adoption of this title shall be transferred, sold, or offered
for sale; nor shall a building permit, zoning permit or certificate of
occupancy be issued for any use or structure thereon, until a plat of
subdivision shall have been recorded with the recorder of deeds of Coles
County, Illinois, in accordance with this title. Any person who violates this
provision shall be subject to the penalties expressed in chapter 3 of this
title.
   H.   City Initiated Requests: The city manager, mayor, board of zoning
appeals and planning or city council may initiate a request for any development
permit on behalf of the city. Such requests shall not be subject to fees, but
shall otherwise follow the same procedures established in this chapter. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-4-2: STAFF ISSUED PERMITS:
All staff issued permits follow the type 1 process described in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter; except, that site plans for development of
nonresidential lots or parcels encompassing one hundred thousand (100,000) or
more square feet of floor area in a single or multiple buildings shall be
reviewed by the board of zoning appeals and planning.
   A.   Zoning/Change Of Use Permit:
      1.   Purpose:
         a.   Ensure that the proposed change of use complies with the
provisions of this code, the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans;
         b.   Ensure that affected agencies may review the proposed change of
use; and
         c.   Ensure compliance with applicable standards of the adopted
building and fire codes.
      2.   Applicability: No land shall be occupied or used, and neither the
use of land nor the use of buildings thereon shall be changed, altered or
occupied, or used in whole or in part for any purpose, until a change of use
permit is issued by the community development director, or their designee. No
permit shall be issued to make a change unless the changes are in conformity
with the provisions of this title.
      3.   Application: Application shall be filed with the community
development director, or their designee, and shall be accompanied by a site
plan prepared pursuant to subsection B of this section and such other
information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to
determine and provide for the enforcement of this title.
      4.   Review Criteria: Applications shall be approved by the community
development director, or their designee, if:
         a.   The use or development is on a legally created lot or parcel;
         b.   The use is authorized in the existing zoning district; and
         c.   The development complies with the standards and conditions of
this title.
      5.   Validity: Change of use permits issued in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall be void six (6) months from the date of
issuance if the construction, alteration or use has not commenced.
   B.   Site Plans:
      1.   Purpose: Site plan review ensures that proposed development complies
with this title. Site plan review shall consider the siting of proposed
construction and its impact on topography, vegetation, adjacent development,
improvements in the immediate area and the site plan's conformance to the
goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and this title. The
design shall discourage unnecessary grading and shall retain the natural
character of the site including the preservation of trees and other natural
features to the degree practical.
      2.   Applicability:
         a.   A site plan shall be required for all new construction, exterior
additions or changes in use to any building, structure, land or parking lots.
No zoning permit or building permit shall be issued for a development subject
to site plan review until such site plan has been approved in accordance with
this section.
         b.   When a conditional use permit application is reviewed, or when
the final plan for a planned unit development is reviewed, the site plan
application may be processed concurrently with those reviews.
         c.   The community development director, or their designee, may waive
the requirement for a site plan review for development within the scope of this
section when such a waiver will not adversely affect the purposes and intents
of this title, as evidenced by the following:
            (1)   Changes to conforming development not resulting in an
increased parking demand or increased traffic generation; and
            (2)   Construction is limited to internal remodeling of a
nonresidential structure projected to cost less than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000) or changes are limited to internal remodeling of a residential
structure not creating additional bedrooms; and
            (3)   The community development director, or their designee, finds
that a site plan is not required to ensure compliance with adopted codes and
plans.
      3.   Application And Procedure:
         a.   Site plans shall be reviewed and approved by the community
development director, or their designee; except, that site plans for
development of nonresidential lots or parcels encompassing one hundred thousand
(100,000) or more square feet of floor area in one or more buildings shall be
reviewed by the board of zoning appeals and planning as a type 4 process as
described in subsection
10-4-1 C1d of this chapter.
         b.   A site plan, including all information listed in the appendix to
the ordinance codified herein, may be submitted for the entire development at
one time or for individual development phases. When a site plan is submitted
for an individual phase of a development on a single parcel, the applicant
shall also prepare a conceptual site plan for the remainder of the parcel. The
conceptual site plan shall indicate the approximate location of development on
the remainder of the parcel, together with proposed driveways, streets and
drainage system.
      4.   Review Criteria: The following determinations shall be made before
approving the site plan:
         a.   The site is capable of accommodating the building(s), parking
areas, driveways and open spaces, and is in compliance with all requirements of
this title;
         b.   The site plan provides for ingress, egress and internal traffic
circulation in conformance with the requirements of this title and other
adopted codes and policies;
         c.   All development features, including the principal building and
any accessory buildings, open space, service roads and parking areas are
located in conformance with the requirements of this title and other adopted
codes and policies; and
         d.   The plan is consistent with the comprehensive plan, and other
adopted planning policies and design guidelines.
      5.   Decision Maker: The community development director, or their
designee, or board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny approval of
site plans, in conformance with the criteria established in subsection B4 of
this section, as applicable.
      6.   Validity:
         a.   The approved site plan shall be kept on file by the city and
shall lapse one year from the date of site plan approval, unless construction
is commenced.
         b.   Site plan approval shall be valid as long as the applicant
retains a valid building or zoning permit.
         c.   Site plan approval shall run with the land and shall continue to
be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure that was the
subject of the application.
         d.   If engineering plans and profiles are required for the project,
these shall be submitted to the community development director, or their
designee.
         e.   Following approval of the site plan and any required plans and
profiles, the community development director, or their designee, shall issue
building permits for construction in conformance with the approved site plan.
Said permits may be revoked by the community development director, or their
designee, for failure to comply with the approved site plan, the conditions
attached thereto, or other applicable regulations.
      7.   Appeal: Appeals of the decision of the community development
director, or their designee, shall be filed with the city clerk within thirty
five (35) days of the decision.
   C.   Building Permits:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of the building permit regulations is to ensure
that all structures within the city comply with the provisions of this title
and the applicable building code adopted by the city, other applicable adopted
fire, life, safety, building and sanitary codes, and other adopted regulations
of the city, county, state or federal agencies.
      2.   Applicability: No person shall construct or modify a structure until
a building permit has been obtained from the community development director, or
their designee. A building permit shall not be required for normal property
maintenance that does not alter the structure.
      3.   Application And Procedures: A property owner or designated
representative shall initiate building permit review by filing an application
with the community development director, or their designee, in conformance with
the requirements listed in the appendix to the ordinance codified herein.
      4.   Review Criteria: The application shall indicate that:
         a.   The building will be constructed on a legally established parcel
or lot;
         b.   The applicant will provide the site with access to adequate
public facilities to serve the use in conformance with subsections
10-8-2K and
10-9-6F of this title;
         c.   All applicable local, state and federal permits have been issued
or are in the process of being obtained;
         d.   All construction will comply with the adopted building code, fire
code, electrical code, mechanical code and any other applicable codes and
policies adopted by the city, county, state and federal agencies;
         e.   The applicant and subsequent property owners are responsible for
maintaining landscaping and other site improvements in compliance with this
title; and
         f.   The site will be developed and used in a manner that is
consistent with:
            (1)   The land uses and intensities established in the
comprehensive plan.
            (2)   The provisions of the adopted building code.
            (3)   The provisions of this title.
            (4)   The approved site plan for all development.
      5.   Decision Maker: The community development director, or their
designee, shall approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of all
applications for building permits.
      6.   Amendments: Amendments to the building plans may be filed at any
time before the completion of the work for which the permit was sought. Such
amendments, after approval, shall be filed with and be deemed a part of the
original application. If the amendment changes the building footprint or
affects the site plan design, an amended site plan shall be required.
      7.   Completion Of Buildings: Nothing contained in this section shall
require any change in the plans, construction, size or designated use of a
building, for which a valid permit has been issued or lawful approval given
before the effective date hereof. Construction under such permit or approval
shall be started within ninety (90) days and shall be completed within one year
of permit issuance.
      8.   Condition Of Permit: All work performed under a permit issued by the
community development director, or their designee, shall conform to the
approved application and plans, and approved amendments thereof. It shall be
unlawful to reduce or diminish the area of a lot, unless a revised site plan
showing the proposed change in conditions has been approved; provided, that
this shall not apply when the lot is reduced by reason of a street opening or
widening or other public improvement.
      9.   Signatures On Permit: The applicant and the community development
director, or their designee, shall sign the permit.
      10.   Posting Of Permit: A copy of the permit shall be kept on the
premises open to public inspection during the work and until the completion of
construction. The community development director, or their designee, shall
require a certified copy of the approved plans to be kept on the premises at
all times from the commencement of the work to the completion thereof. The
community development director, or their designee, shall be given at least
twelve (12) hours’ notice of commencement of work under a permit.
      11.   Revocation: The community development director, or their designee,
may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this section in
case there have been any false statements or misrepresentation as to a material
fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
      12.   Excavation Permit: No permit for excavation for any building shall
be issued before application has been made for a building permit.
      13.   Validity: The building permit shall be valid for the use for which
the building permit was granted, as long as the use is in compliance with
applicable codes, providing that within six (6) months of issuance of the
building permit a certificate of occupancy has been applied for and obtained by
the applicant, unless the permit is granted an extension.
      14.   Appeals: Appeals of the adopted building codes shall be made to the
appropriate board through the community development director, or their
designee, within thirty five (35) days of the community development director’s,
or their designee’s, action.
   D.   Certificate Of Occupancy:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of a certificate of occupancy is to ensure that
all structures and uses of land comply with the permits issued for the
development and with the provisions of this title.
      2.   Applicability: Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any
of the following:
         a.   Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally
altered; or
         b.   Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
      3.   Application: Certificate of occupancy applications shall be
submitted to the community development director, or their designee, and shall
be submitted at the time of building permit application.
      4.   Content Of Certificate: The certificate of occupancy shall state
that the building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all the
building codes, health regulations and ordinances, and the provisions of these
regulations. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the community development director, or their designee, and copies shall be
furnished, upon request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest
in the building affected.
      5.   Review Criteria:
         a.   Comply with all adopted building codes, fire codes, electrical
codes, mechanical codes and any other applicable codes and policies adopted by
the city.
         b.   Conform with the approved plans and any conditions placed thereon
by the community development director, or their designee.
         c.   Successfully pass all required inspections, including, but not be
limited to:
            (1)   Building.
            (2)   Site.
            (3)   Landscaping.
            (4)   Parking.
            (5)   Drainage and storm water detention.
         6.   Decision Maker: The community development director, or their
designee, shall approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of all
applications for certificates of occupancy.
         7.   Issuance Of Certificate: The certificate of occupancy shall be
issued within three (3) days after a final inspection.
         8.   Issuance Of Temporary Certificate Of Occupancy: If public
improvements, landscaping and parking lot surfacing improvements cannot be
completed due to inclement weather, the community development director, or
their designee, may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy (TCO) for a
period not to exceed six (6) months; provided, that the applicant guarantees
the full cost of installation at prevailing wages of all outstanding
improvements with a bond, letter of credit or cash escrow. The applicant shall
submit a written request for the TCO explaining the reasons for delay of
completion of the work and the timetable for completion. The TCO shall not be
construed, in any way, as altering the respective rights, duties or obligations
of the owners. Such TCO shall not be issued except under such restrictions and
provisions as will adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. Construction
guarantees shall be released when the city has accepted public improvements and
signed off on final inspection of other improvements. Guarantees for
landscaping shall be released two (2) years after installation of landscaping.
   E.   Home Occupation Permit:
      1.   Purpose: A home occupation permit is required to ensure that all
home occupations are conducted in a safe manner without adverse affects on
adjacent residences.
      2.   Applicability: No person shall conduct a home occupation until a
home occupation permit has been issued.
      3.   Application: The applicant shall file a completed application with
the community development director, or their designee, describing the location
and operation of the proposed home occupation in sufficient detail to ensure
that the occupation will be conducted in accordance with the home occupation
regulations in section
10-7-6  of this title.
      4.   Review Criteria: The application shall be approved if the proposed
home occupation will be conducted in conformance with the home occupation
standards established in section
10-7-6  of this title.
      5.   Decision Maker: The community development director, or their
designee, shall approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of all
applications for home occupation permits.
      6.   Validity: The permit shall be valid for a period of one year.
   F.   Sign Permits:
      1.   Purpose: The sign permit ensures that all signs are safely
constructed and comply with the provisions of this title, applicable building
codes and any other applicable regulations.
      2.   Applicability: No person shall erect, place or locate a sign, or
alter a nonexempt sign within the city until a sign permit has been obtained
from the community development director, or their designee. A sign permit shall
be required for all signs except as exempted by section 10-10-7 of this title.
      3.   Application And Procedures: A property owner or designated
representative shall initiate site plan review by filing an application with
the community development director, or their designee, in conformance with the
requirements listed in the appendix to the ordinance codified herein.
      4.   Review Criteria: All signs shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the requirements of chapter 10 of this title, the city’s
adopted building and electrical codes, and applicable standards of this title.
Signs regulated by 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 440/1 et seq., highway
advertising control act of 1971, shall comply with the standards of that
statute and provide proof thereof.
      5.   Decision Maker: The community development director, or their
designee, shall approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of all sign
permits.
      6.   Validity: The sign shall be completed within six (6) months, or as
otherwise indicated in the sign permit. If construction of the sign has not
commenced within this time period, the permit shall be no longer valid and a
new sign application shall be required. The sign permit shall be valid as long
as the use and sign are in compliance with applicable codes.
   G.   Access Permits:
      1.   Purpose: An access permit shall be required for any development or
use within public right of way to ensure that the use is conducted safely.
      2.   Applicability: No structure (e.g., buildings, driveways, fences,
irrigation facilities, culverts and signs) shall be constructed and no use
established within a public right of way without an access permit.
      3.   Application: The applicant shall file a completed application with
the community development director, or their designee, describing proposed
structure or use in sufficient detail for the public works director to evaluate
the impacts of the proposed structure or use on the public health, safety and
welfare.
      4.   Review Criteria: The public works director may approve an
application for an access permit using the following criteria to find that:
         a.   There will be benefits for the community or area by granting the
proposed access permit;
         b.   There is a community need for the private development proposed
for city property;
         c.   The proposed use will not negatively impact access, traffic
circulation, neighborhood stability or character, sensitive areas such as
floodplains or natural hazard areas; and
         d.   The proposed use is in conformance with the requirements of this
title and all applicable city policies.
      5.   Decision Maker: The public works director shall approve, approve
with conditions or deny all access permits.
      6.   Validity: An access permit shall be valid for the term approved by
the public works director; provided, that if the structure is not constructed
or the use is not established within six (6) months of issuance, the permit
shall be void. The applicant shall notify the public works director twenty four
(24) hours prior to initiation and upon completion of any work subject to an
access permit. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-4-3: MAJOR DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Comprehensive Plan Amendments: All comprehensive plan amendments follow
the type 3 review process as described in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter.
      1.   Purpose: To amend the comprehensive plan from time to time so that
they best reflect existing conditions and projected needs of the city.
      2.   Application And Procedures:
         a.   The applicant shall file an application with the required
information listed in the appendix to the ordinance codified herein.
         b.   Amendments to the comprehensive plan text may be initiated by the
board of zoning appeals and planning, the city council, city staff or by
petition of an owner of property located in the city.
         c.   Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged to
confer with the community development director, or their designee, to discuss,
in general, the procedures and requirements for a comprehensive plan amendment
request pursuant to this title.
         d.   A comprehensive plan amendment request may be initiated by filing
an application with the community development director, or their designee, and
paying the application filing fee as established by the city council.
      3.   Review Criteria: The following criteria shall be considered when
reviewing a comprehensive plan amendment application:
         a.   Whether there was error in the original comprehensive plan
adoption in that the council failed to take into account then existing facts,
projections or trends that were reasonably foreseeable to exist in the future.
         b.   Whether events subsequent to the comprehensive plan adoption have
invalidated the council's original premise and findings made upon plan
adoption.
         c.   Whether any or all of the council's original premise and findings
regarding comprehensive plan adoption were mistaken.
         d.   Whether events subsequent to the comprehensive plan adoption have
changed the character and/or condition of the area so as to make the
application acceptable.
      4.   Decision Makers:
         a.   Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning:
            (1)   The board of zoning appeals and planning shall hold a public
hearing in accordance with subsection
10-4-1B of this chapter within thirty (30) days of receipt of application and
make its recommendation to the city council on each proposed comprehensive plan
amendment.
            (2)   When the board of zoning appeals and planning deems it
necessary or expedient, the board may consider other property for a change or
amendment of plan category in addition to the property described in the
application provided that such additional property is included in the hearing
notices.
            (3)   In determining its recommendation of whether the proposed
amendment should be approved, the board of zoning appeals and planning shall
consider the review criteria established in subsection A3 of this section.
         b.   City Council:
            (1)   The council may approve, conditionally approve or deny the
proposed amendment.
            (2)   When making its decision, the council shall consider the
review criteria established in subsection A3 of this section and the record
provided by the board. If the plan amendment is approved, future amendments to
the zoning map shall be consistent with the approved comprehensive plan
amendment.
            (3)   The city council shall act on the plan amendment in
conformance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-7 within thirty (30)
days of the next council meeting following the conclusion of the board's public
hearing.
      5.   Filing Of Plan: The official comprehensive plan shall be certified
by the city council and placed on file with the city clerk.
   B.   Text And Zoning Map Amendments: All amendments to the text of this
title and zoning map amendments follow the type 3 review process as described
in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter.
      1.   Purpose: The council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on
petition, amend, supplement, or change, by ordinance, the zoning map or
development regulations in this title to better provide for the public health,
safety and welfare of the city.
      2.   Applicability: An owner of real property within the city, or that
owner's authorized representative, may apply for a change in zoning district
boundaries (rezoning) for that landowner's property, or an amendment to the
text of this title. The board of zoning appeals and planning, city manager or
the city council also may initiate such amendments.
      3.   Application And Procedures: The applicant shall file an application
with the required information listed in the appendix to the ordinance codified
herein.
      4.   Review Criteria: Changes to the text of this title or the zoning map
shall not become effective until after review and study by the board of zoning
appeals and planning and the city council who shall consider the following
review criteria, as applicable, to determine whether the change should be
approved:
         a.   The existing zoning was in error at the time of adoption; or
         b.   The proposed change is consistent with, and in furtherance of,
the implementation of the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan, other
adopted plans, and the policies, intents and requirements of this title and
other city regulations and guidelines; or
         c.   There is a community need for and benefit from the proposed
change; or
         d.   The proposed change is consistent with the character of the
affected area; or
         e.   The proposed zoning is compatible with the zoning and uses of
property nearby; or
         f.   The existing zoning is suitable for the development of the uses
authorized under the existing zoning classification, will be conducive to
proper community planning, and is a logical extension of an existing urban area
or growth center; and
         g.   Public and community facilities, which may include, but are not
limited to, sanitary and storm sewers, water, electrical service, police and
fire protection, schools, parks and recreation facilities, roads, libraries,
and solid waste collection and disposal, are available and adequate to serve
uses authorized under the proposed zoning; and
         h.   Authorized uses will not adversely affect the capacity or safety
of the street network in the vicinity of the property; and
         i.   Potential environmental impacts (e.g., excessive storm water
runoff, water pollution, air pollution, noise pollution, excessive lighting, or
other environmental harms) of authorized uses will be mitigated.
      5.   Decision Makers:
         a.   Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning:
            (1)   The board of zoning appeals and planning shall hold a public
hearing on each proposed amendment within thirty (30) days of the date of
application.
            (2)   When the board of zoning appeals and planning deems it
necessary or expedient, the board may consider other property for a change or
amendment of zoning district in addition to the property described in the
application; provided, that such additional property is included in the hearing
notices.
            (3)   Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the public
hearing, the board of zoning appeals and planning shall forward to the city
council a summary of all evidence taken at the hearing, together with its
recommendations for any change to zoning district boundaries and/or
regulations. The board may recommend approval, denial, or conditional approval.
The reasons for the recommendations shall be included. A copy of the
recommendations shall be given to the applicant.
         b.   City Council:
            (1)   Decision: The council shall consider the findings of fact and
the recommendation of the board of zoning appeals and planning and the record
of public input. Within thirty (30) days of conclusion of the council's initial
consideration of the application, the council may, by simple majority vote,
approve, deny or conditionally approve the recommendation of the board of
zoning appeals and planning.
            (2)   Amending Ordinance: If the council approves an application,
it shall adopt an ordinance approving the change. The amending ordinance shall
define the change or boundary as amended. The ordinance shall be filed with the
city clerk and shall be recorded in the county recorder's office.
            (3)   Protest: In case a written protest is filed with the city
clerk, in conformance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-14, a
favorable vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the council membership shall be required
to approve the amendment.
   C.   Planned Unit Development (PUD):
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of the PUD process is to demonstrate
conformance with the comprehensive plan, compatibility of land use and
coordination of improvements within and among individually platted parcels,
sections or phases of development. A PUD application includes a rezoning
application tied to a detailed plan for site development and a subdivision plat
if applicable. The concept plan phase of the PUD includes the site layout and
preliminary plat. The final plan is approved in conjunction with the rezoning,
proposed development phasing and final subdivision plat.
      2.   Applicability: Planned unit development may be applied to
residential, commercial, industrial and mixed use projects to provide design
flexibility not available through strict interpretation of the standards
established in this title. Classification as a planned unit development shall
require a rezoning of the affected property in conformance with subsection B of
this section. Design flexibility is provided through planned unit development
to enhance long term community benefits that may be achieved through high
quality development that provides:
         a.   More efficient infrastructure.
         b.   Reduced traffic demands.
         c.   More usable public or private open space.
         d.   Recreational amenities.
         e.   Needed housing choices.
      3.   PUD Concept Plan:
         a.   Purpose: A PUD concept plan constitutes a major step in the
review process and provides general information about the proposed planned unit
development.
         b.   Applicability: A concept plan is optional, unless the applicant
proposes to develop a portion of a larger site.
         c.   Application And Procedures: The applicant shall file an
application with the required information listed in the appendix to the
ordinance codified herein. PUD concept plan shall be processed as a type 3
application as described in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter.
         d.   Review Criteria: The concept plan application shall be evaluated
using the review criteria established for zoning map amendments (subsection B
of this section), major subdivision (subsection E of this section) and the
following criteria:
            (1)   The development design is consistent with the purposes of the
planned unit development (subsection C1 of this section) and comprehensive plan
goals and policies; and
            (2)   The development is designed and phased to make efficient use
of existing infrastructure, have lower traffic volumes or contribute to better
mobility than would conventional development, provide more usable public or
private open space or other recreational amenities than conventional
development, and provide needed housing choices; and
            (3)   The development will provide long term benefits to the
neighborhood in which it is located and the community as a whole.
         e.   Decision Makers:
            (1)   Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning: The board of zoning
appeals and planning shall review the concept plan application at a public
hearing and make a recommendation to the city council for approval, denial, or
conditional approval of the concept plan, the requested rezoning and the
preliminary subdivision plat, if applicable.
            (2)   City Council: The city council shall review the concept plan
application, proposed zoning amendment, and the board of zoning appeals and
planning recommendation, and approve, deny, or conditionally approve the
concept plan and preliminary plat, if applicable. The city council may require
the dedication of perimeter rights of way as a condition of concept plan
approval.
      4.   Final Development Plan:
         a.   Purpose: The final development plan, together with the
development schedule and final plat, shall act as the blueprint for development
of a planned unit development project over the length of time the project is
developed. The final development plan and final plat refine the information
submitted during the concept plan stage.
         b.   Application And Procedures: The applicant shall file an
application with the required information listed in the appendix to the
ordinance codified herein, and it shall be processed as a type 2 application in
accordance with subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter.
         c.   Review Criteria: The final development plan and final plat
application and submittal shall be in substantial conformance with the concept
plan. The final development plan shall be reviewed for substantial conformance
with the concept plan and the review criteria for rezoning (subsection B of
this section) and subdivision (subsection E of this section). Substantial
conformance means that the application does not:
            (1)   Vary the proposed gross residential density or intensity of
use;
            (2)   Vary the proposed ratio of residential units to
nonresidential square footage;
            (3)   Involve a reduction of the area set aside for common open
space or the substantial relocation of such area;
            (4)   Substantially increase the floor area proposed for
nonresidential use; or
            (5)   Substantially increase the total ground areas covered by
buildings or involve a substantial change in the height of buildings.
         d.   Decision Makers: The city council shall review the final plan,
proposed zoning amendment and final plat, as applicable, within thirty (30)
days following the receipt of the complete application. The council shall
approve, conditionally approve or deny the final development plan, rezoning,
development schedule and final plat within thirty (30) days of its initial
consideration. The applicant shall provide all required subdivision guarantees
prior to the final reading of the ordinance creating the PUD.
         e.   Recording: The final development plan and final plat with
restrictive covenants and articles of incorporation, if any, a certified copy
of the ordinance approving the plan and plat, and any other related documents
and changed zoning shall be recorded in the county recorder's office within six
(6) months of approval by the city council.
         f.   Amendments To Final Development Plan And Final Plat: No changes
shall be made in the approved final development plan and final plat unless in
conformance with the following requirements:
            (1)   Minor Changes: The community development director, or their
designee, may authorize minor changes under the following conditions:
               (A)   The term “minor changes” as used in this section is
considered to represent changes which do not alter the overall characteristics
of the total plan and which create no adverse impacts on adjacent uses or
public services and facilities. Some examples of what can be considered as
minor changes are:
         (i)   Changes in location and type of landscaping and/or screening so
long as the approved character and intent is maintained;
         (ii)   Changes in the orientation of portions of parking areas so long
as the effectiveness of the overall site circulation and parking is maintained;
parking areas shall be relocated not closer than twenty feet (20') to any
residential structure or ten feet (10') to any street or right of way lines;
and the number of parking spaces shall not be reduced by the relocation;
         (iii)   Changes in the location of sidewalks and pathways; provided,
that continuity of pedestrian circulation remains;
         (iv)   The reorientation, but not complete relocation, of major
structures; or
         (v)   Changes that will not impact properties or uses outside of and
adjacent to the PUD.
         (vi)   The construction of accessory buildings and structures as
established in this title.
               (B)   No minor change authorized by this section may cause any
of the following:
                  (i)   Change in the permitted uses or of development
character;
                  (ii)   Increased overall coverage of structures;
                  (iii)   Increased intensity of use;
                  (iv)   Increased demand for traffic circulation and public
utilities;
                  (v)   Decrease in public or private open space;
                  (vi)   Decrease in pavement and sidewalk widths; or
                  (vii)   Increased numbers of dwellings.
            (2)   Major Changes: All other changes to the approved final
development plan shall be deemed "major" and shall be approved only by the
council after review of a revised final development plan and/or map. No
amendments may be made in the approved final development plan unless the
applicant establishes that such amendments are required as a result of:
               (A)   Changes in conditions which occurred after final
development plan approval;
               (B)   Changes in the development policy of the community; or
               (C)   Conditions that were reasonably unforeseen at the time of
final development plan approval.
            (3)   Recording Of Changes And Amendments: Any changes that are
approved for the final development plan and/or final plat shall be recorded as
amendments to the previously recorded plan and/or map.
      5.   Lapse Of Plan And Rezone: If a PUD has not been completed in
accordance with an approved development schedule (a “lapse”), the community
development director, or their designee, shall schedule the project before the
board of zoning appeals and planning, at which time a revocation of all prior
approvals shall be considered. If the board of zoning appeals and planning
determines that a lapse has occurred, the community development director, or
their designee, shall record an appropriate legal notice and may initiate,
without owner consent, a zoning change to the underlying zone.
      6.   Development According To Final Development Plan And Final Plat: No
building permit shall be issued on any site unless a site plan has been
submitted and approved in accordance with the provision in subsection
10-4-2B of this chapter, and unless such site plan conforms with the conditions
of the adopted final plan and final plat.
      7.   Transfer Of Ownership: The requirements, restrictions, conditions
and provisions of the approved PUD concept plan and final development plan and
final plat shall be binding upon the owners, their heirs and assigns and future
owners until such time as the city may release such limitation on the use of
the subject property under the procedures provided herein.
   D.   Conditional Use Permits: All conditional use permit applications follow
the type 3 review process as described in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter.
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of conditional use review is to allow the city
to exercise some discretion over the extent and design of certain activities
that could have a detrimental effect on the community if permitted to exist in
large numbers, in certain locations or without special conditions. Therefore,
these regulations enable the city to authorize a conditional use subject to
conditions that mitigate the potential problems associated with the use or its
location in relation to the neighboring properties. A conditional use is not a
use by right.
      2.   Applicability: Conditional uses, as shown in tables 5-2 and 5-3
(subsections
10-5-3B and C, respectively, of this title), are uses that have negative
impacts upon allowed uses that can be mitigated for some sites. A conditional
use, once approved, goes with the land for the approved use only, unless the
permit is revoked due to violations enumerated in subsection D6 of this
section. The designation of a use in a zoning district as a conditional use
does not constitute an authorization or assurance that such use will be
approved. Temporary uses for commercial, recreational or amusement land uses
also shall be required to receive approval of a conditional use permit.
      3.   Application And Procedures: The applicant shall file an application
with the required information listed in the appendix to the ordinance codified
herein.
      4.   Review Criteria: The following criteria shall be used when
determining approval of a conditional use permit:
         a.   The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the
goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan;
         b.   The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and
intent of the applicable zoning district regulations and complies with
requirements of this code;
         c.   The proposed conditional use is not materially detrimental to the
public health, safety, comfort and general welfare, and will not result in
material damage or prejudice to other property in the vicinity;
         d.   The proposed use is compatible with and preserves or enhances the
character and integrity of adjacent development and includes improvements
necessary to mitigate adverse development related impacts, such as traffic,
noise, odors, visual nuisances, or other similar adverse effects to adjacent
development and neighborhoods;
         e.   The proposed use does not generate pedestrian and vehicular
traffic that will be hazardous to the existing and anticipated traffic in the
neighborhood;
         f.   The proposed conditional use complies will all fire, health,
building, plumbing, electrical and storm water drainage regulations of the
city, county, state and federal agencies; and
         g.   Adequate utilities exist to service the proposed conditional use.
      5.   Decision Makers:
         a.   Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning: The board of zoning appeals
and planning shall conduct a public hearing, review the conditional use permit
application and make its recommendation to the council for approval, denial, or
conditional approval.
         b.   City Council: The council shall review the conditional use permit
application and any other proposed action related to the permit and the board's
recommendation, and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the permit.
The council may impose conditions and restrictions upon the establishment,
location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as
deemed necessary to protect the public and to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this title.
      6.   Revocation: Any conditional use permit granted under the authority
of this title is subject to revocation by the council for any or all of the
following reasons:
         a.   Noncompliance with any special conditions imposed by this title
or by the council at the time of approval of the conditional use permit.
         b.   Violation of any provisions of this title pertaining to the use
of the land, construction or uses of buildings or structures or activities
conducted on the premises by the permittee or agents of the permittee.
         c.   Violation of any other applicable provisions of this title or any
state or federal law or regulation by the permittee or agents of the permittee;
provided, that such violations relate to the conduct or activity authorized by
the conditional use permit or the qualifications of the permittee or its agents
to engage in such conduct or activity.
      7.   Validity: The conditional use permit shall be valid for the duration
of the period specified in the ordinance approving the permit unless revoked by
the council or the use is ceased or terminated for ninety (90) consecutive
days. The duration of the permit may be extended if, after a public hearing,
the board of zoning appeals and planning recommends and the council grants the
extension of up to one hundred twenty (120) days. Conditional use permits
granted prior to adoption of this title shall remain in effect under the
conditions established at the time the permits were issued. Amendments to those
permits shall be processed as new permits in accordance with this title. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
   E.   Major Subdivision: All subdivisions creating five (5) or more lots or
parcels (any of which is less than 5 acres) and any subdivision of a parcel
created through the minor subdivision process, shall be processed in
conformance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8 and 765 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 205/0.01 et seq. (Ord. 09-O-60, 12-1-2009)
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that
subdivisions comply with the minimum standards for the design, development and
improvement established in this title.
      2.   Applicability: Every owner of any tract or parcel of land who shall
hereafter subdivide or plat said tract or parcel into five (5) or more lots
(any of which is less than 5 acres) or shall divide a lot or parcel created
through the minor subdivision process shall follow the major subdivision
process.
      3.   Concept Plan:
         a.   Purpose: The purpose of the concept plan is to ensure that
improvements are well coordinated within and among individually platted
parcels, sections, or phases of a development prior to approval of a
preliminary plat. Approval of a concept plan shall constitute approval of the
type(s) and intensity of development and approval of a project phasing plan. A
concept plan may be processed concurrently with a preliminary plat.
         b.   Applicability: A concept plan is required for any major
subdivision. The concept plan shall identify all contiguous land holdings of
the applicant and establish a phasing plan for any subdivision involving
multiple phases of development and any subdivision for which only a portion of
the parent tract or a portion of contiguous holdings under common ownership are
proposed to be platted.
         c.   Application And Procedures: The applicant shall file an
application with the required information listed in the appendix to the
ordinance codified herein. The application shall be reviewed according to the
type 3 process described in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter.
         d.   Review Criteria: The board and council shall consider the
following criteria when reviewing the concept plan:
            (1)   The consistency of the proposed subdivision with applicable
zoning of the property.
            (2)   The consistency of proposed public improvements with the
existing and planned development within and surrounding the proposed
subdivision.
            (3)   The suitability of the proposed project for the site.
            (4)   Conformance of the proposed project with the goals and
objectives of the comprehensive plan and the city development standards.
            (5)   The availability and adequacy of required public and
community facilities, utilities and services to serve the proposed project.
These may include, but are not limited to, sanitary and storm sewers, water,
electrical services, police and fire protection, schools, parks and recreation
facilities, roads, libraries, solid waste collection and disposal and others,
as applicable.
            (6)   The extent to which the proposed project would adversely
affect the capacity or safety of that portion of the street network influenced
by the use.
            (7)   The extent to which the proposed project would contribute to
inefficient development patterns.
            (8)   The environmental impacts that the proposed project will
generate including, but not limited to, excessive storm water runoff, water
pollution, air pollution, noise pollution, excessive nighttime lighting, or
other environmental harm.
         e.   Decision Makers: The city council shall determine whether the
proposed development meets the criteria stated in subsection E3d of this
section and shall approve, deny or conditionally approve the application after
receipt of the recommendation of the board. If the public works director
determines that the proposed subdivision may have a major impact on the school
districts, the city shall provide a copy of the concept plan and successive
preliminary plat to the applicable school district for review and comment.
         f.   Effect Of Approval And Validity:
            (1)   Approval of a concept plan constitutes acceptance of the
type, density and intensity of land use indicated on the plan as being
consistent with the comprehensive plan; the classification and arrangement of
streets indicated; the proposed phasing plan; and the nature of utility service
proposed. The approval of the concept plan shall not expire as long as the
development proceeds in accordance with the phasing plan. At such time as the
development lags one year behind the approved phasing plan, or a period of one
year elapses without approval of a preliminary plat, concept plan approval
shall expire. Upon receipt of a written request, the board of zoning appeals
and planning may approve extensions upon finding that changing conditions in
the city do not necessitate changes to the approved concept plan.
            (2)   Concept plan approval does not ensure approval of a
preliminary plat involving a substantially different concept or failing to meet
specific requirements of these regulations, and approval does not comprise any
vesting of development rights or any assurance that permits of any kind will be
issued.
      4.   Preliminary Plat:
         a.   Purpose: Preliminary plat approval allows the board of zoning
appeals and planning and city council to review all substantive aspects of a
proposed subdivision and impose such conditions as will be necessary to ensure
compliance with city plans and regulations.
         b.   Applicability: Any person proposing to subdivide land, other than
a minor subdivision, shall submit the application and preliminary plat to the
community development director, or their designee, for consideration of the
board of zoning appeals and planning. The design and layout of the subdivision
shall conform to the requirements of chapter 8 of this title. The community
development director, or their designee, may permit the applicant to prepare a
final plat for submission to the council at the same time the preliminary plat
is submitted. However, if a concept plan is submitted concurrently with a
preliminary plat, the submission and review of the final plat shall be done
separately.
         c.   Application And Procedures: The applicant shall file an
application with the required information listed in the appendix to the
ordinance codified herein. The application shall be reviewed according to the
type 3 process described in subsection
10-4-1 C of this chapter.
            (1)   Before any application is made, the applicant is encouraged
to confer with the community development director, or their designee, to
discuss, in general, the procedures and requirements for preliminary plat
approval pursuant to these regulations.
            (2)   A preliminary plat application and applicable fee shall be
submitted to the community development director, or their designee, for review
and the applicable fee shall be submitted to the city comptroller.
            (3)   A preliminary plat application shall be filed thirty (30)
days prior to the regular board of zoning appeals and planning meeting at which
the applicant desires to be heard.
         d.   Submittal Date: For purposes of these regulations, the date of
the regular meeting of the board of zoning appeals and planning at which time a
complete preliminary plat is reviewed shall constitute the official application
date of the plat.
         e.   Notification Of Subdivision:
            (1)   School District: In conformance with 765 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 205/2, the community development director, or their designee, shall
notify the president of the school board of each school district in which the
land is subdivided that the plat has been submitted for approval and that it is
available for inspection. The notice shall give the date, time and place of
hearing on the plat and shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or shall be delivered by personal delivery.
            (2)   County: When a proposed subdivision is located within the
extraterritorial area of the city, outside the city limits, but not farther
than twelve (12) miles, the city shall provide a copy of the preliminary plat
to the county and applicable township for review and comments in conformance
with 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
         f.   Review Criteria: The recommending and decision making bodies
shall make the following findings before approving a preliminary plat:
            (1)   The plat is consistent with the future land use map in
conformance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8;
            (2)   The application conforms with environmental and health laws
and regulations concerning water and air pollution, the disposal of solid
waste, public facilities to supply water, community or public sewage disposal
and, where applicable, individual systems for sewage disposal. If on site
wastewater systems are proposed, the community development director, or their
designee, shall find that the proposed development and improvements are
compatible with long term expansion plans for the city wastewater system, and
the county health department shall certify that the proposed lots satisfy
applicable regulations prior to approval of the final plat;
            (3)   The site is served, or will be served at the time of
development, with all necessary public utilities;
            (4)   The location of the site will not cause the need for
premature or inefficient extensions and expansions of public facilities,
utilities and services;
            (5)   The applicant has demonstrated that public services such as
schools, public safety and fire protection will be available upon platting of
the subdivision in conformance with the requirements of chapter 9 of this
title;
            (6)   The site represents an overall development pattern that is
consistent with chapter 8 of this title and with the goals and policies of the
comprehensive plan, the capital improvements program, and any other applicable
planning documents adopted by the city;
            (7)   The site and application conform to all applicable provisions
of these regulations;
            (8)   The proposed subdivision will not overload existing public
streets or create the need for the city to fund new street construction to
serve the subdivision in conformance with the provisions of chapter 9 of this
title;
            (9)   The preliminary plat shows the location, spacing and design
of proposed streets, curb cuts and intersections, all of which are consistent
with the engineering design standards provided in chapter 9 of this title;
            (10)   Each lot in the plat of a residential development has
adequate and safe access to/from a local street. If lot access is to/from a
collector or arterial street, the board of zoning appeals and planning shall
expressly find that such access is safe and that no other lot access or
subdivision configuration is feasible;
            (11)   The site contains a parcel, lot and land subdivision layout
that is consistent with this title, generally accepted land planning and site
engineering design principles;
            (12)   The arrangement of streets and lots shall give due regard to
the topography and other physical features of the property; and
            (13)   The applicant agrees to dedicate and improve land, right of
way and easements, as may be determined to be needed to effectuate the purposes
of these regulations and the standards and requirements incorporated herein.
         g.   Staff Action:
            (1)   The community development director, or their designee, shall
transmit copies of the preliminary plat to the board of zoning appeals and
planning.
            (2)   The public works director and community development director,
or their designee, shall file a written recommendation with the board of zoning
appeals and planning within twenty one (21) days of receipt of the preliminary
plat. The public works director shall include the written comments of the
Illinois department of transportation, relevant highway authority, county
health department and school district, if applicable.
         h.   Decision Makers:
            (1)   Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning: Within thirty (30) days
of receipt of the application, if the board of zoning appeals and planning
finds that the preliminary plat satisfies the requirements of this title, it
shall make its recommendation to the council. If the board finds otherwise, it
shall specify in writing the objections to such plat and may either recommend
denial or recommend approval conditioned upon specific changes to the plat. The
applicant may, however, agree in writing to an extension of time not to exceed
sixty (60) days. A copy of the recommendations shall be forwarded to the
applicant. In the case of denial of the preliminary plat, the board shall
notify the applicant in writing within thirty (30) days of the reasons for this
action. Failure of the board of zoning appeals and planning to act within
ninety (90) days without written consent of the applicant shall result in a
recommendation to approve the application. The recommendation and findings of
the board, shall be submitted to the council.
            (2)   City Council: Within six (6) months (to allow for approval of
engineering aspects from the director of public works) of the next council
meeting following the board's action, the city council shall review the
application and approve, conditionally approve or deny the preliminary plat. If
the preliminary plat is denied, the city council shall advise the applicant of
the reason for denial. Approval of the preliminary plat by the city council
shall constitute approval to proceed with the preparation of the final plat but
not to be deemed as approval of the subdivision. (Ord. 09-O-60, 12-1-2009)
         i.   Exceptions: Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such
unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development or unusual
conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in this
title would result in real difficulties or substantial hardship or injustice,
the council, after report by the board, may vary or modify such requirements so
that the applicant may develop his property in a reasonable manner, while, at
the same time, the public welfare and interests of the city and surrounding
area are protected and the general intent and spirit of this title are
preserved.
         j.   Duration Of Permit/Approval: Preliminary plat approval shall
confer upon the applicant, for a period of one year from the date of approval
by the city council, the right to proceed to final plat approval pursuant to
the terms and conditions under which the preliminary plat approval was granted
by the city council. The applicant may delay the submission of the final plat
provided approval time extension is granted by the city council in accordance
with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8.
      5.   Construction Plans/Improvements:
         a.   Construction Plans Required:
            (1)   Following approval of the preliminary plat, the applicant
shall submit construction plans consisting of complete plans and specifications
for all easements, streets, traffic control devices, streetlights, street
signs, sanitary sewers, stormwater facilities, water system facilities,
sidewalks and the provision for all public utility sources to be provided to
each lot within the subdivision together with other improvements required by
these regulations. The public works director shall review the plans and
specifications as a type 1 application in accordance with subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter for minimum improvements and report these findings to
the applicant. If the public works director shall find such construction plans
and specifications to be in accordance with the adopted standards and
procedures for subdivision improvements, he shall determine the amount of bond,
if required. Following the approval of the plans and specifications by the
public works director, the applicant may submit the final plat to the community
development director, or their designee, for consideration by the board of
zoning appeals and planning and the city council.
            (2)   All improvements required pursuant to these regulations shall
be designed and constructed in accordance with the design standards and plan
requirements of these regulations, the standards and specifications of the city
and, where applicable, the requirements and authorization of the appropriate
state agency, utility company or local franchisee.
         b.   Construction Drawing Requirements: The applicant shall file the
construction drawings in conformance with the requirements listed in the
appendix to the ordinance codified herein.
         c.   Survey Monuments: All subdivision boundary corners shall be
marked with survey monuments in conformance with the requirements in 765
Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/1(a). If survey monuments are removed during
construction, a registered land surveyor shall replace them before the final
plat is approved and/or before the city accepts improvements. All subdivisions
must be referenced to two (2) United States public land survey corners of
record.
         d.   Public Agency Reviews: Prior to approving the construction plans,
the applicant shall submit the construction plans to the public works director
for review of applicable local reviewing agencies and public utility companies
that will service the subdivision and the Illinois department of
transportation. The public works director may seek consultation in the review
of plans, and the applicant shall pay the costs of such consultations. The
public works director shall review and act on all construction plans within
thirty (30) days of submittal.
         e.   Approval: Following agency and utility approvals, the public
works director shall approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of the
construction plans. Plans that are denied may be amended and immediately
resubmitted. Denial may be appealed to the city council within thirty (30) days
of notification.
         f.   Timing Of Improvements: The applicant is authorized to clear
sight lines for surveys and provide access for boring equipment when necessary;
provided, that any related disturbance of the site is the minimum needed to
obtain required information for the final engineering plans. Except upon the
written approval of the public works director or community development
director, or their designee, no grading, removal of vegetation, land filling,
construction of improvements, or other material change shall commence on the
subject property until the applicant has:
            (1)   Received approval of the construction plans and all necessary
permits from the city, including a written notice to proceed with construction
from the director of public works;
            (2)   Entered into an improvement agreement with the city or
otherwise arranged for completion of all required improvements; and
            (3)   Obtained necessary approvals and permits from other affected
municipal, county or state agencies.
         g.   Modification Of Construction Plans: Installation of improvements
and construction shall conform to the approved construction plans. If the
applicant chooses to make minor modifications in design and/or specifications
during construction, such changes shall be made at the applicant's own risk. It
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the public works
director in advance of any changes to be made to the approved plans. The
applicant shall provide as built plans prepared by a registered professional
engineer with a statement by the engineer to the effect that the installed
improvements conform to the approved construction plans with any exceptions
noted. When the applicant deviates from construction, the city may take such
other actions as may be deemed appropriate including, but not limited to,
revocation of map approval and/or permits already issued and/or withholding of
future approvals and permits.
         h.   Inspection And Acceptance Of Improvements:
            (1)   Inspection Required: All improvements required by these
regulations shall be inspected by the public works director, except for
improvements made under the jurisdiction of other public agencies or by an
independent engineer as authorized in a written agreement with the city. In
these cases, engineers or inspectors of such agency will make the necessary
inspections. Where inspections are made by other agencies, the applicant shall
provide the city with written reports of each final inspection.
            (2)   Inspection Schedule: It shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to notify the public works director of the commencement of
construction of improvements forty eight (48) hours prior thereto. Inspections
shall be required at each of the following stages of construction or as
otherwise determined through an owner contract or improvement agreement (see
subsection I of this section):
               (A)   Site grading/erosion control completion.
               (B)   Start and completion of each phase of underground utility
construction.
               (C)   Subgrade preparation prior to aggregate base installation.
               (D)   Aggregate base compaction.
               (E)   Concrete curb and gutter installation.
               (F)   Prior to constructing pavement.
            (3)   Compliance With Standards: The applicant and the bonded
construction contractor shall bear full and final responsibility for the
installation and construction of all required improvements according to the
provisions of these regulations and the standards and specifications of other
public agencies.
            (4)   Acceptance:
               (A)   Approval of the installation and construction of
improvements by the public works director shall not constitute acceptance by
the city of the improvements for dedication purposes.
               (B)   The city shall not have any responsibility with respect to
any street or other improvements, notwithstanding the use of the same by the
public, unless the street or other improvements shall have been accepted by the
city council upon recommendation of the public works director.
               (C)   After acceptance of improvements, the developer shall
maintain a two (2) year warranty with surety equivalent to twenty five percent
(25%) of the total cost of improvements to ensure that any failures occurring
within the warranty period will be properly repaired.
            (5)   Site Cleanup: The applicant shall be responsible for removal
of all equipment, material, and general construction debris from the
subdivision and from any lot, street, public way or property therein or
adjacent thereto. Dumping of such debris into sewers, onto adjacent property or
onto other land in the city, other than an approved landfill, is prohibited.
            (6)   Failure To Complete Improvements: Failure to complete all
required public improvements within six (6) months of final plat approval or
within a period otherwise specified by the city council shall result in
revocation of final plat approval. If an improvement agreement (see subsection
I of this section) has been executed and security has been posted and required
public improvements are not installed pursuant to the terms of the agreement,
the city may:
               (A)   Declare the development to be in default and require that
all public improvements be installed regardless of the extent of completion of
the development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default;
               (B)   Revoke final plat approval until the public improvements
are completed and record a document to that effect with the county recorder's
office for the purpose of public notice;
               (C)   Obtain funds pursuant to the surety and complete the
public improvements itself or through a third party;
               (D)   Assign its right to receive funds pursuant to the surety,
in whole or in part, to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the
subdivision or addition for whom the public improvements were not constructed,
in exchange for the subsequent owner's agreement to complete the required
public improvements; and/or
               (E)   Exercise any other rights available under the law.
            (7)   Release Of Construction Surety Upon Completion Of
Improvements: Upon a satisfactory inspection of public improvements and
acceptance by the city, the city council shall adopt a resolution accepting
improvements and releasing the surety in the affected subdivision plat. The
surety for construction shall not be released until surety has been provided
for the warranty of improvements. Upon written request of the applicant, the
city clerk shall deliver a certified copy of the resolution to the applicant
and the bonding company.
         i.   Filing Construction Plans: Approved construction plans shall be
retained permanently in the office of the public works director.
      6.   Final Plat:
         a.   Purpose: Final plat approval is required at the completion of the
major subdivision process so that the subdivision plat can be recorded,
dedications can be made and building construction can begin.
         b.   Application And Procedures: The applicant shall submit an
application with the required information listed in the appendix to the
ordinance codified herein to the community development director, or their
designee. The application shall be processed as a type 2 application pursuant
to subsection 
10-4-1C of this chapter.
         c.   Review Criteria: When the final plat conforms to the approved
preliminary plat, certification to this effect shall be endorsed on the final
plat by the city council. Where the final plat does not conform to the approved
preliminary plat, the council may deny approval of the final plat. Before
approving the final plat, the council shall make the following findings:
            (1)   The final plat substantially conforms to the approved
preliminary plat and any conditions and exceptions granted pursuant thereto.
Substantial deviations shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
               (A)   Change in the location or design of a public street;
               (B)   A change in the number or layout of lots or blocks;
               (C)   A change in access to lots;
               (D)   A change in areas, streets or rights of way to be reserved
or dedicated;
               (E)   A change in the drainage plan which increases the runoff
from the tract;
               (F)   A change in the public utilities and facilities to be
provided; and
               (G)   A change in the extent of buffering between the proposed
subdivision and adjacent areas and/or land uses.
            (2)   The final plat conforms to all applicable requirements of
these regulations, and other applicable land development regulations.
            (3)   All submission requirements of these regulations have been
satisfied.
         d.   Staff Action:
            (1)   The community development director, or their designee, shall
review the final plat to ensure that all the requirements have been fulfilled.
The community development director, or their designee, may forward copies of
the final plat to appropriate departments and agencies for their review and
shall forward all staff and agency comments to the applicant and city council.
            (2)   The community development director, or their designee, shall
schedule review of the final plat with the city council within thirty (30) days
of filing of the final plat.
         e.   Decision Makers:
            (1)   City Council:
               (A)   Unless agreed to by the applicant, the city council shall
approve, conditionally approve or deny the final plat within thirty (30) days
from the date of the application, and subsequently shall transmit written
notice of its decision to the applicant.
               (B)   If the proposed final plat is approved, the mayor shall
sign the final plat and copies of the same filed with other certification and
instruments required for recordation.
            (2)   Failure To Act: If the city council fails to act upon the
final plat within the prescribed time, the applicant may take action in
conformance with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8.
         f.   Filing And Recordation:
            (1)   After the approval of the final plat by the city council,
said plat and certified copy of the ordinance approving it shall be recorded in
the county recorder's office at the owner's expense. If not recorded within six
(6) months of approval, such plat shall have no validity and shall not be
recorded without reapproval in conformance with this subsection. The city
council may grant one 120-day extension to allow the plat to be recorded.
However, the application for extension must be made prior to the expiration of
the six (6) months following approval.
            (2)   The development improvement agreement, if applicable, shall
be recorded with the final plat.
   F.   Minor Subdivisions:
      1.   Purpose: Adequate information concerning land use, utility
requirements, traffic impact, streets, easements and dedications, and
sufficient time to review that information are vital to ensure the continued
health, safety and welfare of the city residents. Recognizing that small scale
projects may be unnecessarily burdened by these process costs, the city herein
establishes a simplified procedure for minor subdivisions.
      2.   Applicability: Any person proposing to subdivide land into four (4)
or fewer lots or parcels shall submit a final plat to the community development
director, or their designee, prepared in accordance with subsection E of this
section. If public improvements are required, the applicant shall submit and
receive approval of construction plans prior to processing the final plat. If
any of the parcels in the proposed minor subdivision were created by the minor
subdivision process, or if the community development director, or their
designee, determines that the proposed subdivision creates the need for off
site infrastructure improvements, then the application shall be reviewed as a
major subdivision.
   3.   Application And Procedures: The application and procedure for minor
subdivisions shall be the same as for final plats (type 2 process); except,
that the community development director, or their designee, shall receive the
application and shall determine its completeness, and the final plat will not
be recorded until after all public improvements have been accepted by the city.
Applicants for subdivisions or resubdivisions may follow these procedures;
provided, that the subdivision meets all of the following criteria:
         a.   No new public streets are required for lot access to a public
street.
         b.   No new easements are required.
         c.   The design and layout of the subdivision shall conform to the
requirements of chapters 8 and 9 of this title.
      4.   Review Criteria: The minor subdivision shall comply with the
criteria set forth for final plats.
      5.   Decision Makers: Consent of the city council shall be required for
approval of a minor subdivision.
      6.   Maintenance Guarantee: The applicant shall guarantee the public
improvements against defects in workmanship and materials for a period of two
(2) years from the date of city acceptance of such improvements. The
maintenance guarantee shall be secured in an amount reflecting twenty five
percent (25%) of the cost of the completed improvements at the time of adoption
of the resolution accepting the improvements.
   G.   Conveyances And Plat Adjustments Or Corrections:
      1.   Purpose And Applicability: The following short form approval process
may be used for:
         a.   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as
right of way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipelines that do not involve any new streets or easements of access.
         b.   Conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use.
         c.   A conveyance made to correct a description in a prior conveyance
such as:
            (1)   To correct an error in any course or distance shown on the
prior plat;
            (2)   To add any course or distance that was omitted on the prior
plat;
            (3)   To correct an error in the description of the real property
shown on the prior plat;
            (4)   To indicate monuments set after death, disability or
retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with
responsibilities for setting monuments;
            (5)   To show the proper location or character of any monument
which has been changed in location or character or which originally was shown
at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character on the prior plat;
            (6)   To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or
omission as previously approved by the board of zoning appeals and planning or
the city council; such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited
to: lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent recorded
plats; and
            (7)   To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines
between two (2) adjacent lots where lot owners join in the application for plat
amendment and neither lot is abolished; provided, that such amendment does not
attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a
material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat.
         d.   Single lot splits and lot line adjustment to combine lots.
      2.   Application And Procedures: The application, with the required
information as listed in the appendix to the ordinance codified herein, shall
be filed with the public works director who shall review the application
according to the type 2 process established in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter, and forward the plat for the review of affected
utilities and other applicable agencies. The public works director shall
approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of the application. However, if
a written protest to the application for correction to the plat is filed, then
the public works director shall schedule the application for review at the next
board of zoning appeals and planning meeting and shall notify all affected
property owners of such meeting. After approval of the application, all
conveyances or plat corrections or adjustments shall be recorded pursuant to
subsection E6f of this section. Disputed boundary line adjustments shall be
done in conformance with 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 215/0.01 et seq.
      3.   Review Criteria:
         a.   All resultant parcels shall comply with the minimum standards
required by these regulations;
         b.   No change in street right of way locations or reduction of
easement width shall occur; and
         c.   The action will not adversely affect the character of the
previously recorded plat or the character of the area.
      4.   Decision Maker: The public works director shall approve,
conditionally approve or deny all applications for conveyance and plat
corrections or adjustments.
   H.   Vacation Or Abandonment Of Streets, Easements Or Plats:
      1.   Purpose: When deemed to be in the public interest, and where no
private rights will be injured or endangered and neither the public nor
abutting property owners will suffer any loss or inconvenience thereby, all or
a portion of any street, alley or public reservation, including, but not
limited to, public utility or drainage easements, dedicated building setback
lines and access control, or subdivision plat may be vacated, in conformance
with 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 and 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/
6 and 205/7. Applications for vacation of any street, alley or a public
reservation or subdivision plat may be made by the city or by any owner of
property on which the street, alley or public reservation lies or adjoins.
      2.   Applicability: A street or easement may be vacated if the street,
alley or public reservation, or easement is not necessary for the public safety
or convenience and meets the review criteria set forth below. A plat may be
vacated or abandoned if it has not been developed or has been partially
developed and the owner desires to vacate the undeveloped portion thereof.
      3.   Application And Procedures: Any street, alley or public reservation,
or portion thereof, certain public roads, or subdivision plat may be vacated by
ordinance adopted by the city council pursuant to the type 2 process
established in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter. Any application for vacation or abandonment by
ordinance shall be filed in the office of the public works director with the
required information as listed in the appendix to the ordinance codified
herein. Following the adoption of any ordinance vacating any street, alley or
public reservation, or portion thereof, or subdivision plat, the clerk shall
file a copy thereof for recording. Any vacation of right of way, reservation or
easement on a recorded plat shall be noted on the final plat.
      4.   Reservation Of Easements: In vacating any street, alley or public
reservation, or portion thereof, either by plat or by ordinance, the council
may reserve such rights of way and other easements as in the judgment of the
council are necessary or desirable for public service.
      5.   Reversion Of Land Vacated: Streets, alleys or other public
reservations that have been vacated shall be sold or shall revert to the owners
of adjoining properties as provided by state law and any amendments thereto.
      6.   Review Criteria:
         a.   The proposal is in conformance with 765 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 205/6;
         b.   The proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan, major
street plan and other adopted plans and policies of the city;
         c.   The proposal shall not landlock any parcel of land;
         d.   The proposal shall not restrict access to any parcel so that such
access is unreasonable, economically prohibitive, or devalues any property
affected by the proposed vacation;
         e.   The proposal shall have no adverse impact on the health, safety,
and/or welfare of the general community, and shall not reduce the quality of
public services provided to any parcel of land; and
         f.   There is evidence that the right of way, reservation or easement
or subdivision plat is no longer needed by any of the parties having an
interest in same.
      7.   Decision Makers: The city council shall review the application in
the same manner as a final plat at a public hearing and approve, approve with
conditions or deny approval of the application.
   I.   Improvement Agreements:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of an improvement agreement is to ensure
completion of public improvements.
      2.   Applicability: Except as provided below, before the final plat is
recorded, all applicants shall be required to complete, to the satisfaction of
the public works director, all street, sanitary, and other public improvements,
as well as lot improvements on the individual residential lots of the
subdivision or addition as required by these regulations. The required
improvements shall be those specified in the approved preliminary and/or final
plat.
      3.   Conditions: As a condition of final plat approval, the council shall
require the applicant to execute an irrevocable letter of credit in favor of
the city of Charleston to assure the construction of certain infrastructure
extensions and improvements as identified in the final plat and the improvement
agreement. This surety shall remain in effect for the duration of the agreement
or until the city has accepted all improvements. In the event the applicant is
unable to complete the required improvements, and such improvements are deemed
necessary for the preservation of the public health and safety, the city may
use the letter of credit or other guarantee to complete the improvements as
required.
      4.   Guarantee Of Completion Of Improvements: The council may defer the
requirement for the completion of required improvements if the applicant enters
into an improvement agreement by which the applicant covenants and agrees to
complete all required public improvements no later than two (2) years following
the date upon which the final plat is signed. Such two (2) year period may be
extended for up to an additional two (2) years at the discretion of the
council. The council may require the applicant to complete and dedicate some
required public improvements prior to approval of the final plat and to enter
into an improvement agreement for completion of the remainder of the required
improvements during such two (2) year period. The city attorney shall approve
any improvement agreement as to form and legality.
      5.   Covenants To Run With Land: The improvement agreement shall provide
that the covenants contained therein shall run with the land and bind all
successors, heirs and assigns of the applicant. The improvement agreement shall
be recorded with the county recorder. All existing lien holders shall be
required to subordinate their liens to the covenants contained in the
improvement agreement.
      6.   Performance Security:
         a.   Whenever the council permits an applicant to enter into an
improvement agreement, the applicant shall be required to provide sufficient
security to ensure completion of the required public improvements. The security
shall be in the form of a letter of credit, cash escrow or a surety bond naming
the city as the "beneficiary".
         b.   The letter of credit, cash escrow or surety bond shall be in an
amount estimated by the public works director as reflecting one hundred percent
(100%) of the cost of the improvements in the approved construction plan as
calculated using prevailing wage rates, and shall be sufficient to cover all
promises and conditions contained in the improvement agreement.
         c.   In addition to all other security, when the city participates in
the cost of an improvement, the applicant shall provide a performance bond from
the contractor, with the city as a co- obligee.
         d.   The issuer of any surety bond shall be subject to the approval of
the city attorney.
      7.   Escrow Agent: If security is provided in the form of a cash escrow,
the applicant shall deposit said security with the city clerk a cash amount or
certified check endorsed to the escrow agent for a face value in an amount not
less than the amount specified by the public works director.
         a.   Accrual: The surety bond or cash escrow account shall accrue to
the city for administering the construction, operation and maintenance of the
improvements.
         b.   Reimbursement: Where oversized facilities are required by the
city, the city and applicant shall specify a reimbursement procedure in the
improvement agreement.
      8.   Maintenance Guarantee: The applicant shall guarantee the
improvements against defects in workmanship and materials for a period of two
(2) years from the date of city acceptance of such improvements. The
maintenance guarantee shall be secured in an amount reflecting twenty five
percent (25%) of the cost of the completed improvements at the time of adoption
of the resolution accepting the improvements.
      9.   Temporary Improvements: The applicant shall construct and pay for
all costs of temporary improvements required by the city and shall maintain
said temporary improvements for the period specified.
      10.   Governmental Units: Governmental units to which these improvement
and security provisions apply may file, in lieu of the agreement and security,
an ordinance by the officers or officials authorized to act on their behalf,
agreeing to comply fully with all applicable provisions of these regulations.
      11.   Decision Makers: The city council shall approve, approve with
conditions or deny approval of the improvement agreement.
   J.   Variances:
      1.   Purpose: Variances provide a mechanism for relief for property
owners when strict application of this title would result in practical
difficulties or a particular hardship. The variance granted shall be the
minimum necessary to permit reasonable use of the land.
      2.   Applicability: The board of zoning appeals and planning shall hear
and make recommendations on all requests for variances, in conformance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-5. The city council shall decide all
variances. No variance shall be granted to allow a use that is not authorized
by this title or a density that exceeds the maximums established for the
applicable zoning district. The practical difficulty or hardship must be
clearly exhibited and shall not be a result of actions of the applicant or
previous owner.
      3.   Application And Procedures: The application, with the required
information as listed in the appendix to the ordinance codified herein, shall
be filed with the community development director, or their designee, and
processed in accordance with the procedures for a type 3 application as
described in subsection 
10-4-1C of this chapter.
      4.   Required Findings: A variance is not a right. In conformance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-5, a variance may be granted only upon
finding that:
         a.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
the zone; and
         b.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
         c.   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
         d.   The following factors shall be used to determine whether each of
the findings have been satisfied:
            (1)   Prior to finding that a property could not yield a reasonable
return as provided in subsection J4a of this section, the city shall consider:
               (A)   The initial purchase price was prudent and the intended
return reasonable.
               (B)   Lack of reasonable return was not due to a general
economic downturn that affected all similarly situated property in the city.
               (C)   The impact of the regulations could not have been
reasonably anticipated at the time of purchase of the property.
            (2)   Prior to finding that the plight of the owner is due to
unique circumstances, as provided in subsection J4b of this section, the city
shall consider:
               (A)   The variance is being requested due to a constraint that
does not commonly apply to other properties within the city.
               (B)   The variance is required due to the shape or size of the
property or due to natural constraints such as steep slopes, floodplains or
significant vegetation (define this as specimen trees or stands of trees) that
will be preserved.
            (3)   Prior to finding that the variance, if granted, will not
alter the essential character of the locality, as provided in subsection J4c of
this section, the city shall consider:
               (A)   The variance will not reduce the viability of adjacent
uses.
               (B)   The variance will not reduce the value of adjacent
properties.
               (C)   The variance will not create a health or safety hazard for
the users of the subject or adjacent properties, pedestrians, bicyclists or
automobiles.
               (D)   The variance will not subject adjacent residences to
additional light or noise.
      5.   Decision Makers:
         a.   Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning: The board of zoning appeals
and planning shall conduct a public hearing in conformance with subsection
10-4-1B of this chapter. The board shall make recommendation to the city
council on approval or denial of the variance request. The board shall make
finding based upon subsection J4 of this section in conformance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-5.
         b.   City Council: City council shall make the final decision by
considering the above described findings and minutes of the public hearing from
the board of zoning appeals and planning.
   K.   Adjustments By Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning: After making
required findings the board may grant design authorized adjustments for the
redevelopment, remodeling or expansion of existing sites when it determines
that the strict application of landscaping and other standards cannot be
accomplished on the site. These provisions shall not apply to redevelopment of
sites involving the removal of existing buildings.
      1.   Required Findings:
         a.   The applicant has provided sufficient information to evaluate the
necessity of the exception and the impacts of the proposed design alternative;
and
         b.   Strict compliance with landscaping standards is not physically
feasible, due to existing structures on the site, required parking and required
setbacks; and
         c.   The proposed exceptions are the minimum required to allow the
proposed redevelopment, remodeling or expansion of the site; and
         d.   The proposed design alternative and exceptions result in greater
compliance with the landscape provisions, a more attractive site and greater
compatibility with adjacent development than current development.
      2.   Authorized Exceptions: The board may adjust landscaping, parking and
setback requirements subject to the following limitations:
         a.   Total site landscaping has not been reduced more than twenty
percent (20%) below the requirement for new development on the site;
         b.   Total number of parking spaces has not been reduced by more than
ten percent (10%) of the required spaces; and
         c.   Parking angles, parking space width and traffic flow are
sufficient to provide for the safe reduction of parking aisle widths; and
         d.   Building setbacks have not been reduced by more than twenty
percent (20%).
   L.   Appeals From Staff Determinations:
      1.   Purpose: Appeals to the board of zoning appeals and planning provide
a mechanism for review of any staff determination, including, but not limited
to, action on a development application or interpretation of development
regulations.
      2.   Applicability: An applicant, aggrieved citizen or city
representative, who believes that the city has committed an error in any order,
requirement, decision or refusal made by any member of the city staff, may
appeal that action by filing a notice of appeal with the community development
director, or their designee, within thirty (30) days of the subject action. An
appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless
in the opinion of the community development director, or their designee, by
reason of the facts stated, the request or stay would result in imminent peril
to life or property. In this event, the proceedings shall not be stayed except
by order of the board or by the circuit court on application and on notice to
the community development director, or their designee, from whom the appeal is
taken, and on due cause shown. The board may authorize development activity to
continue if it determines that the development does not pose an imminent threat
to the health, safety and welfare of adjacent property owners.
      3.   Application And Procedures: The application shall be the same as
those required for a variance and shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures for a type 4 application as described in section
10-4-1C of this chapter.
      4.   Appeals Review Criteria: The scope of review shall be limited to
determining whether the decision or interpretation by the staff was in
accordance with the intent and requirements of this title.
      5.   Decisions: The procedures shall be in conformance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-12.
   M.   Vested Rights Determination:
      1.   Purpose: The vested rights determination procedure is intended to
determine whether an applicant has acquired a protected status that requires
the city to permit a development to proceed contrary to existing or amended
land use regulations. The procedure establishes a limit on the duration of all
development approvals to avoid unproductive investment in public facility
system capacities.
      2.   Applicability: The determination of vested rights applies to
developments and permits that were approved or issued or were in the process of
being approved on or before the effective date hereof and approved projects in
which no development activity has occurred for five (5) years or more.
      3.   Application And Procedures: The application for vested rights
determination shall include all information listed in the appendix to the
ordinance codified herein and shall be processed as a type 3 application
pursuant to subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter.
      4.   Review Criteria: The application shall be denied unless the
applicant demonstrates compliance with the following criteria:
         a.   Entitlement to development approval on the basis of detrimental
reliance, i.e.:
            (1)   The initial application for development approval was made by
the applicant and approved by the city;
            (2)   The city had an opportunity to require the applicant to
submit relevant information, including, but not limited to, adequate public
facilities data;
            (3)   The applicant has proceeded in good faith; and
            (4)   No approvals or permits have lapsed or been revoked; or
         b.   Entitlement to development approval on the basis of other vested
rights under any applicable state law.
      5.   Decision Makers:
         a.   Board Of Zoning Appeals And Planning: The board of zoning appeals
and planning shall review the application at a public hearing in conformance
with subsection
10-4-1B of this chapter and shall make recommendations to the city council.
         b.   City Council: The city council shall approve, conditionally
approve or deny approval of all vested rights determinations. If the applicant
is found to be vested, the city council shall enter into an agreement with the
applicant specifying the terms of continued development. If the applicant is
found to be not vested, the development application for which the applicant
made the vested rights claim shall be considered void.
      6.   Validity: The vested rights determination shall be valid for one
year if the applicant fails to enter into an improvements agreement. Otherwise,
vested rights determination shall be valid for the term specified in the
development agreement.
   N.   Issuance Of Rules And Regulations For Public Improvements: The city may
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations regarding the design and
installation of improvements required pursuant to this title through a type 2
review process as described in subsection
10-4-1C of this chapter. The public works director shall prepare such rules for
review and approval by the city council.
      1.   Minimum Standard: Any rule and regulation established shall meet the
minimum city and state standards, but nothing in this section shall prevent the
city from requiring compliance with higher requirements than the state
regulations.
      2.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of public hearing on any proposed rule or
regulation shall be given in at least one newspaper having general circulation
within the city at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing.
      3.   When Effective: Rules and regulations issued by the city shall be
effective after approval by the city council.
      4.   Enforcement Of Rules: The public works director shall enforce rules
and regulations adopted under this section in the following manner:
         a.   Suspend Or Revoke Permit: The public works director may suspend
or revoke any permit for noncompliance with any rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this section.
         b.   Notice Of Violation: When the public works director determines a
violation exists, the public works director shall notify the violator in
writing. Such notice of violation shall be delivered to the person causing the
violation or the legally authorized representative of the person or mailed to
the last known address of that person.
         c.   Stop Work Order Issued: In addition to the notice of violation,
the public works director may issue a written stop work order if it is believed
that the violation poses a serious threat to health and safety. The stop work
order shall be delivered to the owner of the property involved, to the agent of
the owner or to the person doing the work.
         d.   Reinstallation Of Improvement: The public works director may
require that an improvement installed in violation of rules and regulations
adopted pursuant to this section be reinstalled in compliance with adopted
rules and regulations. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 03-O-38, 12-16-2003;
Ord. 09-O-60, 12-1-2009; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 5
ZONING DISTRICTS, MAPS AND USES
SECTION:
10-5-1: Districts Established
10-5-2: Zoning Maps
10-5-3: Use Matrices And Interpretation
10-5-4: District Regulations
10-5-4-1: A Agricultural District
10-5-4-2: RE Residential Estate District
10-5-4-3: R-1 Single-Family Residence District
10-5-4-4: R-2 And R-2U Two-Family/Duplex Residential Districts
10-5-4-5: R-3 And R-3U Limited Multi-Family Residential Districts
10-5-4-6: R-4 And R-4U Multi-Family Residential Districts
10-5-4-7: C-1 Neighborhood Service Commercial District
10-5-4-8: C-2 General Commercial District
10-5-4-9: C-3 Central Business District
10-5-4-10: I-1 Light Industrial District
10-5-4-11: I-2 Heavy Industrial District
10-5-4-12: C/D Corridor Development District
10-5-4-13: M Manufactured Home Park District
10-5-4-14: PUD Planned Unit Development District
10-5-4-15: AOD Airport Overlay District
10-5-4-16: FHOD Flood Hazard Overlay District
10-5-4-17: GOVT Government District
10-5-4-18: RTA Residential Transition Area Overlay District
10-5-1: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this title, the incorporated
area of the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
A    Agricultural district
RE   Residential estate district
R-1  Single-family residence district
R-2  Two-family/duplex residential district
R-2U Two-family/duplex residential district - university influence area
R-3  Limited multi-family residential district
R-3U Limited multi-family residential district - university influence area
C-1  Neighborhood service commercial district
C-2  General commercial district
C-3  Central business district
I-1  Light industrial district
I-2  Heavy industrial district
C/D  Corridor development district
M    Manufactured home park district
PUD  Planned unit development district
AOD  Airport overlay district
FHOD Flood hazard overlay district
GOVT Government district
RTA  Residential transition area overlay district
 
(Ord. 09-O-60, 12-1-2009)
10-5-2: ZONING MAPS:
   A.   Maps Included By Reference:
      1.   Official Zoning Map:
         a.   With the exception of the airport overlay district discussed in
subsection A2 of this section, the boundaries of districts are indicated upon
the official zoning map of the city, which map is made a part of this title by
reference. The official zoning map and all the notations, references and other
matters shown on the map shall be as much a part of this title as if the
notations, references and other matters set forth by said map were all fully
described herein. The official zoning map shall be on file in the office of the
city building official and shall bear the signature of the mayor attested by
the city clerk, under the certification that it is the official zoning map of
the unified development code.
         b.   The city council may, from time to time, adopt a new official
zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map, in the event
that the official zoning map becomes damaged or destroyed, or for purposes of
clarity due to a number of boundary changes, or to correct drafting errors or
omissions; provided, however, that any such adoption shall not have the effect
of amending the original unified development code or any subsequent amendment
thereof.
      2.   Airport Overlay Map: The boundaries of the airport overlay district
shall be the same as shown on the airport height zoning map. This map is hereby
adopted by reference as the official airport overlay map. The map shall have
the same force and effect as if it were fully set forth and described herein.
The map is available for review in the office of the Community Development
Department.
      3.   University Influence Area: The boundaries of the university
influence area, as defined in the comprehensive plan, are hereby incorporated
by reference, may be modified by ordinance from time to time and shall be added
to the official zoning map.
   B.   Maintenance Of Zoning Map: If, in accordance with the provisions of
this title, changes are made in the district boundaries or other matters
portrayed on the official zoning map, the ordinance number and the date of each
change shall be recorded by the city clerk on the official zoning map.
   C.   Interpretation Of Zoning Map:
      1.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, alleys or other public rights of way shall be construed to
follow the centerlines.
      2.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following the lot lines.
      3.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following section lines,
quarter lines, quarter section lines, or quarter-quarter section lines shall be
construed as following the lines.
      4.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate limits
shall be construed as following corporate limits.
      5.   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
      6.   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
rivers, streams, creeks or other waterways shall be construed to follow the
centerlines.
      7.   Boundaries not capable of being determined in subsections C1 through
C6 of this section shall be as dimensioned on the official zoning map or if not
dimensioned, shall be determined by the scale shown on the map.
   D.      Relationship Between Zoning Districts And Future Land Use
Categories: The adopted future land use classification map shall guide
determination of appropriate zoning. Table 5-1 below shows the correlation
between future land use categories and zoning districts. Where multiple
districts may apply to a future land use category, appropriate zoning shall be
based on compatibility with existing and planned land uses and public
facilities. The planned unit development (PUD) district is the appropriate
district for mixed use development. The PUD district, the airport overlay
district and the university influence area may be applicable to any future land
use category. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
TABLE 5-1: CORRELATION BETWEEN FUTURE LAND USE AND ZONING
Future Land Use Corresponding Zoning Districts1
Future Land Use                         Corresponding Zoning Districts1
15  Agriculture                         A    Agricultural district
2   Low density single-family           RE   Residential estate district
25  Medium density single-family        R-1  Single-family residence district
21  Medium density single-family        R-1  Single-family residence district
    attached
                                      R-2  Two-family/duplex residential
                                        R-2U districts
                                      R-3  Limited multi-family residential
                                        R-3U districts
215 High density single-family attached R-3  Limited Multi-Family Residential
                                        R-3U Districts
                                      R-4  Multi-Family Residential Districts
                                        R-4U
31  Community/neighborhood commercial   C-1  Neighborhood Service Commercial
                                             District
35  Regional commercial                 C-2  General Commercial District
3   Mixed use                           C-3  Central Business District
45  Business                            I-1  Light Industrial District
                                        C/D  Corridor Development District
4   Industrial                          I-2  Heavy Industrial District
22  Mobile homes                        M    Manufactured Home Park District
6   Education                           May be appropriate in any district,
5   Parks/recreation                    subject to appropriate design and
7   Government                          buffering
 
Note:
1.   The Planned Unit Development District may be applied in any future land
use category.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-5-3: USE MATRICES AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Interpretation Of Matrices:
      1.   Use Categories And Specific Uses: Use categories listed in the first
column of tables 5-2 and 5-3 of this section are defined in section
10-2-3 of this title. Specific uses are listed in the second column of the
tables. If a specific use is listed in the tables, that use is allowed only
within the districts indicated, not within the districts that allow the broader
use category.
      2.   Permitted Uses: A "P" indicates that the listed use is allowed by
right within the respective zoning district. Permitted uses are subject to all
other applicable standards of this title.
      3.   Conditional Uses: A "C" indicates that the listed use is allowed
within the respective zoning district only after review and approval of a
conditional use permit, in accordance with the review procedures of subsection
10-4-3D of this title. Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable
standards of this title.
         4.   Prohibited Uses: A "-" indicates that the listed use type is not
allowed within the respective zoning district, unless it is otherwise expressly
allowed by other regulations of this title. Unlisted uses are prohibited and
the listing of a use as “prohibited” or “not allowed” in this section shall not
be construed to permit unlisted uses by inference.
   B.   Residential Land Use Matrix: Table 5-2 of this section lists the
principal uses allowed within residential zoning districts and uses permitted
by conditional use permit in accordance with subsection
10-4-3D of this title.
TABLE 5-2
PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
To view Table 5-2 in PDF, click HERE
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 10-O-5, 3-16-2010; Ord. 11-O-44,
10-18-2011; Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015; Ord. 18-O-4, 2-6-2018)
   C.   Nonresidential Land Use Matrix: Table 5-3 of this section lists the
principal uses allowed within nonresidential zoning districts and uses
permitted by conditional use permit in accordance with subsection
10-4-3D of this title.
TABLE 5-3
PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
To view Table 5-3 in PDF, click HERE
   D.   Uses Not Provided For In Zoning Districts: In the case where a use is
not specifically listed under any of the permitted, conditional, accessory or
temporary uses in the district regulations, the building official shall
determine the appropriate district or districts where such use shall be allowed
based on a comparison of other uses which most closely resemble the unlisted
use.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007; Ord. 10-O-5,
3-16-2010; Ord. 11-O-44, 10-18-2011; Ord. 14-O-41, 10-7-2014; Ord. 15-O-9, 1-
20-2015; Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015; Ord. 16-O-7, 3-15-2016; Ord. 17-O-41, 12-19-
2017; Ord. 18-O-3, 2-6-2018; Ord. 18-O-4, 2-6-2018; Ord. 20-O-22, 6-16-2020;
Ord. 2021-O-7, 4-6-2021; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-5-4: DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
This section
10-5-4 is made in accordance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the City.
The City is zoned in districts that are established to achieve the purposes set
forth in each district's purpose and the general purposes established in
chapter 1 of this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-1: A AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the A Agricultural District is to provide for
agricultural activities, for protection of resources such as forested areas,
waterways and areas of unusual scenic value, and at the same time, to provide
for rural residences on large lots for those who choose a rural environment and
to prevent the untimely scattering of more dense urban uses which should be
confined to areas planned for efficient extension of public services.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Section
10-5-3, table 5-2 of this chapter lists the uses authorized in the A District.
   C.   Density And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
density and dimensional standards established in section
10-8-1, table 8-1 of this title.
   D.   Performance Standards: Development shall conform to the standards
established in this title. The Public Works Director may require centralized
water and wastewater provisions based upon lot size, environmental conditions
or proximity to existing or planned utilities. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-2: RE RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The RE Residential Estate District is intended for low density
residential living in rural character subdivisions.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-2 (subsection
10-5-3C of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the RE district.
   C.   Density And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
density and dimensional standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards: Development shall conform to the standards
established in chapter 8 of this title.
   E.   Cluster Development: Cluster development, as described in section
10-8-3 of this title, may be allowed subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The density, including existing dwelling units, as determined under
chapter 8 of this title, shall not exceed the maximum zoned densities by more
than one hundred twenty percent (120%). There shall be no more than twenty (20)
dwelling units per cluster.
      2.   No minimum or maximum lot size requirement applies; provided, that
land area requirements for water supply and sewage disposal systems are met.
      3.   Clustered dwelling units shall have access from an all weather
surfaced road or highway.
      4.   An application shall be accompanied by a subdivision map depicting
each lot to be developed for clustered dwelling units.
   F.   Figure:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1554.gif]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-3: R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the R-1 single-family residence district is to
provide for conventional detached single-family residential development on
moderate sized lots where water and sewer facilities are provided. The R-
1 district is intended for application to areas where urbanization and full
utilities and public services exist or are planned in the reasonably near
future.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-2 (subsection
10-5-3A of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the R-1 district.
   C.   Density And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
density and dimensional standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards: All residences shall be limited to occupancy by
a single "family", as defined in section
10-2-3 of this title.
   E.   Figure:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1556.gif]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-4: R-2 AND R-2U TWO-FAMILY/DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the R-2 and R-2U two-family duplex dwelling
districts is to provide for a mix of single-family and duplex residential
development on small lots where water and sewer services are provided. The R-
2 and R-2U districts are intended for areas designated "210" (medium density
residential attached). These districts should serve as a transition between R-
1 districts and more intensive development. The R-2U district is intended to
apply in the university influence area designated in the comprehensive plan.
Higher occupancy rates are allowed and more stringent parking standards are
required in the R-2U district than in the R-2 district due to the influence of
the university.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-2 (subsection
10-5-3B of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the R-2 and R-2U
districts.
   C.   Density And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
density and dimensional standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards:
      1.   All residences in the R-2 district shall be limited to occupancy by
a single "family", as defined in section
10-2-3 of this title.
      2.   In the R-2U district, dwelling units may be occupied by up to five
(5) people, regardless of relationship, but not more than two (2) residents per
bedroom.
   E.   Figure:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1558.gif]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-5: R-3 AND R-3U LIMITED MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the R-3 and R-3U limited multi-family
residential districts is to provide land areas for the development of a mix of
different moderate density residential unit types which may serve as a
transition between less intensive residential areas and commercial or
university influence areas. The R-3U district is intended to apply in the
university influence area designated in the comprehensive plan. More stringent
parking standards are required in the R-3U district than in the R-3 district
due to the influence of the university.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-2 (subsection
10-5-3B of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the R-3 and R-3U
districts.
   C.   Density And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
density and dimensional standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards:
      1.   Multi-family development shall comply with the standards established
in subsection
10-8-1B9 of this title.
      2.   More stringent parking standards are applicable in the university
influence area pursuant to section
10-8-4 of this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
      3.   In the R-3 and R-3U district, single-family and multi-family
dwelling units may be occupied by not more than two (2) residents per bedroom.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
   E.   Figure:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1560.gif]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-6: R-4 AND R-4U MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the R-4 and R-4U multi-family residential
districts is to provide areas for high density multi- family development that
has convenient access to activity centers and major roadways. The density
permitted in the R-4 and R-4U districts is intended to provide for the
inclusion of adequate open space areas for residents. Greater densities or
heights may be authorized for these districts through the creation of a planned
unit development district. The R-4U district is intended to apply in the
university influence area designated in the comprehensive plan. More stringent
parking standards are required in the R-4U district than in the R-4 district
due to the influence of the university.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-2 (subsection
10-5-3B of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the R-4 and R-4U
districts.
   C.   Density And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
density and dimensional standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards:
      1.   Multi-family development shall comply with the standards established
in subsection
10-8-1B9 of this title.
      2.   More stringent parking standards are applicable in the university
influence area pursuant to section
10-8-4 of this title.
      3.   In the R-4U district, single-family and multi-family dwelling units
may be occupied by not more than two (2) residents per bedroom.
   E.   Figure:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1562.gif]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-7: C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the C-1 neighborhood service commercial
district is to provide for limited shopping and personal service uses to serve
the needs of surrounding nearby neighborhood.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-3 (subsection
10-5-3C of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the C-1 district.
   C.   Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the dimensional
standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards: Development shall conform to the following
performance standards in addition to the other provisions of this title:
      1.   A C-1 district shall be no greater than five (5) acres, nor less
than one acre in size, unless the city council finds that the proposed uses may
be established compatibly with adjacent neighborhoods.
      2.   The maximum building area within a C-1 district is ten thousand
(10,000) square feet.
      3.   No service use shall employ more than five (5) persons in a single
shift on the premises, not including employees whose principal duties are off
the premises or temporary seasonal employees.
      4.   Parking spaces may be reduced by up to fifteen percent (15%) for
retail and service uses in the C-1 district.
      5.   Outdoor storage, display or operation is prohibited.
      6.   Businesses shall not operate between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. unless authorized through a
conditional use permit. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-8: C-2 GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the C-2 general commercial district is to
provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a wide variety of
commercial activities generally serving a wide area and located particularly
along certain existing major thoroughfares where a general mixture of
commercial and service activity now exists.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-3 (subsection
10-5-3C of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the C-2 district.
   C.   Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the dimensional
standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards: Development shall conform to the following
performance standards in addition to the other provisions of this title:
      1.   All service recreation and entertainment uses, along with all drive-
in or drive-through appurtenances, shall be located a minimum of one hundred
feet (100') from any R-1 district.
      2.   Outdoor displays shall be limited to vehicles and temporary sales.
All vehicles for sale shall be less than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds' gross
weight.
      3.   All car storage lots shall be screened from any R district.
      4.   Outdoor storage, display and operations shall be screened from
adjacent R districts. Outdoor storage and operations areas, but not sales
display areas, shall be screened from view from abutting street rights of way.
      5.   Big box stores, and other buildings greater than fifty thousand
(50,000) square feet, shall be authorized only subject to a conditional use
permit. The board and council shall consider the following standards, in
addition to those established in subsection
10-4-3E of this title:
         a.   Parking lots for more than one hundred (100) vehicles shall be
split up so that seasonal and overflow parking areas are located to the side of
the building.
         b.   Landscaping shall be incorporated throughout the site with
appropriately scaled plantings that will create a natural transition between
the large and small buildings.
         c.   At least ten percent (10%) of the parking lot shall be landscaped
with additional accent plantings placed throughout the pedestrian areas
abutting the building facades. Landscaping shall be done in conformance with
chapter 8 of this title.
         d.   Outdoor storage areas, loading areas and trash receptacles shall
be located behind the buildings, but shall not be located within the access
drives or circulation paths. All such areas shall be screened from view of any
residential district or use, highways and arterials. Screening shall be done in
conformance with chapter 8 of this title.
         e.   Mechanical and electrical equipment shall be located within the
structure when possible. External equipment shall be screened or finished to
match the colors of adjacent building materials. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-9: C-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the C-3 central business district is to provide
opportunity for a broad spectrum of commercial uses (particularly retail,
service and office uses) with second floor residential uses that promote a
vibrant, pedestrian oriented business area. To promote walkability, parking
requirements are minimal and standards include maximum building setbacks
(build-to lines).
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-3 (subsection
10-5-3C of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the C-3 district.
   C.   Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the intensity and
dimensional standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards: Development shall conform to the standards
established in chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-10: I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of I-1 light industrial district is to provide for
heavy commercial and light industrial uses with minimal outdoor operations.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-3 (subsection
10-5-3C of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the I-1 district.
   C.   Intensity And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
intensity and dimensional standards established in table 8-1 (
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Performance Standards: Development shall conform to the standards
established in chapter 8 of this title. The following additional performance
standards are applicable to the I-1 district:
      1.   I-1 districts shall be located adjacent to arterials and highways.
      2.   All buildings and outdoor operating areas shall be set back a
minimum of fifty feet (50') from the property line of any residentially zoned
property; except, that the community development director, or their designee,
may authorize a reduction in the width of the setback where a type E buffer
yard is provided pursuant to section
10-8-5  of this title.
      3.   Outside storage of materials, products or equipment shall be limited
to areas of the side and rear yards and shall be screened from abutting
streets, R districts and C districts.
      4.   Loading docks shall be located in the side or rear yards; provided,
that any loading area facing a street shall be screened in accordance with
chapter 8 of this title.
      5.   Any use located within an I-1 district shall operate only in
accordance with the following minimum standards regarding vibration, smoke,
odor, noise, glare, wastes, fire hazards and hazardous materials. Conditional
uses located within the I-1 district may have higher standards of performance
placed upon them through the approval process.
         a.   Vibration: No activity or operation shall cause, at any time,
vibration of the earth perceptible without instruments; except, that vibration
caused by blasting may be conducted in accordance with requirements of the fire
department.
         b.   Smoke, Particulate Matter And Gases: All activities and
operations shall comply with the adopted air quality regulations of the
Illinois division of environmental protection, Illinois department of health
and the United States environmental protection agency.
         c.   Odor: Noxious or toxic odors discharged by the activity or
operation shall not be detectable beyond the property line of the lot on which
it is located.
         d.   Noise: No noise shall be emitted beyond the property line or
zoning district boundary line. At no time shall the volume of sound
continuously or recurrently generate more sound than sixty five (65) dB
measured at the property line or zoning district boundary line or as otherwise
regulated.
         e.   Glare: Glare from spotlights or high temperature processes,
whether direct or reflected, shall not be visible beyond the property line on
which the activity or operation is located.
         f.   Solid And Liquid Waste: All solid waste, debris and garbage shall
be contained within an approved, closed and screened dumpster(s), refuse bin(s)
and/or trash compactor(s) until removed from the site. Exterior incineration of
trash or garbage shall not be permitted 1 . Sewage and liquid wastes shall be
discharged only in full compliance with applicable county, state and federal
laws.
         g.   Fire Hazards: Activities or operations within the I-1 district
shall be operated in conformance with the requirements of the fire department
and any applicable state regulations.
         h.   Hazardous Materials: Activities or operations within I-1 district
shall provide a list of all materials to be used or located on the site,
whether on a full time or part time basis, that are covered by SARA title III
community right to know. This information shall be provided at the time of site
plan review. If the activity or operation is existing and is a change of use or
expansion, such information shall be provided to the community development
director, or their designee, with the change of use permit application or other
required permit, but prior to the introduction of the hazardous materials to
the site. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection
  4-3-4C of this code.
10-5-4-11: I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the I-2 heavy industrial district is to provide
for a wide variety of manufacturing, fabricating, processing, wholesale
distributing and warehousing uses appropriately located for access by major
thoroughfares or railroads, but to restrict or prohibit those industries which
have characteristics likely to produce negative impacts or adverse effects
within or beyond the limits of the district.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-3 (subsection
10-5-3C of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the I-2 district.
   C.   Intensity And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
intensity and dimensional standards established in table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title).
   D.   Special Conditions: The performance standards for the I-1 district,
subsection
10-5-4-10D5 of this chapter, shall apply to land uses located in the I-
2 district in addition the following standards:
      1.   I-2 districts shall be at least ten (10) acres in size and shall not
require access from local or collector streets passing through residential
districts.
      2.   All buildings and outdoor operating areas shall be set back a
minimum of fifty feet (50') from the property line of any residentially zoned
property; except, that the community development director, or their designee,
may authorize a reduction in the width of the setback where a type E buffer
yard is provided pursuant to section
10-8-5 of this title.
      3.   Outside storage of materials, products or equipment shall be limited
to areas of the side and rear yards and shall be screened from abutting
streets, R districts and C districts.
      4.   Loading docks shall be located in the side or rear yards; provided,
that any loading area facing a street shall be screened in accordance with
chapter 8 of this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-
2025)
10-5-4-12: C/D CORRIDOR DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the C/D corridor development district is to
encourage economic development activity along the Route 16 corridor between the
cities of Charleston and Mattoon, thus expanding employment opportunities in
Coles County and enhancing its tax base. The C/D district is founded on a
cooperative working relationship between those parties with an interest in
encouraging the economic development in the county and facilitating quality
development along the corridor. To that end, the requirements of the C/
D district are intended to encourage development that both enhances the economy
of the county and the aesthetics of the area, and maintains and encourages
environmental quality.
   B.   Authorized Uses: Table 5-3 (subsection
10-5-3C of this chapter) lists the uses authorized in the C/D district.
   C.   Prohibited Uses: Authorized uses in table 5-3 (subsection
10-5-3C of this chapter) shall not be construed to include the following uses
that are prohibited in the C/D district:
Asphalt plants.
Auto salvage yards.
Batching plants.
Commercial feedlots.
Concrete plants.
Foundry.
Hides, skins, and raw furs processing.
Junkyards.
Landfills.
Refuse incinerators.
Residential uses on zoning lots smaller than ten (10) acres in size.
Slaughterhouses.
   D.   Lot Controls:
      1.   Minimum Lot Size:
         a.   The minimum lot size for a zoning lot, any part of which is
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of Route 16, shall be two (2) acres
(87,120 square feet).
         b.   The minimum lot size for a zoning lot located more than one
thousand feet (1,000') from Route 16 shall be one acre (43,560 square feet).
      2.   Minimum Lot Width:
         a.   The minimum lot width for a zoning lot, any part of which is
located within one thousand feet (1,000') of Route 16, shall be two hundred
feet (200').
         b.   The minimum lot width for a zoning lot located more than one
thousand feet (1,000') from the Route 16 right of way shall be one hundred feet
(100').
      3.   Corridor Open Space:
         a.   In order to ensure quality development and preserve views along
Route 16, a corridor open space is established abutting Route 16. The open
space corridor shall be located in the one hundred feet (100') closest to the
property lines abutting Route 16. The fifty feet (50') of the open space
corridor closest to Route 16 shall be defined as the "front fifty feet (50')".
The fifty feet (50') of the open space corridor located farthest from Route 16
shall be defined as the "rear fifty feet (50')". Unless otherwise noted in this
section, no activities or obstructions other than as listed in this section
shall be allowed in the front fifty feet (50') of this open space area, as
measured perpendicular from the property line abutting Route 16, and this area
shall be planted and maintained with live landscape material.
         b.   Parking, as required under subsection E7 of this section, shall
be permitted within the rear fifty feet (50') from Route 16. Should parking be
located within this portion of the corridor open space, it shall be landscaped
as required in subsection E9 of this section.
         c.   Low profile ground signs, as permitted in subsection E6c(2) of
this section, shall be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from Route 16.
         d.   Directional signs, as permitted by subsection E6c(4) of this
section, shall be permitted in the corridor open space when said signs are used
in indication of the site ingress and egress.
         e.   The one hundred foot (100') corridor open space is to be
landscaped as required in subsection E9d of this section.
         f.   Pole signs, as permitted by subsection E6c(3) of this section,
shall be set back at least fifty feet (50') from Route 16.
         g.   Signs not listed in this section are prohibited in the open space
corridor.
      4.   Yard Requirements:
         a.   All structures shall be set back a distance of at least twenty
five feet (25') from all front, side and rear lot lines and the corridor open
space.
         b.   In the case of zoning lots adjacent to major roads in the C/
D district, all structures shall be set back a distance of at least fifty feet
(50') from the road. Major roads shall be defined as Loxa Road, Old State Road,
and Township Roads 800N, 1050E, 1200E, 1230E, 1300E, 1350E and 1400E.
      5.   Transitional Yards:
         a.   There shall be established a transitional yard of the first fifty
feet (50') abutting the edge of the C/D district. Open storage, refuse
containers or other structures accessory or otherwise, shall not be located
within the transitional yard and shall be adequately screened from view if
visible from any residential lot(s).
         b.   Every parking lot in a transitional yard shall be buffered and
screened by a perimeter landscaped open space having a width of at least five
feet (5'). The landscaping and screening treatment of such space shall be
designed and maintained to a height of at least three feet (3') above the
surface of the parking lot.
      6.   Height:
         a.   Structures located on a zoning lot, any part of which is located
within one thousand feet (1,000') of Route 16, shall have a maximum height of
sixty feet (60').
         b.   Structures located within two hundred feet (200') of the C/
D district boundary shall have a maximum height of thirty five feet (35').
         c.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, all structures in the C/D district
shall also be subject to the height limitation established by the Coles County
memorial airport hazard zoning regulations, as directed by subsection E2 of
this section.
      7.   Maximum Lot Coverage: The maximum coverage of any zoning lot within
the C/D district by buildings, parking, roads or any other impervious surface
shall not exceed seventy percent (70%).
   E.   General Requirements And Restrictions:
      1.   Nonconforming Uses: Where, at the effective date hereof, a lawful
use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of the C/
D district, such use may continue subject to the nonconforming use provisions
of chapter 6 of this title.
      2.   Airport Restrictions: Any development within the C/D district that
is also within the area controlled by the Coles County memorial airport hazard
zoning regulations must meet the requirements of both sets of regulations. In
cases where differences exist between the two (2) regulations, the more
restrictive standard shall apply.
      3.   Performance Standards: All uses in the C/D district which require
buildings and/or open areas for manufacturing, fabrication, processing,
extraction, heavy repairing, dismantling, storage or disposal of equipment, raw
materials, manufactured products or wastes shall conform to the performance
standards defined in subsection
10-5-4-10D5 of this chapter as concerns smoke, fly ash, dust, odor, gases and
fumes, glare, vibration, and noise and sound.
      4.   Severe Slope Restrictions: To protect the visual and environmental
quality of the C/D district, no building shall be constructed on any portion of
a zoning lot that exceeds a thirty percent (30%) slope. In addition, all
buildings and structures shall be set back from the toe of the slope a minimum
of ten feet (10') and an average of twenty feet (20').
      5.   Curb Cuts:
         a.   In order for the city to support an application to the Illinois
department of transportation for a new vehicular ingress/egress onto Route 16,
the zoning lot which will gain access to Route 16 must conform to the
requirements of this subsection E5.
         b.   Vehicular ingress/egress onto Route 16 shall be permitted only if
it:
            (1)   Is at least twenty (20) acres in size.
            (2)   Has a minimum frontage on Route 16 of one thousand feet
(1,000').
            (3)   Is not within one thousand two hundred fifty feet (1,250') of
an existing road or curb cut.
         c.   As a condition of approving any development with a curb cut onto
Route 16, the owner shall grant an easement for the purpose of linking adjacent
properties with an access road. Such easement shall be fifty feet (50') in
width, parallel and abutting the property line along Route 16. The access road
shall be centered within the easement. Such road will be utilized in cases
where an applicant meets the requirements of subsections E5b(1) and E5b(2), but
not subsection E5b(3) of this section.
         d.   Access roads in the C/D district will be constructed to the
specifications defined in chapter 8 of this title, except as defined otherwise
in this subsection E5. The applicant for whom the access road is constructed
will bear responsibility of construction and maintenance of the access road,
and submit to the city a letter of credit, which sum shall ensure adequate
design, construction and maintenance of the road. The terms of the letter of
credit, as to period and amount, shall be established by the city council.
         e.   Where a zoning lot has access from a road that intersects with
Route 16, the centerline of the road; provided, that access shall be at least
one hundred fifty feet (150') from the Route 16 right of way.
      6.   Signs:
         a.   Master Sign Plan Required: For any zoning lot on which the owner
proposes to erect one or more signs, the owner, their agent or assignee shall
submit a master signage plan to the community development director, or their
designee. The building official shall approve the master signage plan, which
will meet the requirements of this subsection E6, prior to the issuance of a
building permit, and all signs placed on the zoning lot shall conform to the
master signage plan and the requirements of this subsection E6. Such plan may
be amended, from time to time, upon approval by the community development
director, or their designee. The master signage plan shall contain the
following information:
            (1)   An accurate plot plan of the zoning lot, at a specified
scale.
            (2)   The location of all buildings, parking, driveways and
landscaped areas on the zoning lot.
            (3)   The computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum
area for each individual sign, the height of each individual sign and the total
number of signs to be erected on the zoning lot.
            (4)   An accurate indication on the plan of the proposed location
of each present and future sign, except temporary signs need not be shown.
         b.   Maximum Sign Area:
            (1)   Maximum Total Sign Area: The maximum total sign area for all
signs on a zoning lot in the C/D district, except incidental signs, building
markers and temporary signs, shall not exceed the lesser of the following:
               (A)   Maximum number of total square feet: Five hundred (500).
               (B)   Square feet of signage per linear foot of street frontage:
One (1.0).
            (2)   Lots Fronting On Two Or More Streets: Lots fronting on two
(2) or more streets are allowed the permitted sign area for each street
frontage. However, the total sign area that is oriented toward a particular
street may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign area allocations that
is derived from the lot, building or wall area frontage on that street.
            (3)   Computation Of Area Of Individual Signs: The area of a sign
face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one
face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or
color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence
or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets the regulations of this title
and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
            (4)   Computation Of Area Of Multi-Faced Signs: The sign area for a
sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of
all sign faces visible from any one point. When two (2) identical sign faces
are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at
the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and
are not more than forty two inches (42") apart, the sign area shall be computed
by the measurement of one of the faces.
            (5)   Computation Of Height: The height of a sign shall be computed
as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be
the lower of: a) existing grade prior to construction; or b) the newly
established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming,
mounding or excavating, solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases
in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be
computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base
of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a
public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the
principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower.
         c.   Permitted Signs: The following signs are permitted in the C/
D district:
            (1)   Flat signs; provided, that such signs shall not extend more
than twenty four inches (24") from the wall or building to which they are
attached, the bottom of such signs shall be at least ten feet (10') above
grade, and such signs shall not cover or block any window, opening,
architectural feature or architectural detail. The sign and any appurtenant
devices or structural supports shall not project above the cornice or fascia of
the building to which it is attached.
            (2)   Low profile ground signs; provided, there shall be only one
sign per street frontage; and further provided, that each such sign shall not
exceed a height of eight feet (8') and an area of ninety six (96) square feet.
            (3)   Pole signs; provided, that there shall be only one sign per
street frontage; and further provided, that each such sign shall not exceed a
height of twenty five feet (25') and an area of one hundred twenty five (125)
square feet.
            (4)   Directional signs; provided, the total aggregate sign area of
all incidental signs shall not exceed forty eight (48) square feet; and further
provided, that each individual sign shall not exceed a height of three feet
(3').
            (5)   Temporary real estate signs; provided, there shall be only
one sign per street frontage; and further provided, that each sign shall not
exceed an area of twelve (12) square feet and a height of five feet (5').
Temporary real estate signs shall be removed from the property upon the
completion or discontinuance of the sale of said property.
            (6)   Temporary construction signs; provided, there shall be only
one sign per street frontage; and further provided, that each sign shall not
exceed an area of twelve (12) square feet and a height of five feet (5').
Temporary construction signs shall be removed from the property upon the
completion or discontinuance of said construction.
            (7)   Temporary noncommercial signs; provided, that such signs for
purposes of public elections are displayed not more than thirty (30) days prior
to the election and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the date of
the election for which they are displayed.
            (8)   Governmental signs.
            (9)   Corporate flags, flags of the United States, the state, the
city, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, and
any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of
competent jurisdiction; provided, that such flags shall be limited to a total
of four (4), and each flag shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area and
shall not be flown from a pole, the top of which is more than forty feet (40')
in height. These flags shall be flown in accordance with the protocol
established by the congress of the United States for the stars and stripes.
            (10)   Building marker; provided, such sign shall not exceed an
area of four (4) square feet.
            (11)   An industrial/business park containing at least four (4)
sites or ten (10) acres may be permitted one directory sign identifying the
industrial/business park by name and identifying the occupants of the
industrial/business park. Said sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet in size for the first ten (10) acres of the industrial/business park area,
plus one hundred (100) square feet for each additional ten (10) acre increment
of the industrial/business park area, to a total of four hundred (400) square
feet. The portion of the directory sign area dedicated any given tenant shall
be deducted from that tenant's allowable sign area, as controlled by subsection
E6b(1) of this section.
         d.   General Requirements: The following general requirements shall
apply to all signs in the C/D district:
            (1)   All signs, except noncommercial messages, shall be
appurtenant to a permitted use of the property on which displayed.
            (2)   No sign shall exceed a height of fifteen feet (15') when said
sign is located on a lot on which the primary use of the property is
agricultural or the property is vacant.
            (3)   No sign shall be erected in any location where, by reason of
its position, it will obstruct the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal,
or other traffic control device.
            (4)   No spotlight, floodlight or lighted sign shall be installed
in any way which will permit the rays of such sign's light to penetrate beyond
the property on which such light or lighted sign is located in such manner as
to constitute a nuisance.
            (5)   All signs shall be imprinted with the sign owner's name and
address and the sign erector's name and address. Signs not carrying such an
imprint will be presumed to be owned by the person in possession of the
property on which the sign is located.
            (6)   All signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the
building code, the fire code, and the electrical code of the city.
            (7)   All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition
and in compliance with all applicable city codes as well as the provisions
contained in this section.
            (8)   No sign shall be animated in the C/D district.
            (9)   No signs shall be erected upon or project through the roof of
any building nor shall any sign attached to a building extend above the
roofline.
            (10)   Notwithstanding any other provisions in this section, the
following signs shall be exempted from these regulations and need not be
designated in the master sign plan:
               (A)   Official signs promulgated by municipalities, state
government, special districts or the department of transportation.
               (B)   Signs affixed by public utilities to their poles and other
facilities for identification.
            (11)   No sign may be erected or maintained which contains,
includes or is illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving lights
except those giving public service information such as weather, date and
temperature.
            (12)   No sign may be erected or maintained which is not
effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being
directed at any portion of the traveled way of any street or road so as to
cause glare or impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle.
            (13)   Structures for any ground or pole sign shall be more than
one hundred feet (100') from any other structure for a ground or pole sign.
This requirement shall not apply to structures which are separated or screened
by buildings, natural surroundings or other obstructions in such a manner that
only one sign face located within such distance is visible at any one time.
            (14)   Vehicles with exterior markings of any size, identifying or
advertising a commercial enterprise, shall not be stored in any front or corner
side yard. Such vehicles shall also be screened from view from all adjoining
properties and streets.
         e.   Legal Nonconforming Signs:
            (1)   Any legal nonconforming sign may continue in use and be
maintained for life of the sign in order to amortize the investment therein.
            (2)   A legal nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended.
            (3)   Any legal nonconforming sign damaged by fire, flood,
explosion, war, riot or act of God may be restored or reconstructed; provided,
that said restoration or reconstruction does not expand the preexisting
nonconformity and is completed within two (2) months.
      7.   Parking Requirements:
         a.   The off street parking requirements for uses permitted in the C/
D district shall be as follows:
Type Of Use Parking Space Required
Type Of Use                       Parking Space Required
Commercial, retail                4 per 1,000 square feet of building area
Commercial, wholesale             1 per 1,000 square feet of building area
Distribution                      1 per 1,000 square feet of building area
Educational institutions/services 3 per 1,000 square feet of building area
Health/medical services           3 per 1,000 square feet of building area
Manufacturing/assembly/           2.5 per 1,000 square feet of building area
production of materials
Offices                           3 per 1,000 square feet of building area
Storage                           1 per 1,000 square feet of building area
 
         b.   Off street parking shall not be located in any yards in the C/
D district, except as otherwise permitted in this subsection.
      8.   Loading Requirements:
         a.   The off street loading berths required for uses permitted in the
C/D district shall be as follows:
Type Of Use Loading Space Required
Type Of Use                       Loading Space Required
Commercial, retail                1 per 10,000 square feet of building area
Commercial, wholesale             1 per 10,000 square feet of building area
Distribution                      1 per 10,000 square feet of building area
Educational institutions/services 1 per 100,000 square feet of building area
Health/medical services           1 per 100,000 square feet of building area
Manufacturing/assembly/           1 per 10,000 square feet of building area
production of materials
Offices                           1 per 100,000 square feet of building area
Storage                           1 per 40,000 square feet of building area
 
         b.   No loading dock shall be located in the front yard of any zoning
lot in the C/D district.
         c.   No loading dock shall be located within the open space corridor
or any transitional yard.
         d.   Screening of the loading dock shall be in conformance with
subsection E9 of this section.
      9.   Landscaping And Screening:
         a.   Landscape Plan: A landscape plan shall be required for all
exterior construction and development activity. Such landscape plan shall be
drawn in conformance with the requirements specified herein. Landscape plans
must be approved by the community development director, or their designee,
prior to the issuance of a building permit for exterior construction and
development. All landscape plans submitted for approval shall contain or have
attached the following information unless certain requirements are waived by
the community development director, or their designee, due to nonapplicability:
            (1)   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures, aboveground or belowground utilities, parking lots and drives,
roadways and rights of way, sidewalks, bicycle paths, ground signs, refuse
disposal areas, bicycle parking areas, fences, freestanding electrical
equipment, tot lots and other recreational facilities, and other freestanding
structural features as determined necessary by the community development
director, or their designee. This drawing may be incorporated with the master
signage plan as determined by subsection E6a of this section.
            (2)   The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and
common names, of all proposed planting materials.
            (3)   The location of existing buildings, structures and plant
materials on adjacent public or private property within twenty feet (20') of
the site.
            (4)   Existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours
at two foot (2') intervals; proposed berming, indicating contours at one foot
(1') intervals.
            (5)   Specification of the size and type and boundaries of all
proposed ground cover.
            (6)   The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and
common names, of all existing planting materials.
            (7)   Elevations of all fences proposed for location on the site.
            (8)   Elevations, cross sections and other details as determined
necessary by the community development director, or their designee.
         b.   Selection, Installation And Maintenance Of Plant Materials:
            (1)   Planting materials used in conformance with the provisions
contained herein shall be of good quality, of a species normally grown in
central Illinois, and capable of withstanding the extremes of individual site
microclimates. Size and density of plant material, both at the time of planting
and at maturity, are additional criteria which must be considered when
selecting plant materials.
            (2)   All landscaping materials shall be installed in accordance
with the current planting procedures established by the American Association of
Nurserymen. The installation of all plant material required by this subsection
E9 may be delayed until the next optimal planting season, that being the period
between April 1 and October 30.
            (3)   The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials and barriers,
including refuse disposal areas and street rights of way, as may be required by
the provisions of this section.
            (4)   All landscaping materials shall be maintained in good
condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, and plant
material not in this condition shall be replaced when necessary and shall be
kept free of refuse and debris. Fences, walls and other barriers shall be
maintained in good repair.
         c.   Design Criteria: Landscape plans described in subsection E9a of
this section shall be prepared based on the following design criteria. The
evaluation and approval of landscape plans shall also be based on these design
criteria:
            (1)   The scale and nature of landscaping materials should be
appropriate to the size of the structures and surrounding existing materials.
Large scaled buildings, for example, should generally be complemented by larger
scaled plants.
            (2)   Plant material should be selected for its form, texture,
color, pattern of growth and adaptability to local conditions.
            (3)   Evergreens should be incorporated into the landscape
treatment of a site, particularly in those areas screening parking lots.
            (4)   All shade trees and ornamental trees shall have a minimum
trunk size of two and one-half inches (21/2") in diameter upon installation, as
measured six inches (6") above the established ground level.
            (5)   Plant material should be placed intermittently against long
expanses of building walls, fences and other barriers to minimize the stark
appearance and create a softening effect.
            (6)   Planting beds should be mulched with bark chips, feather
rocks or similar materials. Mulch shall not be used as a substitute for plant
materials.
            (7)   Detention/retention basins and ponds shall be landscaped.
Such landscaping should include shade and ornamental trees, evergreens,
shrubbery, hedges, sod and/or other planting materials.
            (8)   Deciduous trees should be placed on the south and west sides
of the building to provide shade from the summer sun. Evergreens and other
materials should be concentrated on the north side of buildings to dissipate
the effect of winter winds.
            (9)   Existing plant material shall, wherever practical as
determined by the building official, be incorporated into the landscape
treatment of a site. The removal of trees within public rights of way is
expressly forbidden without the approval of the community development director,
or their designee.
            (10)   Earthen berms and existing topographic features should be,
whenever determined practical by the community development director, or their
designee, incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site, particularly
when combined with plant material to facilitate screening.
         d.   Open Space Corridor And Transitional Yards:
            (1)   Except as provided elsewhere in this subsection E9, the open
space corridor and all transitional yards shall be devoted exclusively to
landscaping. Driveways and sidewalks needed to serve a permitted use may be
located within the open space corridor and transitional yards subject to the
requirements of subsection E5 of this section and approval of the community
development director, or their designee.
            (2)   Landscaping for the open space corridor and transitional
yards shall consist of a combination of ground cover, shade trees, ornamental
trees and shrubs, decorative paving material and appropriate screening devices
such as decorative walls or berms. The use of shade trees and ornamental trees
shall be provided at the rate of one tree for every fifty (50) linear feet of
landscaped open space. Evergreen trees may be substituted for shade trees or
ornamental trees upon approval of the community development director, or their
designee. Ornamental shrubs shall be provided at a rate of one shrub for every
fifty (50) linear feet of landscaped open space and, except as otherwise
required, shall be maintained at a height of not more than four feet (4'). A
mixture of shrub species shall be provided, of which at least twenty five
percent (25%) shall be evergreen. Areas not planted with shrubs or trees shall
be maintained with ground cover.
            (3)   Where, as permitted under subsection E7b of this section,
parking is provided in the rear fifty feet (50') of the corridor open space,
the parking lot shall be buffered and screened by a perimeter landscaped open
space having a width of at least five feet (5'). The landscaping and screening
treatment of such space shall be designed and maintained to a height of at
least three feet (3') above the surface of the parking lot.
         e.   Refuse Containers, Outdoor Storage And Loading Docks:
            (1)   All refuse containers and all areas of permitted outdoor
storage shall be fully enclosed by an opaque fence, wall or densely planted
evergreen hedge of a height sufficient to completely screen such containers or
storage areas from view from all adjoining properties and all streets.
            (2)   No refuse containers or storage areas shall be located within
any required yard.
            (3)   Outdoor storage of semitractor-trailers, heavy construction
vehicles and agricultural vehicles, as permitted in this section, shall not
require screening, except as controlled by subsection E6d(14) of this section.
            (4)   Screening for loading docks and service areas shall be a
minimum of six feet (6') and entirely screen the area from public right of way
and incorporate materials and finishes similar or compatible with those of the
primary structures.
         f.   Parking Lots: Every parking lot shall be buffered by a perimeter
landscaped open space of at least five feet (5'). The landscaping treatment of
such space shall be designed and maintained with ground cover, or a combination
of ground cover, ornamental shrubs, and trees, unless otherwise specified in
this section.
   F.   Approval Process: Site plan review shall be required pursuant to the
provisions of this subsection in addition to the other requirements of this
section before building permits may be issued, and shall apply to all uses
whether permitted, conditional or accessory. The following regulations shall
apply generally to all uses contained within the C/D district:
      1.   Intent: The intent of this subsection is to promote safe and
efficient use of land, to contribute to an orderly and harmonious appearance of
the Route 16 corridor, and to further enhance property values. The site plan
review process is intended to help ensure that newly developed properties and
redeveloped properties are compatible with adjacent development, and that
adverse impacts of development are minimized. The site plan review process in
the C/D district is to provide for review of:
         a.   Compatibility of a project with its environment, other land uses
and existing buildings in the area.
         b.   Compatibility of a project with the site plan review criteria for
development of the Route 16 corridor, as defined in subsection F5 of this
section.
         c.   Compliance of a project with the use, lot, and general
requirements of this zoning district, as depicted in Route 16 corridor design
manual.
      2.   Hearing Body: A corridor review committee (hereafter referred to as
the CRC) is hereby authorized to hear and make recommendations to the city
council on uses proposed in the C/D district. The CRC shall consist of a
representative from each of the following:
         a.   The city of Charleston city council.
         b.   The city of Mattoon city council.
         c.   The city of Charleston board of zoning appeals and planning.
         d.   The city of Mattoon plan commission.
         e.   Coles Together.
         f.   Coles County airport authority.
         g.   Corridor zone land owners' associations.
      3.   Procedures: Prior to issuance of a building permit, all development
within the C/D district that does not conform to the requirements of this
section, must be approved by the city council in conformance with the following
process:
      a.   Applicant will complete an application for zoning compliance in the
C/D district on forms provided by the city.
      b.   Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of an application for zoning
compliance approval, the community development director, or their designee,
shall schedule the applicant before the next available plan review meeting of
the CRC and shall notify the public of such meeting in conformance with the
requirements of a type 3 permit application in accordance with section
10-4-1 of this title.
      c.   The CRC shall conduct a plan review hearing to consider the merits
of the development proposal and its compliance with the standards of the C/
D district.
      d.   Upon completion of the hearing, the CRC shall make a recommendation
to the city council regarding compliance of the proposed development with the
requirements of this section.
      e.   The community development director, or their designee, shall
schedule a public hearing before the city council within thirty (30) days, and
shall make a public notice regarding the city council hearing, in compliance
with section
10-4-1 of this title.
      f.   Upon completion of the public hearing, the council shall vote to
approve or deny the plan or to approve the plan subject to specific
modifications. The mayor shall sign a concept plan, noting any approved or
required changes from said plan, and file it with the community development
director, or their designee.
      g.   Upon application for building permit, the community development
director, or their designee, shall compare the building permit application to
the filed concept plan. The building permit application must substantially
conform to the concept plan and fully comply with the requirements of this
section.
      h.   Requests for departures from approved plans will be required to
follow the same procedure as outlined in this section.
      4.   Submission Requirements:
         a.   A concept plan including the following information shall be
prepared by the applicant and submitted to the CRC at the formal review
meeting:
            (1)   Land use on the site.
            (2)   Land uses within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property.
            (3)   Location of available utilities.
            (4)   Property boundaries.
            (5)   Topographical data showing floodplain, if any.
            (6)   Access points to the site.
            (7)   Location of buildings.
            (8)   Distances for setbacks and height.
            (9)   Tabulation of relevant lot and building data.
            (10)   Address and phone of applicant.
            (11)   Scale and north arrow.
            (12)   Location and direction of surface and subsurface drainage
and retention.
         b.   The CRC may, by majority vote, require that the landscape plan
(subsection E9 of this section) and master sign plan (subsection E6 of this
section) be presented at their formal review meeting.
      5.   Review Criteria: In evaluating a concept plan for development in the
C/D district, the CRC shall consider how the proposed plan meets the following
land use and design criteria:
         a.   Land Use Criteria:
            (1)   Avoid incompatibilities with larger existing users in
corridor (i.e., Coles County memorial airport and Sarah Bush Lincoln Hospital),
understanding that they are important economic development components of the
corridor and county.
            (2)   Focus office/commercial/light industrial development
(enclosed activities) along the frontage of Route 16 to enhance its appearance
and image.
            (3)   Locate industrial uses which may have an adverse impact on
the appearance and image of the corridor away from Route 16.
            (4)   Attract airport related uses near the airport.
            (5)   Attract additional medical related uses near the hospital.
            (6)   Facilitate reuse or redevelopment of residential structures
along Route 16 for commercial uses.
         b.   Design Criteria:
            (1)   Avoid overburdening of soil, air, water or infrastructure in
the Route 16 corridor.
            (2)   Protect and enhance open/recreation uses in the study area,
particularly the Charleston county club, the hiking/biking trail, wooded areas
and creeks and rivers.
            (3)   Encourage redevelopment of older nonproductive uses.
            (4)   Build private roads to public standards.
            (5)   Protect residential uses from adverse impacts of
nonresidential activities.
            (6)   Minimize changes in natural terrain.
            (7)   Separate residential uses from major noise producing sources.
            (8)   Separate internal traffic circulation from parking aisles.
            (9)   Minimize visual impact of parking visible from the street.
            (10)   Minimize impacts of airport noise.  (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003;
amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025; Ord. 2025-O-22, 5-6-2025)
10-5-4-13: M MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the M manufactured home park district is to
provide for the creation of planned manufactured home developments in
appropriate locations. Manufactured home parks are intended to provide all the
amenities of a small neighborhood, including shelters, open space and
recreational facilities.
   B.   Authorized Uses: In addition to manufactured homes, a manufactured home
park may include a clubhouse and a store for residents of the park that does
not exceed twenty five (25) square feet per manufactured home in the park.
   C.   Development Standards: The development standards in section
10-7-18 of this title shall apply to manufactured home parks in addition to the
other requirements of this title. Manufactured home parks shall include at
least five (5) acres to provide adequate area for required improvements and
buffers.
   D.   Transfer Of Ownership: All land within a manufactured home park shall
remain under common ownership, and no person shall sell, convey, or transfer
ownership of any property or any portion thereof.
   E.   M Zone Designation: The applicant for the creation or expansion of a
manufactured home park shall submit a detailed scaled site plan illustrating
sufficient information to ensure compliance with the regulations of this title.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-14: PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 1 :
   A.   Purpose: The PUD district is an overlay district that provides the
flexibility to deviate from the setbacks, street widths and land use
limitations applicable in conventional zoning districts. The district is
intended to:
      1.   Encourage innovative land planning and site design concepts, and
mixed use development through greater design and land use flexibility;
      2.   Include landscaping, passive and/or active recreation areas, open
space, trails and greenways, preservation of special natural and historic
features, or some other site amenities that contribute to the creation of an
exceptional development that will be a long term asset to users of the site and
the city as a whole;
      3.   Encourage the conservation and more efficient use of open space
ancillary to the development;
      4.   Encourage the efficient use of land, and to reflect changes in land
development and service delivery so that there are economic benefits to the
public and the applicant;
      5.   Promote the integration of commercial, recreational and educational
facilities and residential uses;
      6.   Encourage development of well located, clean, safe and pleasant
industrial and business park sites;
      7.   Lessen the burden of traffic on streets, roads and highways; and
      8.   Achieve other comprehensive plan goals.
   B.   Authorized Uses: The council shall determine the appropriate uses in a
PUD at the time of the PUD application and attach a list of authorized uses to
each approved PUD plan.
   C.   Density And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
density and dimensional standards of the underlying district established in
table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title), except as expressly approved in the PUD plan. Densities
greater than those designated in the adopted future land use plan shall be
based on the compatibility of the proposed development with adjacent uses, the
adequacy of facilities and services and the amenities provided for users of the
development. The intensity of nonresidential development shall be established
as a maximum floor area ratio (FAR) at the time of planned development
approval. In determining the maximum FAR, the board of zoning appeals and
planning and city council shall consider:
      1.   The intensity of adjacent development;
      2.   Demands for the nonresidential development proposed in the PUD;
      3.   The mix of residential and nonresidential development in the
vicinity;
      4.   The adequacy of transportation facilities, including streets,
parking, transit facilities and bicycle/pedestrian facilities; and
      5.   The adequacy of utilities and public facilities and services.
   D.   Performance Standards: Development shall conform to the standards
established in this title. The following additional performance standards are
applicable to the PUD district:
      1.   Dimensional Standards: All dimensional standards established in
chapter 8 of this title shall apply to development within the planned
development unless the city council finds that potential negative impacts of
proposed exceptions to minimum standards are fully mitigated and are offset by
community amenities provided in the development. Furthermore, the applicant
must meet the following standards:
         a.   Setback Standards: Building setbacks shall not be less than the
minimum setback standards established in chapter 8 of this title for the
underlying district unless the applicant can demonstrate that:
            (1)   Buildings can be designed safely and compatibly with lesser
setbacks;
            (2)   Reduced setbacks are offset by the provision of readily
accessible private or common open space;
            (3)   Modified setbacks provide for the protection of steep
hillsides, wetlands or other environmentally sensitive natural features; and
            (4)   All buildings are provided with adequate emergency access for
fire protection.
         b.   Architectural Standards: The architecture of the nonresidential
construction shall be compatible with the adjacent residential development.
Residential development restrictions may be required as part of the development
approval process.
      2.   Community Amenities: Deviation from the standards may be recommended
by the board and approved by the city council subject to the provision of the
following community amenities:
         a.   Transportation amenities, including additional trails, bike or
pedestrian amenities, and transit oriented improvements (including school bus
shelters);
         b.   Excess park land dedication and facilities for active or passive
recreation;
         c.   Open space or agricultural land reservation;
         d.   Community facilities for provision of public services beyond
those required for development within the PUD; or
         e.   Other provisions in excess of minimum standards that the board
and the city council find provide sufficient community benefit to offset the
proposed deviation from strict development standards. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-4-3C of this title for application, review and approval procedures.
10-5-4-15: AOD AIRPORT OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the AOD airport overlay district is to ensure
that the development and use of land does not interfere with normal use of the
county airport.
   B.   Authorized Uses: All uses authorized by the underlying zoning district
shall be allowed except as limited by federal aviation administration
regulations.
   C.   Density And Dimensional Standards: Development shall conform to the
density and dimensional standards of the underlying district established in
table 8-1 (subsection
10-8-1C of this title); except, that height standards are limited in accordance
with subsection D of this section.
   D.   Performance Standards: The airport protection zone overlay district
(APZOD) special height regulations, as mandated by the department of
transportation, federal aviation administration, federal aviation regulations,
14 CFR part 77, 1996, and as shown on the county airport height zoning map,
which are both incorporated by reference hereto, shall apply to any airport
land, other than a helicopter landing facility, owned and operated by a public
agency, and shall be applied in combination with the underlying zoning district
classification. The location of the APZOD boundaries is generally shown on the
development plan map in the comprehensive plan and in the Charleston airport
height zoning map. The airport layout plan (ALP), on file at the county
airport, shall be referred to for the exact location of APZOD boundaries, and
all development shall be in compliance with the ALP and the applicable federal
aviation regulations. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-16: FHOD FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY DISTRICT:
Development within the flood hazard overlay district (FHOD) shall be in
conformance with title 9, chapter 11 of this code, which is incorporated by
reference herein. These standards shall be applied in combination with the
underlying zoning district classification. The exact location of the flood
hazard boundaries for a lot or parcel shall be as indicated on the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) for the area in which the particular lot or parcel is
located. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-5-4-17: GOVT GOVERNMENT DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the GOVT government district is to ensure that
the development and use of land is consistent with governmental purposes.
   B.   Authorized Uses: All uses authorized by the governmental unit shall be
allowed except as limited by federal aviation administration regulations. All
governmental owned property shall be classified as being in the government
district.
   C.   Performance Standards: Development shall conform to the general
development standards established in this title.
   D.   Nongovernmental Uses: If governmental land is transferred to private
ownership, the zoning designation of the land shall be automatically
reclassified as the most restrictive adjacent zoning district. Private
development shall conform to the general development standards for the
redesignated zoning district as established in this title. (Ord. 09-O-60, 12-1-
2009)
10-5-4-18: RTA RESIDENTIAL TRANSITION AREA OVERLAY DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the RTA residential transition area overlay
district is to ensure that the development and use of land provides for an
appropriate transition from higher intensity developments to single-family
residential developments with consideration for the intensity of adjacent
developments.
   B.   Authorized Uses: All uses authorized by the underlying zoning district
shall be allowed.
   C.   General Development Standards: Development shall conform to the general
development standards of the underlying district established in this title;
except, that height standards are limited in accordance with subsection D of
this section.
   D.   Performance Standards: All development in the residential transition
area overlay district (RTA) shall be limited to thirty five feet (35') or two
and one-half (21/2) stories as the maximum height. (Ord. 09-O-60, 12-1-2009)
CHAPTER 6
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose
10-6-2: Continuation, Completion Of Nonconforming Projects
10-6-3: Nonconforming Lots Of Record And Use
10-6-4: Expansion, Improvement, Restoration And Maintenance Of Nonconformity
10-6-5: Certificate Of Nonconformity
10-6-6: Change In Use
10-6-7: Nonconforming Parking
10-6-8: Nonconforming Signs
10-6-9: Abandonment And Discontinuance Of Nonconforming Rights
10-6-10: Exceptions
10-6-11: Conversion To Conditional Use
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
Within Charleston there exist structures, uses of structures and uses of land
that were lawful prior to the effective date hereof, but which now would be
prohibited or restricted under the provisions of this title. The purpose and
intent of this title is to permit these nonconformities to continue until they
are removed, but not to encourage their continuation. Such uses are declared by
this title to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved.
Such nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, except
in conformance with section
10-6-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-6-2: CONTINUATION, COMPLETION OF NONCONFORMING PROJECTS:
Whenever the use of a building shall become nonconforming through an amendment
to this title or the district boundaries, such use may be continued and, if no
structural alterations are made, may be changed to another nonconforming use of
the same or of a more restricted classification. No accessory use or building
shall be added to a nonconforming lot or lot containing a nonconforming
building or structure. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-6-3: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD AND USE:
A parcel of land with an area less than that required for the applicable zoning
district may be used for any purpose permitted in the zoning district if:
   A.   Conformance: The owner is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the community development director, or their designee, that the parcel was
lawful at the time it was created; and
   B.   Alternatives: No reasonable alternative exists to make the
nonconforming lot conforming, such as the addition of adjoining land under the
property owner’s control; and
   C.   Compliance With Other Regulations: The use meets all other regulations
prescribed for the zoning district prior to occupancy or use; and
   D.   Safety: The proposed use can be developed in a safe manner that
adequately provides for water and wastewater facilities in conformance with
this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-6-4: EXPANSION, IMPROVEMENT, RESTORATION AND MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMITY:
   A.   Expansion: A nonconforming use of land existing on the effective date
hereof may be continued; provided, however, that no such nonconforming use of
land shall, in any way, be expanded or extended, either on the same or
adjoining property, except for construction that is intended to bring the
property into compliance with the Americans with disabilities act requirements.
   B.   Improvement, Repair And Maintenance:
      1.   Routine Repair And Maintenance Of Nonconforming Structure: Normal
maintenance or minor repair of a nonconforming structure shall be permitted.
Nonstructural repairs include roof replacement, foundation tuck pointing,
window replacement, painting, replacement of trim and siding, and other normal
maintenance activities. "Minor repairs" shall be defined as repairs that are
nonstructural in nature. The cumulative value of the maintenance or repair work
during any thirty six (36) month period shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of
the fair market value of the property prior to conducting of the maintenance,
based on an appraisal prepared by a state of Illinois certified real property
appraiser. If the value of repairs exceeds sixty percent (60%) of the fair
market value of the property, the building or structure shall be brought into
conformance with the provisions of this title. Value of repairs shall be
determined based on material costs and prevailing wage rates.
      2.   Remodeling And Alterations Of Nonconforming Use:
         a.   If remodeling costs exceed the lesser of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) or sixty percent (60%) of the fair market value of a
property, based on an appraisal performed by a certified real property
appraiser, in any continuous thirty six (36) month period, the property shall
be brought into conformance with this title.
         b.   Structural alterations or additions to a building that is
nonconforming with respect to the height and/or setback requirements
established in section
10-8-1 of this title shall be permitted; provided, that no such alteration or
addition shall increase the existing nonconformity or create a new
nonconformity.
      3.   Restoration Of Destroyed Nonconforming Use: A nonconforming building
that has been damaged by fire, explosion, or act of God to the extent of more
than fifty percent (50%) of its reproduction value shall not be restored except
in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. When
damaged by less than fifty percent (50%) of its reproduction value, a
nonconforming building may be repaired or reconstructed and used as before the
time of damage; provided, that all portions of the structure being restored are
not and were not on or over the property line, the nonconformity is not
increased, and a certificate of occupancy is issued within one year of the date
of the damage. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-6-5: CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMITY:
Evidence of the status of a nonconforming structure, use of land or use in a
structure shall be supplied by the owner of the property upon request of the
community development director, or their designee. Any nonconforming use that
has not been issued a certificate of nonconformity within twelve (12) months of
notification by the city shall lose its status as a legal nonconforming use and
shall be discontinued.
   A.   Proof Of Status: One or more pieces of evidence predating the effective
date hereof shall be provided by the applicant and included with the
application. Evidence of nonconformity shall be in the form of:
      1.   Building, land use or development permits;
      2.   City or state zoning, tax assessor or aerial maps;
      3.   Repair and maintenance bills and receipts giving proof of the
nonconformity's existence;
      4.   Remodeling, mechanical and electrical equipment contractors'
receipts for installation and construction affecting the nonconformity;
      5.   Bills of sale and contracts;
      6.   Business licenses;
      7.   Listing in telephone or business or similar publications; and
      8.   Any other evidence that the community development director, or their
designee, deems appropriate to the nonconforming structure, land use or use in
a structure.
   B.   Review Of Information; Issuance Or Denial Of Certificate: The community
development director, or their designee, shall review the applicant’s evidence
of preexisting, nonconforming status and determine if the nonconforming
situation is valid. When such a determination is made, the community
development director, or their designee, shall issue a certificate of
nonconformity to the applicant verifying the nature of the nonconformity, date
upon which the nonconformity occurred, the duration of the nonconformity and
the legal description of the nonconforming property. An official copy of the
certificate of nonconformity shall be retained by the city clerk. If the
community development director, or their designee, determines that the evidence
is insufficient or unsatisfactory, the applicant may appeal the community
development director’s, or their designee’s, determination to the board of
zoning appeals and planning pursuant to subsection
10-4-3 L of this title. In addition, a certificate of nonconformity shall be
required for all lawful nonconforming uses of land or buildings created by the
adoption of this title. The application for the certificate of nonconformity
shall be filed with the community development director, or their designee,
within one year after notification by the city of the nonconformity. The
applicant shall apply for a change in use permit if there is a change from one
use to another, in conformance with section
10-6-6  of this chapter. The city shall record the notice of nonconformity and
subsequent certification. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-
2025)
10-6-6: CHANGE IN USE:
   A.   Change In Use Authorized:
      1.   Any nonconforming use of land or structure may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same nature or to a less intensive nature if no
structural alterations are involved and if it is found that the relation of the
structure and proposed use to surrounding property is such that adverse effects
on occupants and neighboring property will not be greater than if the original
nonconforming use continued.
      2.   The nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout those
parts that were manifestly arranged or designed for such use on the effective
date hereof.
   B.   Information Required: Approval for such a change shall be processed
through the board of zoning appeals and planning at a public hearing. The
following additional factors shall be reviewed:
      1.   The character and history of the use and of development in the
surrounding area.
      2.   The comparable degree of noise, vibration, dust, odor, fumes, glare
or smoke detectable at the property line.
      3.   The comparative numbers and kinds of vehicular trips to the site.
      4.   The comparative amount and nature of outside storage, loading and
parking.
      5.   The comparative visual appearance.
      6.   The comparative hours of operation.
      7.   The comparative effect on existing vegetation.
      8.   The comparative effect on water drainage.
      9.   Other factors which tend to reduce conflicts of incompatibility with
the character or needs of the area.
   C.   Application Required: Application for the change of a nonconforming use
shall be submitted to the community development director, or their designee, in
conformance with the requirements of subsection
10-4-2 A of this title, in writing, together with a site plan showing the
existing uses, detailing the type and amount of the proposed change and the
names and addresses of all adjacent property owners within two hundred fifty
feet (250') of the property.
   D.   Notice Of Change Of Use And Protest: Upon receipt of the application,
the property shall be posted with notification of the proposed change. If
protests are received from thirty five percent (35%) or more of the property
owners within the two hundred fifty foot (250') limit within fifteen (15) days
of the posting, the requested change shall require a conditional use permit
(see subsection
10-4-3D of this title).
   E.   Recommendation And Action: The board shall make its recommendations on
the conditional use permit in writing to the city council. The council shall
approve, conditionally approve or deny the application as provided in
subsection
10-4-3D of this title.
   F.   Review Criteria: In addition to the criteria established in subsection
10-4-3D of this title, the board and council shall use the following criteria
to make their determinations:
      1.   The proposed use creates no more off site problems than the existing
use;
      2.   The proposed use occupies no more area of the structure than the
existing use;
      3.   The proposed use requires no more off street parking than the
existing use; and
      4.   Existing lawful nonconforming uses of a structure that change owners
but continue the same use shall be permitted to do so; provided, that an
agreement is signed by the new owner and kept on file in the city clerk’s
office stating that the new owner agrees to all conditions placed on the
previous owner and use(s) of the structure. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-6-7: NONCONFORMING PARKING:
The maintenance, repair and alterations of a use with nonconforming parking may
be permitted, provided the activity does not increase the need for off street
parking. Where these activities result in an increase in parking demands,
sufficient off street parking shall be provided to bring the entire development
into conformance with the requirements of this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-6-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
See section
10-10-12 of this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-6-9: ABANDONMENT AND DISCONTINUANCE OF NONCONFORMING RIGHTS:
   A.   Generally: Whenever a nonconforming use of a building or portion
thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of ninety (90) days, any future
use of such building or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which such building is located. Evidence of
abandonment of the nonconforming use is not required. The board may grant an
extension when an applicant provides evidence of the intent to continue a
nonconforming use and has demonstrated that such extension will not threaten
the health, safety or welfare of adjacent property owners.
   B.   Intermittent, Illegal Uses: The casual, intermittent, temporary or
illegal use of a structure, land or structure and land in combination shall not
be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use, and the
existence of a nonconforming use on part of a lot or tract shall not be
considered to have established a nonconforming use on the entire lot or tract.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
   C.   Removal Of Nonconforming Mobile Home Or Manufactured Home: A
nonconforming mobile home or manufactured home not located in a mobile home
park, having been removed from its foundation or pad, shall constitute
abandonment of the use and shall comply with the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code)
   D.   Manufactured Home Park: All manufactured home parks shall be brought
into compliance for lighting, recreational facilities and shelters within five
(5) years of the effective date hereof.
   E.   Discontinuance Due To Intentional Destruction: A building or structure
that has been intentionally damaged by fire or other causes within the control
of the applicant shall not be permitted to be rebuilt or reestablished. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-6-10: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Residences: Nonconforming residences shall be allowed to provide
private garages or sanitary facilities without complying with this chapter as
long as the garage or sanitary facility is in conformance with all other
adopted codes. Such additions shall comply with all density and dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which they are located.
   B.   Historic Structures: All structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places, or as a state or local historical site, shall not be required
to be brought into conformity with this title; provided, that no construction
or reconstruction increases the degree of nonconformity of the structure or
threatens the historic status of the structure. Structures and locations that
are eligible for listing on the national register shall be exempt from this
title, provided an application for designation by the U.S. interior department
on the national register is filed and accepted.
   C.   Development Of Legal Lots Of Record Not In Compliance With Bulk/Density
Standards: In order to encourage infill and redevelopment, legal lots of record
and vested lots of record that do not meet the bulk and density requirements of
this title may be developed with the land uses permitted in the district.
However, the city council may require that adjacent lots under single ownership
be consolidated to achieve planned density. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-6-11: CONVERSION TO CONDITIONAL USE:
Any nonconforming building, structure, or use may be converted to a permitted
conditional use by the granting of a conditional use permit in conformance with
subsection
10-4-3D of this title. This may occur only when it is shown that the
nonconforming building, structure, or use is providing a particular service to
the public and that the use is not detrimental to the city as a whole or to the
adjacent properties. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
Existing single-family structures which are currently being utilized as a
single-family residence, as defined in this title, are exempt from this
provision and shall be allowed to be rebuilt as a single-family dwelling unit
and shall be allowed to continue to be used as a single-family residence by
right. (Ord. 07-O-45, 8-7-2007)
CHAPTER 7
SUPPLEMENTARY CONDITIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES
SECTION:
10-7-1: General Conditions
10-7-2: Single-Family Residential Design Standards
10-7-3: Multi-Family Residential Developments 1  (Rep. by Ord. 08-O-28, 10-7-
2008)
10-7-4: Accessory Buildings And Structures
10-7-5: Existing Farm Dwellings
10-7-6: Home Occupations And Cottage Industries
10-7-7: Roadside Stands
10-7-8: Child Daycare
10-7-9: Community Residences
10-7-10: Bed And Breakfast Establishments (Rep. by Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
10-7-11: Drive-In Establishments/Uses
10-7-12: Gun Clubs And Shooting Ranges
10-7-13: Salvage Yards And Junkyards
10-7-14: Storage And Miniwarehouse Facilities
10-7-15: Swap Meets And Flea Markets
10-7-16: Telecommunications Towers And Antennas And Personal Wireless Service
Facilities
10-7-17: Adult Oriented Businesses
10-7-18: Manufactured Home Parks And Subdivisions
10-7-19: Recreational Vehicle And Travel Trailer Parks
10-7-20: Residential Rental Management Office
10-7-21: Cannabis Business Establishments
10-7-22: Commercial Solar Energy Systems
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-8-1B9 of this title.
10-7-1: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
All uses shall be developed, used and operated in conformance with the
standards of this title. The additional standards in this chapter shall apply
to the specific land uses listed. Certain uses require a conditional use permit
or a temporary use permit in conformance with chapter 4 of this title. All uses
shall comply with applicable Building, Life Safety, Fire and Health Codes
adopted by the City in addition to regulations of the County, State or Federal
government. The applicant shall provide evidence of compliance with the
applicable requirement. The applicant shall obtain a business license and a
home occupation permit, if applicable, prior to establishment of the use. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-7-2: SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   Applicability:
      1.   The regulations of this section apply to the construction or
placement of a detached, single-family home, manufactured home or modular home
on a private lot.
      2.   No mobile home, recreational vehicle or travel trailer may be used
as a permanent dwelling in the City.
   B.   Development Standards:
      1.   Foundation: All dwellings shall be attached to a permanent perimeter
foundation, leaving no uncovered open areas excepting vents and crawl spaces.
      2.   Manufactured Homes:
         a.   All wheels, hitches, axles, transporting lights and removable
towing apparatus shall be permanently removed prior to installation of the
home.
         b.   All manufactured homes shall be anchored to the foundation.
Anchor design shall be approved by the community development director, or their
designee, prior to installation and shall comply with any requirements of the
State.
      3.   Orientation Of Dwelling: Detached single-family dwellings shall be
designed so that the minimum dimension parallel to the street line is twenty
feet (20').
      4.   Pitched Roof: Homes shall have a pitched roof, with a slope that
rises vertically not less than three inches (3") for each twelve inches (12")
of a horizontal run.
      5.   Floor Area: The floor area shall not be more than thirty percent
(30%) greater than, nor thirty percent (30%) less than the average floor area
of single-family residences on the block on which the home is to be located. A
dwelling unit shall be not less than six hundred forty (640) square feet, and
at least seventy five percent (75%) of its narrowest dimension shall have a
minimum width of twenty feet (20').
      6.   Windows: Windows must cover at least five percent (5%) of any wall
facing a side street, exclusive of the gabled wall areas.
   C.   Design Modifications: Exceptions to these single-family residential
design standards may be authorized through a conditional use permit when the
board and City Council find that the exception will enhance the character of
the home and neighborhood, and be compatible with adjacent development. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-7-3: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 08-O-28, 10-7-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-8-1B9 of this title.
10-7-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Generally:
      1.   Accessory structures shall not be constructed on a lot until the
construction of the principal structure has been completed and shall not be
used unless the principal structure is being used.
      2.   Accessory buildings shall not be constructed in any required front
or side setback area, and separate accessory buildings shall not be built
within six feet (6') of the rear yard lot line and three feet (3') to any side
lot line (see exhibit 7-1, subsection D of this section).
      3.   Accessory buildings shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%)
of the rear yard. Accessory buildings to single-family residences shall not
exceed four percent (4%) of the lot size, with a minimum of eight hundred sixty
four (864) square feet in area allowed on all lots, and a maximum of fifteen
feet (15') in height.
      4.   An accessory building or structure is a subordinate building or
structure, the use of which is secondary to and supports the principal
building.
      5.   Accessory buildings shall not be used for the conduct of business
for a home occupation or storage for a home occupation, except as allowed by
section
10-7-6 of this chapter in the A and RE Zoning Districts.
   B.   Accessory Dwellings: A dwelling unit may be allowed as an accessory use
when the following conditions are met:
      1.   Accessory dwelling units may be constructed only in an A or RE
Zoning District, subject to a conditional use permit pursuant to subsection
10-4-3D of this title;
      2.   The accessory dwelling unit shall be a permanent structure anchored
to a permanent perimeter foundation;
      3.   The accessory dwelling unit may not be sold separately from the
property or the principal dwelling unit;
      4.   The accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all required building
setbacks for the principal residential use;
      5.   The overall height of an accessory dwelling shall be limited to
twenty feet (20');
      6.   One additional off street parking space shall be provided for any
accessory dwelling;
      7.   When the accessory dwelling is directly attached to the principal
dwelling, it shall be considered an integral part of the main building; and
      8.   Accessory dwellings shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square
feet of heated area.
   C.   Accessory Uses In Nonresidential Districts: Accessory uses in
nonresidential districts shall be incidental and subordinate to the principal
use permitted in that district and shall be located on the same lot as the
principal use or structure. Accessory uses shall comply with the specific
density and dimensional standards for the district in which the use is located.
   D.   Exhibit 7-1:
Exhibit 7-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1564.gif]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-7-5: EXISTING FARM DWELLINGS:
Nothing in this title shall require any person or persons occupying a farm
dwelling on the effective date hereof to vacate the dwelling or to
involuntarily sever it from the remainder of the farm. If the dwelling is
voluntarily severed from the farm in order to be used and maintained as a
nonfarm residence by the occupant or for sale or lease to others, it shall be
surveyed and divided pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes and meet any
applicable final plat requirements of this title. The surveyed lot shall be no
larger than necessary, with a minimum area of two (2) acres and shall include
the typical farm buildings and accessory work areas. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-7-6: HOME OCCUPATIONS AND COTTAGE INDUSTRIES:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   To permit and regulate the conduct of home occupations as an
accessory and secondary use to a dwelling unit, whether owner or renter
occupied;
      2.   To ensure that such home occupations are compatible with and do not
have a harmful effect on nearby residential properties and uses;
      3.   To adequately protect existing residential neighborhoods from dust,
odors, noise, traffic and/or other potentially adverse effects of home
occupations;
      4.   To allow residents of the community to use their homes as a
workplace and a source of livelihood, under certain specified standards,
conditions and criteria;
      5.   To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this section; and
      6.   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
   B.   Compliance With Provisions: No home occupation, except as otherwise
provided herein, may be initiated, established, or maintained in the city
except in conformance with the regulations, administrative procedures and
standards set forth in this section.
   C.   Cottage Industries Designated: Home occupations that are more intensive
shall be known as cottage industries and shall be permitted only in the A
zoning district, subject to a conditional use permit as provided in subsection
10-4-3D of this title.
   D.   Standards For Home Occupations:
      1.   Home occupations are authorized if they comply with the performance
standards set forth herein and the performance standard established in table 7-
1 (subsection H of this section). Home occupations may only be operated by a
full time resident of the property.
      2.   The home in which the occupation occurs shall look like a
residential dwelling and not a business establishment. Cottage industries in
the A zoning district may be located in an accessory building on the premises.
      3.   Signage shall comply with the provisions of chapter 10 of this
title.
      4.   Noise levels from the home occupation, detectable at the property
line, shall not exceed those generated by the primary use.
      5.   The applicant for a home occupation shall demonstrate that public
facilities and utilities are adequate to safely accommodate any equipment used
in conjunction with the home occupation.
      6.   Off street parking spaces shall be provided as required for the
residential use, plus one space for each allowed employee and one space for
each client allowed to visit at a given time.
      7.   Storage of dangerous, hazardous, combustible or volatile materials
used in conjunction with the home occupation shall not be permitted in
residential dwellings.
   E.   Exemptions From Permit: The following home occupations shall be subject
to all applicable home occupation regulations and standards of this section,
but shall not be required to obtain a home occupation permit, if all persons
engaged in such activities live on the property and the following conditions
are met:
      1.   Artists, sculptors, composers not selling their artistic product to
the public on the premises.
      2.   Craft work, such as jewelry making and pottery with no sales
permitted on the premises.
      3.   Home offices with no client visits to the home permitted.
      4.   Telephone answering and message services without nonresident
employees.
      5.   Childcare homes as defined in subsection
10-7-8B of this chapter.
   F.   Nonconforming Home Occupations: All existing home occupations which are
either expressly prohibited or which are not in conformity with chapter 6 of
this title shall be removed or modified to become conforming.
   G.   Unsafe Home Occupations: If, in the opinion of the community
development director, or their designee, any home occupation has become
dangerous or unsafe, or presents a safety hazard to the public, pedestrians or
motorists, or presents a safety hazard to adjacent or nearby properties,
residents or businesses, the community development director, or their designee,
shall issue an order to the dwelling owner and/or tenant on the property on
which the home occupation is being undertaken directing that the home
occupation be immediately made safe or be terminated. The property owner and/or
tenant shall be responsible for taking the necessary corrective steps or
measures, but in the event of a failure to do so by the owner and/or tenant,
after notice and a reasonable period of time, the community development
director, or their designee, may take any action to make the home occupation
and dwelling safe. Costs incurred by the community development director, or
their designee, if forced to take enforcement actions, shall be borne by the
property owner and shall be treated as a zoning violation pursuant to chapter 3
of this title.
   H.   Performance Standards:
TABLE 7-1: HOME OCCUPATION PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
                     Zoning District
Performance Standard A RE R-1 R-2/R-2U R-3/R-3U R-4/R-4U M
                                     Zoning District
Performance Standard                 A   RE  R-1 R-2/R-2U R-3/R-3U R-4/R-4U M
Location Of Operations
 Located in accessory structure     Yes Yes No  No       No       No       No
 Located in residence               Yes Yes Yes Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
Customers
 Client visits allowed              Yes Yes Yes Yes      No       No       No
 1 client vehicle at a time         Yes Yes Yes Yes      No       No       No
 2 client vehicles at a time        Yes Yes No  No       No       No       No
 Up to 5 client visits per day      Yes Yes Yes Yes      No       No       No
 Up to 10 client visit per day      Yes Yes No  No       No       No       No
Shipping Deliveries (excluding U.S.
mail)
 Up to 2 per day                    Yes Yes Yes Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
Vehicular Size Limits
 Equipment or delivery vehicles     No  No  Yes Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
  limited to an 8 ton capacity
Maximum Area For Home Occupation
 25 percent of residential floor    No  No  Yes Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
  area
 Up to 2,500 square feet            Yes Yes No  No       No       No       No
Animals
 Small animal grooming/training, no Yes Yes No  No       No       No       No
  boarding
 Small animal boarding              Yes No  No  No       No       No       No
Nonresident Employee Limits
 All employees must be residents    No  No  Yes Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes
 Up to 2 nonresident full time      Yes Yes No  No       No       No       No
  equivalents (FTE) allowed
 
Yes = provision applies in this district
No = home occupations not allowed under stated condition
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-7-7: ROADSIDE STANDS:
   A.   Applicability: "Roadside stands", as defined in section
10-2-3 of this title, are a permitted accessory use in the A and RE districts
and do not require a permit, provided the property owner complies with the
performance standards listed in this section.
   B.   Performance Standards:
      1.   Maximum size of roadside stand area: Four hundred (400) square feet.
      2.   Minimum setback: Twenty five feet (25') from the right of way.
      3.   Minimum off street parking spaces: Five (5) dust free spaces.
      4.   Signage: One sign sixteen (16) square feet/face set back twenty feet
(20') from the right of way. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-7-8: CHILD DAYCARE:
Child daycare homes, as defined in 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/2.18 et
seq., may be permitted in all residential districts in conformance with 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/2.18 et seq., and all other applicable portions
of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes, with the following requirements:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Applicant shall provide sufficient evidence that the proposed use
will comply with all state and city regulations.
      2.   No identification from a public street by signage, graphics,
display, or other visual means is allowed.
      3.   Play space shall be provided.
         a.   Outdoor Play Space: One hundred (100) square feet per child
excluding children in cribs. The area shall be fenced to a minimum of four feet
(4') in height and shall not be permitted in the required front yard.
         b.   Indoor Space: Seventy five (75) square feet per child.
Calculation of the indoor space shall not include the kitchen, hallways and
bathrooms, closets, utility rooms and offices.
      4.   When the use is designated as a conditional use, the building
official may require that the number of children to be cared for on site be
less than that allowed by state or federal regulations if, in their opinion,
the community development director, or their designee, cannot meet or exceed
adopted life safety and fire code standards to adequately protect the number of
children in care.
      5.   An off street passenger loading zone shall be provided for the safe
delivery and pick up of passengers, with a holding capacity of at least four
(4) vehicles, for any daycare facility providing services to more than six (6)
children at any time.
   B.   Daycare Home: A "daycare home", as defined in 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 10/2.18, shall be registered and licensed by the state and city. Any
daycare home providing care to six (6) or more children, not related to the
daycare provider, in a residential area must obtain a conditional use permit.
The operator of a daycare home shall be a full time resident of the home.
   C.   Daycare Center: A "daycare center", as defined by 225 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 10/2.09, shall be registered and licensed by the state and the city
and comply with the following conditions:
      1.   An off street passenger loading zone and drive shall be provided for
the safe delivery and pick up of passengers.
      2.   A six foot (6') high opaque fence along all property lines abutting
any residential use shall be provided. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-
O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-7-9: COMMUNITY RESIDENCES:
A community residence for eight (8) or fewer unrelated persons with
developmental or physical disabilities may be operated in all residential
zoning districts as a permitted use. A community residence for more than eight
(8) unrelated persons shall be permitted as of right in the A, R-3, R-3U, R-
4 and R-4U districts and with a conditional use permit in the RE, R-1, R-2 and
R-2U districts. Community residences, except those for senior citizens, shall
be separated by eight hundred feet (800'). (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-7-10: BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 10-O-13, 4-20-2010)
10-7-11: DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS/USES:
   A.   Purpose; Interpretation: The purpose of this section is to provide
standards for drive-in establishments to promote compatibility of this use with
adjacent land uses and to ensure safe circulation of traffic on and off site.
Drive-in establishments/uses include restaurants, banks and other financial
facilities, automatic teller machines, cleaners, pharmacies and similar uses.
   B.   Applicability: Drive-in establishments/uses may be permitted as
principal or accessory uses in the C-2 Commercial District. All drive-in
establishments/uses shall be in conformance with the requirements of this
section.
   C.   Site Plan Requirements: Drive-in establishments/uses shall be shown on
site development plans where they are proposed as an accessory use to a
principal use. Applicants for drive-in establishments/uses proposed as a
principal use shall submit complete site development plans.
   D.   Location: Drive-in establishments/uses as accessory uses shall not be
located within the front yard of the principal building.
   E.   Stacking Space Schedule: The minimum number of stacking spaces required
shall be as shown in table 7-2 of this subsection.
TABLE 7-2
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS/USES
STACKING SPACE SCHEDULE
Use Type Minimum Spaces 1 Measured From
Use Type                       Minimum Spaces 1  Measured From
Bank teller window             4 per window      Teller window
Car wash, automatic            6 per stall       Entrance
Car wash, self-service         2 per stall       Entrance
Drive-through automatic teller 4 per lane        ATM
machine (ATM)
Gasoline pump island           2 per pump island Pump island
Laundry                        4 per window      Order window
Pharmacy                       3 per window      Order window
Restaurant                     8 per window      Order window
                               Determined by the Public Works Director based on
Other uses                     ITE Transportation and Land Development Stacking
                               Standards
 
   Note:
       1.    The number of stacking spaces required may be reduced or expanded
in conformance with ITE Transportation and Land Development, Stover and Koepke,
1988, which is incorporated with reference hereto, upon recommendation of the
Public Works Director.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
   F.   Stacking Space Layout And Design:
      1.   Minimum stacking size: Eight feet by twenty feet (8' x 20') per
space.
      2.   Minimum stacking setback from property line: Five feet (5').
      3.   Minimum stacking setback from property line along a street side:
Twenty feet (20').
      4.   Separation from other internal driveways with raised medians and
parking spaces: As determined by the Public Works Director.
      5.   Minimum drive-through lane radius:
         a.   Inside drive thru lane radius: Twenty feet (20');
         b.   Drive thru lane width: Twelve feet (12');
         c.   Outside drive thru lane radius: Thirty two feet (32').
      6.   The stacking space layout and design requirements may be reduced or
expanded upon recommendation of the Public Works Director. (Ord. 16-O-5, 2-16-
2016)
   G.   Entrances: Additional entrances shall not be permitted for drive-in
structures unless recommended by the Public Works Director.
   H.   Order Box Noise:
      1.   The order box loudspeaker shall be positioned so that it is directed
toward the vehicle and away from any abutting Residential Zoning District
unless mitigated by a sound wall.
      2.   Drive-in establishments/uses employing order box loudspeakers shall
not be operated between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M., if abutting a Residential District.
   I.   Buffering: The drive-in establishments/uses, including the stacking
lanes, shall be buffered from abutting land uses with a buffer yard in
conformance with section
10-8-5 of this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-7-12: GUN CLUBS AND SHOOTING RANGES:
   A.   Location Of Indoor Establishments: All indoor shooting ranges and gun
clubs shall be located at least two hundred feet (200') from any Residential
District or dwelling, within a completely enclosed structure designed to
prevent the escape of sound beyond the property line.
   B.   Outdoor Shooting Ranges:
      1.   Outdoor shooting ranges shall be located at least one thousand two
hundred feet (1,200') from a residence or any Residential District, and on a
site of at least ten (10) acres.
      2.   A solid fence, wall, berm or shield shall be provided behind all
shooting areas, and be approved by the City Police Department.
      3.   Facilities shall be designed to prevent bullets and ammunition from
escaping the property.
      4.   The location and type of facility shall be reviewed and approved by
the City Police Department.
      5.   A sixty foot (60') wide type E buffer yard shall be provided along
all abutting property lines of outdoor facilities.
      6.   Hours of operation for outdoor facilities shall be only from seven
thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-
2003)
10-7-13: SALVAGE YARDS AND JUNKYARDS:
   A.   Applicability: An applicant proposing to establish a "junkyard or
salvage yard", as defined in section
10-2-3 of this title, shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit in
conformance with subsection
10-4-3D of this title. A salvage yard may be permitted in the I-1 and I-
2 Zoning Districts.
   B.   Guarantee Required: The applicant shall post a guarantee with the city
clerk. This guarantee, approved in form by the city attorney, will assure the
city that the applicant shall complete the plan for restoration for reuse
within one year of discontinuance of the salvage yard. The amount of the
guarantee shall be not less than the estimated cost of the restoration, and the
amount of the estimate shall be approved by the community development director,
or their designee. If the restoration is not completed within the specified
time, the city may use the bond or any portion thereof to complete the
restoration. Failure to maintain a guarantee shall be grounds for revocation of
the conditional use permit authorizing the use.
   C.   Performance Standards:
      1.   Setbacks: No salvage materials shall be stored within twenty five
feet (25') of any property line.
      2.   Compatibility: The proposed buildings or use shall be constructed,
arranged and operated so as to be compatible with the character of the zoning
district and immediate vicinity, and shall not interfere with the development
and use of adjacent property. The proposed development shall not present an
unsightly, obnoxious or offensive appearance to abutting or nearby properties.
      3.   Fencing And Buffering: An eight foot (8') high fence shall be
employed to enclose the storage areas to prevent unauthorized entry and to
ensure public safety. A type E buffer yard shall be provided around the
perimeter of the property, outside the required fence.
      4.   Vehicular Circulation: Driveways within the site shall be dust free.
Driveway access to the public right of way shall be permanently paved and shall
be a minimum of twenty five feet (25') in width.
      5.   Storage Yard Maintenance:
         a.   The lot area surface used for storage shall be gravel, at a
minimum.
         b.   Unusable items that cannot be reused shall be disposed of on a
regular basis and shall not be allowed to collect on the premises.
         c.   All tires not mounted on a vehicle shall be neatly stacked or
placed in racks. If stacked, the stacks shall not be stacked over six feet (6')
in height.
         d.   No garbage or other foul smelling waste likely to attract vermin
shall be kept on the premises.
         e.   Gasoline, oil or other hazardous materials that are removed from
scrapped vehicles or parts of vehicles kept on the premises shall be disposed
of in accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations.
      6.   Nuisance Control: Weeds shall be cut or removed before they reach
six inches (6") in height. Excessive dust, noise, vibration, smoke, fumes,
odors or glare shall not be detected beyond the property lines. Ground water
pollution or other undesirable, hazardous condition shall be prevented.
      7.   Abandonment: The applicant shall provide a written statement that
the area will be cleaned up to the satisfaction of the community development
director, or their designee, should the salvage yard be abandoned or moved in
whole or in part. A salvage yard which remains idle or unused for a continuous
period of one year, whether or not fixtures or equipment are removed, shall
constitute abandonment. The casual, intermittent, temporary or illegal
operation of a salvage yard shall not be sufficient evidence to establish
continuous use. If the owner fails to clean up and restore the salvage yard
within one year of cessation of operation or abandonment, the community
development director, or their designee, shall have the premises cleaned up and
shall use the bond to pay for the costs of cleanup incurred by the city. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-7-14: STORAGE AND MINIWAREHOUSE FACILITIES:
Storage and miniwarehouse facilities may be permitted by right in the I-1 and
I-2 districts and with a conditional use permit in the R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U and
C/D districts, and shall comply with the following conditions:
   A.   Compliance With State Law: Facilities that are leased for the storage
and warehousing of personal property for compensation shall be in conformance
with 240 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/1.01 et seq. The applicant shall provide
proof of compliance.
   B.   Fencing And Screening:
      1.   A fence or wall, located along the required setback line, shall be
provided around the perimeter of any storage facility. An opaque fence or wall
shall be provided along any property line abutting a residential district.
      2.   Minimum height: Six feet (6').
      3.   Signs or other advertising mediums shall not be placed upon,
attached to, or painted on said barrier.
      4.   Buffer yards shall be type C.
   C.   Prohibited Activities:
      1.   The sale of goods or merchandise from or at a storage unit is
prohibited.
      2.   The repair, construction, or reconstruction of any boat, engine,
motor vehicle, or furniture, and the storage of any propane or gasoline engine
or propane or gasoline storage tank is prohibited within any storage unit
because of the danger from fire or explosion caused by the accumulation of
vapors from gasoline, diesel fuel, paint, paint remover, and other flammable
materials.
   D.   Accessibility: Vehicular ingress-egress shall provide for safe access
by customers and emergency vehicles. Access aisles within the site shall be a
minimum of twenty feet (20') wide.
   E.   Building Height: Building height shall not exceed eighteen feet (18').
   F.   Fire Protection: Fire hydrants shall be provided to meet the
requirements of the fire prevention code adopted by the city. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-
18-2003)
10-7-15: SWAP MEETS AND FLEA MARKETS:
   A.   Access: Swap meets and flea markets shall be accessible from a
collector or arterial street.
   B.   Buffer Yard Required: Swap meets and flea markets that are conducted
outside shall have a type D buffer yard along all property lines abutting
residential districts.
   C.   Conduct Of Use: The event shall be conducted entirely on private
property, with the consent and approval of the property owner. Any temporary
structure used shall be promptly removed upon the cessation of the event. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-7-16: TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS AND PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE
FACILITIES:
Telecommunications towers and antennas and personal wireless service facilities
shall be located, constructed and maintained in conformance with the
regulations adopted by the city as shown in chapter 13 of this title. Nothing
in this title is intended to contravene federal or state rules and regulations.
(Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-7-17: ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
Adult oriented businesses shall be located and operated in conformance with the
regulations adopted by the city as shown in chapter 12 of this title. (Ord. 03-
O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-7-18: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS AND SUBDIVISIONS 1 :
A manufactured home park or subdivision may be allowed in the M district,
subject to a conditional use permit. The maximum density of a subdivision shall
not exceed eight (8) manufactured homes per acre. The approval procedure shall
be in conformance with subsection
10-4-3D of this title and 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/1 through 115/27,
mobile home park act. The following standards also shall apply:
   A.   Development Standards:
      1.   General Requirements: All manufactured home spaces shall abut on a
hard surfaced roadway of not less than twenty five feet (25') in width which
shall be adequately lighted and drained and shall have unobstructed access to a
paved public street or highway.
      2.   Area: Each site shall have a minimum area of four thousand (4,000)
square feet.
      3.   Location: No manufactured home or structure shall be closer than
twenty five feet (25') to any property line of the manufactured home
subdivision, street or highway, nor closer than twenty feet (20') to another
manufactured home or any building in the park; except, where manufactured homes
are parked end to end, the end to end clearance shall be at least fifteen feet
(15').
      4.   Additions: No additions shall be built onto any manufactured home
other than a porch or entryway, which shall be not less than fifteen feet (15')
from the nearest manufactured home and its additions.
      5.   Service Buildings: Service buildings or other facilities for
laundry, sanitation and other uses shall be located at least twenty five feet
(25') from property lines and shall be accessible to each manufactured home by
hard surfaced access roads and walks.
      6.   Water And Sewer Service: All buildings and manufactured homes within
the subdivision shall be served with community or municipal water supply and
sewage disposal systems approved by the city and state health departments. Each
habitable structure shall have a separate metered connection to utilities.
      7.   Off Street Parking: Two (2) off street parking spaces shall be
provided for each manufactured home site and one space for every fifty (50)
square feet of floor area in administration and service buildings.
      8.   Skirting And Anchoring: All manufactured homes shall be skirted and
anchored in a manner approved by the community development director, or their
designee, and in conformance with 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 120/1 et seq.
      9.   Trees: At a minimum, each manufactured home lot shall have not less
than two (2) canopy trees measuring two and one-half inches (21/2") caliper
measured at one foot (1') above ground level at the time of planting.
      10.   Recreation Space: Playground and recreational park spaces for use
of the residents of the subdivision shall be separate in addition to the open
space between the habitable structures and shall be a minimum of four hundred
(400) square feet per manufactured home lot. Streets, sidewalks, parking areas
and accessory buildings shall not be included in the computation of the
required recreation space area.
      11.   Underground Power And Telephone Lines: All power and telephone
lines shall be installed underground and shall be in compliance with the
standards of the utility provider.
      12.   Drainage: The site shall be graded so that surface water shall not
be permitted to accumulate. The proposed drainage system shall be approved by
the public works director prior to construction of the streets.
      13.   Landscaped Buffer: A type B landscaped buffer strip, a minimum of
twenty five feet (25') in width, shall be provided around the perimeter of the
subdivision.
      14.   Storm Shelter: A shelter shall be provided for every park or
subdivision with more than five (5) manufactured homes. The storm shelter must
be constructed to accommodate fifteen (15) square feet per manufactured home in
the park.
   B.   Approval Criteria: The board and the city council shall evaluate the
manufactured home subdivision based on the approval criteria in subsection
10-4-3D of this title and the following:
      1.   The effect of the proposed manufactured home subdivision on adjacent
property values.
      2.   The consistency and compliance of the proposed manufactured home
park with the provisions of applicable city and state regulations.
      3.   The suitability of the site for the proposed use with special
attention given to topography, subsurface conditions and the availability of
necessary utility service.
      4.   The relationship of the population density resulting from the
proposed manufactured home subdivision and the public interest.
      5.   The use of sound planning and engineering practices regarding
transportation, water and sewerage.
      6.   The availability of access from existing highways and the nature of
the altered traffic pattern resulting from the manufactured home subdivision.
      7.   The availability of adequate public facilities: schools, police
protection, fire protection and other public services.
   C.   Conditions Of Development: In the event of approval, the board and city
council shall specify appropriate conditions and safeguards to protect the
character of existing and future development of adjoining properties as well as
the manufactured home park. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-
2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 9 of this code.
10-7-19: RECREATIONAL VEHICLE AND TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS 1 :
Any person, firm or corporation may maintain, conduct or operate a recreational
vehicle and trailer park (RV park) within an M district following issuance of a
conditional use permit, subject to the criteria established in subsection
10-4-3D of this title and the following conditions:
   A.   Plans Required: Each application for a conditional use permit from the
community development director, or their designee, shall be accompanied by a
plot plan, road layout and plan of proposed sanitary facilities.
   B.   Setback: A trailer at any RV park shall not be parked within one
hundred feet (100') from the traveled portion of any public highway.
   C.   Lot Size And Location:
      1.   Minimum size lot for each individual trailer: Forty feet (40') wide
by sixty feet (60') deep, but not smaller than two thousand four hundred
(2,400) square feet.
      2.   Minimum side yards: Ten feet (10').
      3.   Minimum distance between a trailer in a camp and any residence,
church, school or public library: Five hundred feet (500').
   D.   Roads And Lighting: All lots shall be grouped in blocks abutting roads
of not less than eighteen feet (18') in width, providing easy access to and
from such lots. Road lighting to the satisfaction of the community development
director, or their designee, shall be provided and maintained by the applicant.
   E.   Water Supply: An adequate supply of potable water from a source
approved by the public works director shall be provided to each space.
   F.   Sanitary And Sewage Facilities:
      1.   A central sewage system or individual septic tanks shall be
installed for water closets and showers in conformance with local and state
health codes.
      2.   Adequately lighted and ventilated toilet rooms for each sex shall be
provided within a distance of two hundred feet (200') of any space.
      3.   Every toilet room shall have a minimum of one hand washing facility.
      4.   One shower shall be provided for every six (6) trailer lots up to
fifty (50), and one shower for each twelve (12) lots over fifty (50).
      5.   The floors of all water closets or compartments shall be constructed
and maintained in waterproof condition by using cement, concrete, tile or other
type of waterproof material.
   G.   Garbage And Rubbish:
      1.   A central garbage and rubbish collection point or disposal system
shall be maintained subject to the approval of the community development
director, or their designee.
      2.   Where a central system is not provided, metal or plastic containers
with tightfitting covers, appropriately labeled, shall be provided by the
permittee for garbage and rubbish.
      3.   Where mixed collection is practiced, at least one rubbish container
shall be provided for every two (2) trailers or fractional part thereof.
      4.   All containers for garbage and rubbish shall be emptied each day and
refuse removed from the premises and disposed of in a sanitary manner approved
by the community development director, or their designee.
   H.   Grading And Drainage: All lots and abutting roads or driveways shall be
kept free from heavy or dense growth of brush or weeds and from any poisonous
or noxious weeds, and so graded as to ensure rapid drainage.
   I.   Registration Of Guests: A guest register shall be kept in the
applicant’s office, and upon arrival, the owner or person in control of the
vehicle or vehicles and trailer shall register their name and address and all
persons using same, the date of arrival, and the state vehicle license plate
number, together with the name of the state issuing the license. The register
shall be kept up to date on a daily basis indicating the population of the RV
park, and shall be available at all times for inspection by the community
development director, or their designee, health officer or designees.
   J.   Limitation On Number Of Trailers: No person, firm or corporation
permitted to operate a trailer camp shall allow the parking of trailers in an
excess of the number specified in the application and permit under which the RV
park is operated. Except for a single residence for the RV park supervisor or
caretaker, no recreational vehicle occupancy may be permitted for longer than
fourteen (14) days. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-
18-2025)   
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 3, chapter 9 of this code.
10-7-20: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL MANAGEMENT OFFICE:
   A.   Definition: A residential rental management office shall be defined as
an office for the purpose of the management of residential properties that are
located off site, as a business, including rental, rent collection,
maintenance, and related management activities. The following tasks are often
required in the management of property (but not necessarily limited to):
accounting and reporting, leasing, coordination and scheduling of maintenance
and repair, paying taxes, provision of utilities and insurance, remodeling, and
rent rate setting and collection.
   B.   Purpose:
      1.   Regulations Of Residential Rental Management Offices: To permit (by
conditional use permit) and regulate on site residential rental management
offices located in the R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U, M and PUD zoning districts in
order to encourage a professional approach to the ongoing conduct of rental
business and useful landlord/tenant interaction and for the control of the
internal processes for maintenance and clerical duties.
      2.   Compliance With Provisions: No residential rental management office
located in the R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U, M and PUD zoning districts, except as
otherwise provided herein, may be initiated, established, or maintained in the
city except in conformance with the regulations, administrative procedures and
standards set forth in this section.
      3.   Conditional Use Permit Required: Residential rental management
office shall be permitted in the R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U, M and PUD zoning
districts, subject to a conditional use permit as provided in subsection
10-4-3D of this title.
      4.   Standards: Standards for residential rental management office
located in the R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U, M and PUD zoning districts:
         a.   Residential rental management offices located in the R-3, R-3U,
R-4, R-4U, M and PUD zoning districts are authorized if they comply with the
performance standards set forth herein.
         b.   Residential rental management offices located in the R-3, R-3U,
R-4, R-4U, M and PUD zoning districts shall be classified as an "accessory use"
and may be attached to or within the main structure or detached from the
structure. Residential rental management offices shall be located on the same
lot as the main building, the use of which is naturally and normally incidental
and subordinate to the dominant use of the main use (including building or
land) of the premises.
         c.   Any detached "accessory use" operating as a "residential rental
management office" shall maintain a side yard setback of six feet (6') and a
rear yard setback of twenty five feet (25'). All other aspects of this code
shall be applicable.
         d.   The structure in which the residential rental management office
located in the R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U, M and PUD zoning districts occurs shall
look like a residential dwelling and not a business establishment and shall be
compatible with the character of the parcel and the neighborhood.
         e.   Signage shall comply with the provisions of chapter 10 of this
title.
         f.   Noise levels from the residential rental management office,
detectable at the property line, shall not exceed those generated by the
primary use.
         g.   The applicant for a residential rental management office shall
demonstrate that public facilities and utilities are adequate to safely
accommodate the use in conjunction with the residential rental management
office.
         h.   Off street parking spaces shall be provided as required for the
residential use, plus one space for each allowed employee and/or agent and one
space for each client allowed to visit at a given time.
         i.   Storage of dangerous, hazardous, combustible or volatile
materials used in conjunction with the residential rental management office
shall not be permitted in residential dwellings.
      5.   Unsafe Residential Rental Management Office: If, in the opinion of
the community development director, or their designee, any residential rental
management office has become dangerous or unsafe, or presents a safety hazard
to the public, pedestrians or motorists, or presents a safety hazard to
adjacent or nearby properties, residents or businesses, the community
development director, or their designee, shall issue an order to the dwelling
owner and/or tenant on the property on which the residential rental management
office is being undertaken directing that the residential rental management
office be immediately made safe or be terminated. The property owner and/or
tenant shall be responsible for taking the necessary corrective steps or
measures, but in the event of a failure to do so by the owner and/or tenant,
after notice and a reasonable period of time, the community development
director, or their designee, may take any action to make the residential rental
management office and dwelling safe. Costs incurred by the community
development director, or their designee, if forced to take enforcement actions,
shall be borne by the property owner and shall be treated as a zoning violation
pursuant to chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 11-O-44, 10-18-2011; amd. Ord. 2025-
O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-7-21: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS:
   A.   Local Approvals; Conditions; Non-Transferability:
      1.   All cannabis business establishments must obtain site plan approval
under subsection
10-4-2B. Cannabis business establishments must also obtain a change of use
permit, certificate of occupancy, conditional use permit, and all other local
approvals where required by this title.
      2.   Every change of use permit, site plan approval, certificate of
occupancy, or conditional use permit for a cannabis business establishment may
be subject to conditions imposed by the decision maker to promote compliance
with this section.
      3.   Unless otherwise expressly provided by ordinance, the privileges,
obligations, and provisions of a change of use permit, site plan approval,
certificate of occupancy, or conditional use permit for a cannabis business
establishment:
         a.   Are for the sole benefit of and will be binding on the applicant;
and
         b.   May not be transferred to any other person or entity without a
new application for approval for a person or entity other than the applicant.
   B.   Number: The Mayor and City Council may establish the number of each
type of cannabis business establishment allowed in the City and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/11-
13-1 by adopting a resolution. The resolution may impose conditions on the
number of cannabis business establishments to promote compliance with this
section.
   C.   State Licensing: Upon application for a change of use permit, site plan
review, certificate of occupancy, or conditional use permit, the applicant must
submit a complete copy of all applications and plans submitted to the State of
Illinois for a cannabis business establishment license. Before issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or otherwise opening to the public, cannabis business
establishments must provide a copy of their license from the relevant state
agency to operate as a cannabis business establishment.
   D.   Compliance With State Regulations And Rules: All cannabis business
establishments must comply with all applicable state and local laws, including
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended, the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended, and applicable administrative rules.
   E.   Compliance With Plans: The development, use, operation, and maintenance
of the cannabis business establishment will be in substantial compliance with
all application documents and plans, except for minor changes and site work
approved by the community development director, or their designee, in
accordance with all applicable City rules, regulations, and ordinances.
   F.   Odor Control: Upon application for site plan review, all cannabis
business establishments must submit a plan for the control of cannabis odors
from the subject property. Cannabis odors shall not be detectable beyond the
property line of the lot on which the cannabis business establishment is
located.
   G.   Security: Upon application for site plan review, all cannabis business
establishments must submit a security plan, and unless otherwise prescribed by
state law, will include a screened and locked loading space and a fire alarm
plan.
   H.   Drive-Through Windows: A cannabis dispensary may not have a drive-
through service.
   I.   Traffic Study: The decision maker for any site plan review may obtain a
traffic study at the applicant's expense if a proposed cannabis business
establishment is expected to substantially increase traffic within two hundred
fifty feet (250') of the subject property. If the proposed use would reduce the
highway capacity manual level of service grade to E or F for any street within
two hundred fifty feet (250') of the property, the site plan must be denied or
approved with conditions mitigating traffic impacts.
   J.   Cannabis Waste: All cannabis business establishments must submit a plan
for the recycling and destruction of cannabis waste, and all cannabis business
establishments must comply with all state, county, and City regulations
governing cannabis waste.
   K.   Hours Of Operation: Unless otherwise prescribed by state law, the
decision maker may condition site plan approval for a cannabis business
establishment on limited hours of operations that are compatible with
surrounding uses.
   L.   On-Premises Consumption Prohibited: No cannabis business establishment
may allow the smoking, inhalation, or consumption of cannabis on the premises
in any form. A sign, at least eight and a half inches by eleven inches (8.5" x
11"), shall be posted inside the cannabis business establishment in a
conspicuous place and visible to patrons and shall include the following
language: "Smoking, eating, drinking or other forms of consumption of cannabis
products is prohibited on the premises of this establishment."
   M.   Principal Use: Cannabis business establishments are only permitted as a
principal use and are not allowed as an accessory use without specific site
plan approval.
   N.   Inspections:
      1.   Cannabis dispensaries and medical cannabis dispensaries are subject
to random and unannounced inspections by local law enforcement.
      2.   Cannabis infusers are subject to random inspections by local law
enforcement.
      3.   Cannabis cultivation centers and craft growers are subject to random
inspections by local safety or health inspectors.
      4.   When reasonable cause of a violation exists, all cannabis business
establishments are subject to inspections by the community development
director, or their designee, with the assistance of the City Attorney, the
Police Department, or other City agents and employees.
   O.   Minimum Distance Limits: In addition to all state-imposed minimum
distance limits, there must be a minimum distance between any building used for
a cannabis business establishment and the property line of a pre-existing
sensitive use, as set forth in the following table:
Table 10-7-21-1
Minimum Distance Limits For Cannabis Business Establishments
                 Public Or Private
                 Preschool,         Licensed Daycare
Minimum Distance Elementary School, Center           Public Park Public Library
                 Or Secondary
                 School
                 Public Or Private
                 Preschool,         Licensed Daycare
Minimum Distance Elementary School, Center           Public Park Public Library
                 Or Secondary
                 School
Cannabis Craft   250'               250'             250'        250'
Grower
Cannabis
Cultivation      1,000'             1,000'           1,000'      1,000'
Center
Cannabis         250'               250'             250'        250'
Dispensary
Cannabis Infuser 250'               250'             250'        250'
Cannabis         250'               250'             250'        250'
Processer
Cannabis         250'               250'             250'        250'
Transporter
Medical Cannabis
Cultivation      1,000'             1,000'           1,000'      1,000'
Center
Medical Cannabis 250'               250'             250'        250'
Dispensary
 
(Ord. 20-O-22, 6-16-2020; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-7-22: COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Scope: The purpose of this section is to provide standards for
commercial solar energy systems that capture energy from the sun and convert it
to electricity. The provisions of this section are based on a facility that
supports the flow of rainwater between each module and the growth of vegetation
beneath the arrays and limiting the impacts of stormwater runoff.
   B.   Purpose: The City has adopted this regulation to achieve the following
goals:
To preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the City's citizens by promoting
the safe, effective, and efficient use of active solar energy systems installed
to reduce the consumption of fossil fuels.
Encourage the use of local renewable energy resources, including appropriate
applications for solar.
Assist local businesses to lower financial and regulatory risks and improve
their economic and environmental sustainability.
Efficiently invest in and manage public infrastructure systems to support
development and growth.
Reduce our dependence on nonrenewable energy resources and decrease the air and
water pollution that results from the use of conventional energy sources.
Enhance the reliability and power quality of the power grid.
Encourage local economic development, diversify the City's energy supply
portfolio, and limit exposure to fiscal risks associated with imported fossil
fuels.
Offer additional energy choice to local consumers and improve competition in
the electricity supply market.
   C.   Definitions:
    ACTIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system whose primary purpose is
to harvest energy by transforming solar energy into another form of energy or
transferring heat from a collector to another medium using mechanical,
electrical, or chemical means.
   COMMERCIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar farm or solar garden that operates
as a grid-connected solar energy system for the purpose of producing
electricity in whole or in part for off-site consumption.
   COMMUNITY SOLAR PROJECT: An active solar energy system jointly owned by the
customer-subscribers who will be the recipients of greater than eighty percent
(80%) of the electricity (or a financial proxy for electricity) generated by
the system, and which meets the following criteria: 1) a maximum size of two
(2) megawatts (MW) of electricity output; 2) the minimum subscription per
customer-owner is two hundred (200) watts of electricity output; 3) no
individual subscriber can own or lease more than forty percent (40%) of a
project; and 4) it has been approved by the Illinois Commerce Commission and
the Illinois Power Agency.
   GRID-CONNECTED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: An active solar energy system that is
connected to an electric circuit served by an electric utility company.
   OFF-GRID SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: An active solar energy system in which the
circuits energized by the solar energy system are not electrically connected in
any way to electric circuits that are served by an electric utility company.
   PASSIVE SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: A solar energy system that captures solar light
or heat without transforming it to another form of energy or transferring the
energy via a heat exchanger.
   PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM: An active solar energy system that converts solar
energy directly into electricity.
   SOLAR ACCESS: Unobstructed access to direct sunlight on a lot through the
entire year, including access across adjacent parcel air rights, for the
purpose of capturing direct sunlight to operate a solar energy system.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR: A device, structure or a part of a device or structure for
which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal,
mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.
   SOLAR COLLECTOR SURFACE: Any part of a solar collector that absorbs solar
energy for use in the collector's energy transformation process. Collector
surface does not include frames, supports and mounting hardware.
   SOLAR ENERGY: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in
the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
   SOLAR ENERGY EASEMENT: An easement that limits the height or location, or
both, of permissible development on the burdened land in terms of a structure
or vegetation, or both, for the purpose of providing access for the benefited
land to sunlight passing over the burdened land.
   SOLAR FARM: A commercial facility that converts sunlight into electricity,
whether by photovoltaic (PV), concentrating solar thermal devices (CST), or
other conversion technology, for the primary purpose of wholesale sales of
generated electricity.
   SOLAR GARDEN: A commercial solar-electric (photovoltaic) array that provides
retail electric power (or a financial proxy for retail power) for the primary
purpose of generating electricity for multiple households or businesses
residing or located on-site or off-site from the location of the solar energy
system. Solar garden shall include community solar projects.
   SOLAR MOUNTING DEVICES: Racking, frames, or other devices that allow the
mounting of a solar collector onto a roof surface or the ground.
   SOLAR RESOURCE: A view of the sun from a specific point on a lot or building
that is not obscured by any vegetation, building, or object for a minimum of
four (4) hours between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and three o'clock
(3:00) P.M. Standard time on all days of the year.
   SOLAR STORAGE UNIT: A component of a solar energy device that is used to
store solar generated electricity or heat for later use.
   D.   Permitted Uses; Commercial Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Solar Gardens:
         a.   Solar gardens comprising an area less than or equal to ten (10)
acres and which meet the conditions and requirements of this section shall be
allowed as a permitted or accessory use in the Agricultural or Government
Districts, but shall be a conditional use on any Agricultural or Government
zoned property within five hundred feet (500') of an airport.
         b.   Solar gardens comprising an area greater than ten (10) acres and
which meet the conditions and requirements of this section shall be allowed as
a conditional use in the Agricultural or Government Districts.
         c.   Solar gardens may comprise all or part of a planned unit
development in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District.
      2.   Solar Farms: Solar farms which meet the conditions and requirements
of this section shall be allowed as a conditional use in the Agricultural or
Government Districts. Solar farms may comprise all or part of a planned unit
development in the I-2 Heavy Industrial District.
      3.   Active Solar Energy Systems: Active solar energy systems designed
and operated primarily for the purpose of producing electricity in whole or in
part for on-site consumption shall be permitted provided they comply with the
regulations applicable to accessory buildings and structures set forth in
section
10-7-4 of this chapter and screening of mechanical equipment set forth in
subsection
10-8-5G of this title.
   E.   Development Standards:
      1.   Height: Ground or pole-mounted solar energy systems shall not exceed
twenty feet (20') in height when oriented at maximum tilt.
      2.   Setbacks: Commercial solar energy systems operated as a principal
use must meet the setback for the zoning district and primary land use
associated with the lot on which the system is located. Commercial solar energy
systems operated as an accessory use may not be located in the front yard of
the lot on which the system is located and must meet the side and rear setback
for the zoning district and accessory land use associated with the lot on which
the system is located.
      3.   Lot Size:
         a.   Solar gardens may be no smaller than two (2) acres.
         b.   Solar farms may be no smaller than ten (10) acres.
      4.   Signs: Suitable warning signs containing a telephone number for
emergency calls shall face all access approaches to the facility. All signs
shall comply with chapter 10 of this title.
      5.   Lot Coverage: Not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the gross
site area shall be occupied by enclosed buildings, each of which shall comply
with the applicable bulk regulations of the relevant zoning district.
   F.   Plan Approval Required: All commercial solar energy systems allowed as
permitted uses shall require administrative plan approval by the community
development director, or their designee, via the review of the application for
a building permit. Commercial solar energy systems allowed as conditional uses
shall include such plans with the application for a conditional use permit.
   G.   Approved Solar Components: Commercial solar energy system components
must have a UL listing or approved equivalent.
   H.   Compliance With State And National Electric Code: All photovoltaic
systems shall comply with the Illinois State and National Electric Code.
   I.   Utility Notification: All grid-connected solar energy systems shall
comply with the interconnection requirements of the electric utility. An
interconnection agreement must be completed with the electric utility in whose
service territory the system is located prior to issuance of a building permit.
   J.   Principal Uses: The City encourages the development of commercial or
utility scale solar energy systems where such systems present few land use
conflicts with current and future development patterns. The owner or operator
of a commercial solar energy system shall be solely responsible for preserving
all solar access and acquiring all solar energy easements designed to protect
and preserve the solar energy resource used to operate the system.
   K.   Solar Gardens: The City permits the development of solar gardens,
subject to compliance with this section and the following standards and
requirements:
      1.   Conditional Use: For solar gardens located within five hundred feet
(500') of an airport, the solar garden must apply for and receive a conditional
use permit in the manner described in chapter 4 of this title.
      2.   Stormwater And NPDES: Solar gardens are subject to the City's
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control provisions and NPDES
permit requirements.
      3.   Ground Cover And Buffer Areas: Top soils shall not be exported
during development, unless part of a remediation effort. When solar gardens are
constructed on formerly agricultural land, the developer shall comply with the
Illinois Department of Agriculture Water and Sewer Line Construction Standards
and Policies related to topsoil management and replacement regardless of the
width of the trench. Soils shall be planted to and maintained in perennial
vegetation to prevent erosion, manage runoff and build soil. Seeds should
include a mix of grasses and wildflowers native to the region of the project
site.
      4.   Foundations: A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation
and design of the solar mounting devices are within accepted development
standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
      5.   Other Standards And Codes: All solar gardens shall be in compliance
with all applicable local, State and Federal regulatory codes, including title
9 of this Code.
      6.   Visibility: Commercial solar energy systems shall be designed to be
screened from routine view from public rights-of-way and residential uses on
adjacent parcels. The commercial solar energy system shall be set back from the
screening device or landscaping so as to not affect the operation of the
system. The property shall comply with fencing, landscaping and screening
requirements described in section
10-8-5 of this title.
      7.   Glare; Reflection: All commercial solar energy systems shall be
designed and installed to prohibit light reflection towards adjacent rights-of-
way and any habitable portion of nearby structures that are not integrated into
the system. Measures to minimize glare include selective placement of the
system, screening, modifying the orientation of the system, reducing use of the
reflector system, or other remedies that limit glare.
      8.   Lighting: Lighting may be installed for safety and security
purposes. Except with respect to lighting required by Federal law, all other
lighting shall be required to comply with section
10-8-6 of this title.
      9.   Power And Communication Lines: Power and communication lines running
between banks of solar panels shall be buried underground. Power and
communication lines running to nearby electric substations or interconnections
with buildings shall be buried underground to the extent practicable, subject
to utility requirements. Exemptions may be granted by the City in instances
where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other elements of the natural
landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines, or distance makes
undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion of the community development
director, or their designee.
      10.   Site Plan Required: A detailed site plan for both existing and
proposed conditions must be submitted, showing location of all solar arrays,
other structures, property lines, zoning and uses of adjacent property, rights-
of-way, service roads, floodplains, wetlands and other protected natural
resources, topography, electric equipment, and all other characteristics
requested by the City. The site plan should also show all zoning districts, and
overlay districts.
      11.   Aviation Protection: For solar gardens located within five hundred
feet (500') of an airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant
must complete and provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool
(SGHAT) and receive the written verification of the airport operator that the
tool demonstrates the system will operate in a manner that will not result in
unsafe conditions for aviation.
   L.   Solar Farms: The City permits the development of solar farms, subject
to compliance with this section and the following standards and requirements:
      1.   Conditional Use: The solar farm must apply for and receive a
conditional use permit in the manner described in chapter 4 of this title.
      2.   Stormwater And NPDES: Solar farms are subject to the City's
stormwater management and erosion and sediment control provisions and NPDES
permit requirements.
      3.   Ground Cover And Buffer Areas: Top soils shall not be exported
during development, unless part of a remediation effort. When solar farms are
constructed on formerly agricultural land, the developer shall comply with the
Illinois Department of Agriculture Water and Sewer Line Construction Standards
and Policies related to topsoil management and replacement regardless of the
width of the trench. Soils shall be planted to and maintained in perennial
vegetation to prevent erosion, manage runoff and build soil. Seeds should
include a mix of grasses and wildflowers native to the region of the project
site.
      4.   Foundations: A qualified engineer shall certify that the foundation
and design of the solar mounting devices are within accepted professional
standards, given local soil and climate conditions.
      5.   Other Standards And Codes: All solar farms shall be in compliance
with all applicable local, State and Federal regulatory codes, including title
9 of this Code.
      6.   Visibility: Commercial solar energy systems shall be designed to be
screened from routine view from public rights-of-way and residential uses on
adjacent parcels. The commercial solar energy system shall be set back from the
screening device or landscaping so as to not affect the operation of the
system. The property shall comply with fencing, landscaping and screening
requirements described in section
10-8-5 of this title.
      7.   Glare; Reflection: All commercial solar energy systems shall be
designed and installed to prohibit light reflection towards adjacent rights-of-
way and any habitable portion of nearby structures that are not integrated into
the system. Measures to minimize glare include selective placement of the
system, screening, modifying the orientation of the system, reducing use of a
reflector system, or other remedies that limit glare.
      8.   Lighting: Lighting may be installed for safety and security
purposes. Except with respect to lighting required by Federal law, all other
lighting shall be required to comply with section
10-8-6 of this title.
      9.   Power And Communication Lines: Power and communication lines running
between banks of solar panels shall be buried underground. Power and
communication lines running to nearby electric substations or interconnections
with buildings shall be buried underground to the extent practicable, subject
to utility requirements. Exemptions may be granted by the City in instances
where shallow bedrock, water courses, or other elements of the natural
landscape interfere with the ability to bury lines, or distance makes
undergrounding infeasible, at the discretion of the community development
director, or their designee.
      10.   Site Plan Required: A detailed site plan for both existing and
proposed conditions must be submitted, showing location of all solar arrays,
other structures, property lines, zoning and uses of adjacent property, rights-
of-way, service roads, floodplains, wetlands and other protected natural
resources, topography, electric equipment, and all other characteristics
requested by the City. The site plan should also show all zoning districts, and
overlay districts.
      11.   Aviation Protection: For solar farms located within five hundred
feet (500') of an airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant
must complete and provide the results of the Solar Glare Hazard Analysis Tool
(SGHAT) and receive the written verification of the airport operator that the
tool demonstrates the system will operate in a manner that will not result in
unsafe conditions for aviation.
      12.   Wildlife Passage: In areas identified as containing important
wildlife habitat, the facility shall be designed, to the maximum extent
feasible, to allow continued use of the site for wildlife habitat and migration
across the site.
   M.   Decommissioning: A decommissioning plan shall be required to ensure
that facilities are properly removed after their useful life. Decommissioning
of solar panels must occur in the event they are abandoned, which shall mean
not in use for twelve (12) consecutive months for reasons other than repair and
replacement. The plan shall include provisions for removal of all structures
and foundations, restoration of soil and vegetation and a plan ensuring
financial resources will be available to fully decommission the site.
Decommissioning and removal of the facilities must be complete within one
hundred eighty (180) days after they are abandoned or the owner delivers notice
of cessation of use, provided the community development director, or their
designee, may grant extensions for force majeure events. The City may require
the posting of a bond, letter of credit or the establishment of an escrow
account to ensure proper decommissioning. (Ord. 18-O-4, 2-6-2018; amd. Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 8
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-8-1: Density And Dimensional Standards
10-8-2: Blocks And Lots
10-8-3: Cluster Or Conservation Subdivisions
10-8-4: Parking And Loading Standards
10-8-5: Landscaping, Buffer Yards And Screening
10-8-6: Lighting
10-8-1: DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Purpose: Every lot shall meet the minimum required setbacks, except for
permissible accessory structures in the rear yard and as further provided in
this title. Setbacks apply on each lot or parcel where a building may be
erected. Table 8-1 (subsection C of this section) summarizes the density and
dimensional standards for lot development in the city. Density and dimensional
standards apply under ideal conditions. Topography, hydrology or other
conditions may necessitate reduced densities, greater setbacks, greater lot
sizes or reduced lot coverage.
   B.   Measurements And Exceptions:
      1.   Density: Maximum density is measured as the number of dwelling units
per net acre of land for residential development. Maximum residential density
is measured by dividing the number of dwelling units on a lot or parcel by the
parcel's net area (in acres). Net area is the gross area minus the area located
within the 100-year floodplain.
      2.   Lot Area:
         a.   Measurement: Lot or parcel area is measured as the amount of
contiguous land area contained within the property lines of a lot or parcel.
         b.   Exceptions: No zoning or building permit or development approval
shall be issued for a lot that fails to meet minimum lot requirements, except
in the following cases:
            (1)   Utilities using land or an unoccupied building covering less
than one thousand (1,000) square feet of site area are exempt from minimum lot
area standards (i.e., sewer lift station, telecommunications buildings).
            (2)   The minimum lot area standards of this title shall not
prohibit the construction of a detached dwelling unit on a vacant lot that was
legally platted or recorded before the effective date hereof; provided, that
the dwelling unit is constructed in compliance with all other applicable
dimensional standards and meets the minimum health and safety standards for
water and wastewater facilities and private sewage disposal systems.
      3.   Lot Width: Lot width is measured between side lot lines along a line
that is parallel to the front lot line or its chord. Minimum lot width is
measured at all points between the front and rear setback for irregularly
shaped lots along curves or cul-de- sac streets.
      4.   Street Frontage: Street frontage is measured between side lot lines
along the front lot line.
      5.   Setbacks:
         a.   Measurement: Setbacks are measured between the furthermost
projection of a structure and the nearest property line of the lot on which the
structure is located. Setbacks must be unobstructed from the ground to the sky
except as specified in this section. The setback of the building from front,
side and rear lot lines shall be measured at right angles from the lot line to
the nearest point of the adjacent building wall.
         b.   Bulk Plane: For any building on a lot or parcel abutting a
single-family residence in an A, RE, R-1 or R-2 district, the building setbacks
must be increased by at least one foot (1') for each foot of height in excess
of thirty feet (30'). (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
         c.   Side Streets: Except in the C-3 district, on side streets,
buildings must be set back at least twenty five feet (25') or the average
setback, as described in subsection B5e of this section, whichever is less.
Buildings on side streets in the R-3, R-3U, R-4 and R-4U districts must be set
back at least fifteen feet (15') or the average setback, as described in
subsection B5e of this section, whichever is less. (Ord. 08-O-28, 10-7-2008)
         d.   Exceptions And Permitted Encroachments:
            (1)   The following features may encroach into required setbacks:
               (A)   Landscaping;
               (B)   Bay windows, belt courses, and ornamental features and
sills, not to exceed eighteen inches (18");
               (C)   Clothesline post in the rear yard;
               (D)   Driveways, curbs and sidewalks;
               (E)   Flagpoles;
               (F)   Open lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside
stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers and the ordinary projections
of chimneys and flues into the rear yard may be permitted for a distance of not
to exceed five feet (5') when these are so placed as not to obstruct light and
ventilation;
               (G)   Heating and cooling units in the side or rear yard, not to
exceed thirty inches (30");
               (H)   Mailboxes;
               (I)   Gutters and awnings, not to exceed thirty inches (30");
               (J)   Septic systems, wells and underground utilities;
               (K)   Signs, as permitted in chapter 10 of this title;
               (L)   In the rear yard, uncovered, unenclosed terraces or
porches, and platforms; pools, ponds and ornamental features which do not
extend more than three feet (3') above the floor level of the ground story,
provided these uses maintain a minimum distance of five feet (5') from the
adjacent side and rear lot lines; (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2022-O-27,
6-7-2022)
               (M)   (Rep. by Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
               (N)   Fences or walls, if otherwise allowed or required by city
regulations; and
               (O)   Yard and service lighting fixtures, poles.
            (2)   Where dwelling units are erected above a commercial
establishment, no side yard is required except when required for the commercial
building.
         e.   Setback Averaging: Where one or more adjacent buildings are set
back a distance less than the required front setback, the minimum front setback
shall be the average of the existing building setbacks on the abutting lots
sharing frontage along the same block face (see exhibit 8-1 at the end of this
subsection B5e). However, setback averaging shall allow no building to encroach
upon the sight triangle as established in subsection
10-8-2F of this chapter.
Exhibit 8-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1566.gif]
 
         f.   Uniform Setback Exceptions: Where a uniform setback line has been
established or observed on one side of a street, no building or structure shall
be erected or altered beyond such setback line. The established setback line
shall be determined by the average setback of the adjacent buildings or
structures on either side of the property. Buildings or structures located
entirely on the back half of a lot shall not be considered in the average.
      6.   Height: All buildings or structures hereafter designed or erected
and existing buildings that may be reconstructed, altered, moved or enlarged
shall comply with the height regulations and exceptions of the district in
which they may be located. Buildings shall not exceed the more restrictive of
the number of stories or the height in feet. One-half (1/2) story is a floor
with an average ceiling height of eight feet (8') or less and a floor area that
does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor area.
         a.   Measurement: As shown in exhibit 8-2 of this section, building
height is measured as the vertical distance between the average finished grade
at the base of the building and:
            (1)   The average height level between the eaves and ridgeline of a
gable or hip roof;
            (2)   The highest point of a mansard or gambrel roof;
            (3)   The highest point of the coping or parapet of a flat roof; or
            (4)   Two-thirds (2/3) the height of an A type roof or any roof
with a pitch of one to one (1:1) or steeper.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1568.gif]
 
         b.   Exceptions: Public or quasi-public service buildings, hospitals,
institutions or schools, where permitted, may be erected to a height not
exceeding sixty feet (60'), and churches and temples may be erected to a height
not exceeding seventy five feet (75') when the required front, side and rear
yards are each increased by one foot (1') for each foot of additional building
height above the height regulations for the district in which the building is
located.
      7.   Buildings Per Lot: There may be two (2) or more related multi-
family, commercial, industrial or institutional buildings on a lot; provided,
that the required yards are maintained around the group of buildings.
      8.   Access Requirements:
         a.   Uses other than detached single-family and duplex residences that
are located on a collector or major thoroughfare as designated in the
comprehensive plan shall not have more than one 26-foot wide entrance for the
parcel on which said use is located; except, that a parcel having more than two
hundred feet (200') of frontage may have an additional twenty six foot (26')
wide entrance. Driveways for detached single-family and duplex residences shall
not be wider than twenty feet (20') and shall access the least intensive
abutting street. No new residential lot that requires access to an arterial
street shall be created.
         b.   Any new entrance to a public street shall require a driveway
permit in accordance with city standards. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
         c.   For all nonresidential uses in the C-2 and I districts, there
shall be a clearly marked fire/emergency lane, not less than twelve feet (12')
in width, located within twenty five feet (25') of the building and surrounding
the perimeter of the building. (Ord. 10-O-5, 3-16-2010)
      9.   Location Of Multi-Family Buildings: Multi-family buildings shall be
separated by a minimum of fifteen feet (15'). No multi- family building shall
be located within fifty feet (50') of the front or rear building wall of
another single-family dwelling unit that is located in the single-family
residence district as measured perpendicular from that wall. (Ord. 08-O-28, 10-
7-2008)
   C.   Table 8-1:
TABLE 8-1: DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
                                    Minimum Setbacks Maximum
          Minimum Lot  Minimum Lot                   Building
Districts Size (Square Width (Feet) Front Side Rear  Coverage  Maximum Height
          Feet)                                      (Percent)
                Minimum             Minimum Setbacks       Maximum
                Lot Size  Minimum                          Building  Maximum
Districts       (Square   Lot Width Front Side       Rear  Coverage  Height
                Feet)     (Feet)                           (Percent)

Residential:                                                     
                                                                     35 feet or
 A              43,5601   100       50    10         35    25        21/
                                                                     2 stories
                                                                     35 feet or
 RE             20,000    100       50    15         30    30        21/
                                                                     2 stories
                                                                     35 feet or
 R-1            9,600     75        25    6/152,3,8  25    35        21/
                                                                     2 stories
                                                                     35 feet or
 R-2 and R-2U   7,200     60        25    6/152,3,8  25    40        21/
                                                                     2 stories
                                                                     35 feet or
 R-3 and R-3U   7,2004    60        155   6/152,3,11 25    40        3
                                                                     stories12
Nonresidential:
 C-1            None      None      25    56,8       None7 35        25 feet or
                                                                     2 stories
                                                                     45 feet or
 C-2            None      None      25    56,8       None7 35        3
                                                                     stories12
                                                                     45 feet or
 C-3            None      None      2510  56,8,10    None7 None      3
                                                                     stories12
 I-1            None      None      25    None6,8    None9 35        35 feet or
                                                                     2 stories
 I-2            None      None      25    None6,8    None9 35        None
 
Notes:
      1.      Minimum lot size shall be 10 acres unless part of a conservation
subdivision. Minimum lot size in a subdivision shall be 1 acre when not served
by public sewer.
      2.      Minimum distance from lot line is 6 feet, provided that the
combined side setbacks on each lot must total at least 15 feet.
      3.      Side lot lines may be reduced pursuant to subsection
10-8-2E of this chapter.
      4.      An additional 1,800 square feet is required per dwelling unit in
excess of 1.
      5.      At least 25 feet is required between any garage entrance and the
abutting right of way.
      6.      5 foot side yard required except on the side of a lot adjoining a
residence district, in which case a side yard of not less than 10 feet shall be
provided in any C district and of not less than 25 feet in any I district.
      7.      No rear yard required except on the rear of a lot adjoining a
residence district, in which case a rear yard of not less than 15 feet shall be
provided.
      8.      The minimum side yard adjoining a street shall be 25 feet, or the
average setback.
      9.      No rear yard required except on the rear of a lot adjoining a
residence district, in which case a rear yard of not less than 25 feet shall be
provided.
      10.      No setbacks shall be required, unless notes 6, 7, and 8 are
required, for the C-3 district area known as the "Courthouse Square". The
"Courthouse Square" shall be defined as the area from the center of 5th Street
to the center of 8th Street and from the center of Van Buren Avenue to the
center of Madison Avenue.
      11.      The minimum side yard adjoining a street shall be 15 feet or the
average setback.
      12.    The maximum height in the residential transition area shall be 35
feet or 21/2 stories.
(Ord. 14-O-41, 10-7-2014)
10-8-2: BLOCKS AND LOTS:
   A.   Blocks: When reviewing proposed lot and block arrangements, the
following factors shall be considered:
      1.   Adequate Building Sites Required: Provisions of adequate building
sites suitable to the special needs of the type of land use (residential,
commercial or other) proposed for development shall be provided, taking into
consideration topographical and drainage features.
      2.   Minimum Lot Sizes Established: Minimum zoning district and lot
requirements defining lot sizes and dimensions shall be accommodated without
creating unusable lot remnants.
      3.   Block Width: The width of the blocks should be arranged so as to
allow two (2) tiers of lots with utility easements, except where a single row
of lots backs up to an arterial street.
      4.   Block Lengths: No residential block shall be longer than one
thousand feet (1,000').
      5.   Dead End Streets: Except as authorized by the city council, all
proposed streets must be extended to the property line. The council may require
the construction of a temporary turnaround having a minimum radius of fifty
feet (50'). Reserve strips shall not be allowed.
      6.   Cul-De-Sac Or Court Blocks: Blocks that terminate in a cul-de- sac
or court shall be permitted if the form or contour of the land makes it
difficult to plat connecting streets. Cul-de-sacs and courts shall be no longer
than six hundred feet (600') and shall have a turnaround with a minimum radius
of fifty feet (50'). The city may require a ten foot (10') wide pedestrian
crosswalk to connect the cul-de-sac with adjacent development.
      7.   Pedestrian Walkways: Where blocks are over six hundred feet (600')
in length, the city may require a crosswalk with a right of way of at least ten
feet (10') in width near the center of the block.
   B.   Single-Family Lots:
      1.   Lot Depth: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no
residential lot shall have a depth of less than one hundred feet (100').
      2.   Single-Family Lots Less Than Ten Acres: Single-family lots smaller
than ten (10) acres shall be deeper than wide, with a depth to width ratio not
greater than three to one (3:1).
      3.   Cul-De-Sac Lots: Cul-de-sac lots shall have a minimum width of
twenty feet (20') at the street line.
      4.   Minimum Yard Requirements: The minimum yard requirements shall be
increased to thirty feet (30') for any lot or parcel boundary which abuts an
arterial street along the front, side or rear property line.
      5.   Principal Buildings Per Lot: Only one principal building is
permitted on a lot except within a PUD (planned unit development) district.
      6.   Lot Arrangement: The lot arrangement and design shall be such that
all lots will provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly
related to topography and to the character of surrounding development.
      7.   Lots At Intersections: Lots at street intersections shall have a
radius of twenty feet (20') at the street corner, except a chord may be
required in lieu of the circular arc where warranted.
      8.   Lot Frontage: All lots shall front on a public street. (Ord. 03-O-9,
3-18-2003)
   C.   High Density Residential Construction:
      1.   (Rep. by Ord. 08-O-28, 10-7-2008)
      2.   A zero side setback will be permitted between abutting buildings for
townhomes, condos and zero lot line development, subject to building and fire
code requirements.
      3.   When dwellings are attached by common party walls, each dwelling
shall be metered separately for water and electric services.
   D.   Compact Housing Types: Lot depth, lot width, and the front, side and
rear yard setbacks listed in table 8-2 of this section shall apply to the
listed housing types when permitted in a PUD district.
TABLE 8-2: LOT STANDARDS FOR COMPACT HOUSING TYPES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS AS
PERMITTED
 
Housing Type        Lot Minimums            Minimum Building Setback Feet
                    Area        Width Depth Front Side1 Rear
                    Square Feet
Patio homes         6,000       50    80    20    10    20
Zero lot line homes 4,000       45    70    20    0     20
Duplex/twinplex     6,500       55    80    15    7     20
Townhouse           2,000       20    70    10    252   20
Multi-family3       10,000      100   100   25    252   20
 
Notes:
1.   A minimum distance of 10 feet is required between buildings on adjacent
lots.
   2.   A minimum of 25 feet must be provided between multi-family buildings on
the same parcel.
   3.   See subsection
10-8-1B9 of this chapter for more standards applicable to multi- family
dwellings.
   E.   Nonresidential Uses:
      1.   Canopy Setback: Canopies connected to or detached from the main
building shall be set back a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from any property
line, except in the C-3 district.
      2.   Side Yard Setback: No interior side yard will be required on
contiguous lots developed as a common project, except as required to comply
with fire codes.
      3.   Accessory Structure Setback: Accessory structures shall be located a
minimum of twenty feet (20') from all property lines. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
   F.   Corner Lots; Sight Triangle:
      1.   Width: Corner lots shall have a width sufficient to permit the
establishment of required building lines on both sides of the adjoining streets
(see exhibit 8-3 of this section). The front yard of the corner lot will be
determined by the community development director, or their designee.
Exhibit 8-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1570.gif]
 
      2.   Visibility At Intersections: Except in the C-3 central business
district, no fence, sign, structure, or planting higher than thirty inches
(30") above the established street grades shall be maintained within twenty
feet (20') of any street intersection right of way. On a corner lot in any
district, no fence, wall, hedge, shrub, sign or structure shall obstruct vision
between a height of two and one-half feet (21/2') and ten feet (10') above the
centerline grades of the intersecting streets within the designated sight
triangle, or required as follows:
         a.   For intersections in the C-1 district or the intersections of two
(2) local or collector streets, the triangular area formed by connecting the
right of way lines, at points which are twenty five feet (25') distance from
the intersection of the right of way lines, and measured along the right of way
lines; or
         b.   For intersections involving two (2) arterial streets, the
triangular area formed by connecting the right of way lines of the intersecting
streets at points which are one hundred feet (100') from their point of
intersection; or
         c.   For intersections involving arterials and other streets, the
sight triangle shall extend from the point of intersection of the rights of way
a distance of one hundred feet (100') down the arterial street and twenty five
feet (25') along the other street.
         d.   The community development director, or their designee, may allow
modifications to the distance required at intersections if the safety of
pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists is ensured.
      3.   Access: Corner lots adjacent to streets of unequal classification
shall access the street of the lesser classification (e.g., designed for the
least capacity), based upon traffic volume.
   G.   Through Lots: Through lots or double frontage lots shall be prohibited
in residentially zoned areas, except when the rear of the lot abuts an arterial
street and no access to that street is allowed.
   H.   Flag Lots: Flag lots shall be prohibited.
   I.   Lot Lines: All lots, so far as practical, shall have side lot lines at
right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Unusual
or odd shaped lots having boundary lines that intersect at extreme angles shall
be avoided.
   J.   Lot Orientation: The lot line common to the street right of way line
shall be the front line. All lots shall face the front line and a similar lot
across the street. Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that the rear
line does not abut the side of an adjacent lot.
   K.   Lot Access: Lot access shall be provided in conformance with subsection
10-9-6F of this title.
   L.   Driveways: Driveways shall be designed and constructed in conformance
with subsection
10-8-4G of this chapter and subsection
10-9-6F of this title.
   M.   Lot Remnants: No lot or parcel shall be created which fails to meet the
minimum standards of the applicable zoning district and this title, except
pursuant to a PUD that provides for the perpetual maintenance of such remnants.
   N.   Number Of Principal Uses And Structures Per Lot: In any commercial or
industrial district, more than one principal structure may be erected on a
single lot; provided, that the area, yard and other requirements of this title
shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-8-3: CLUSTER OR CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of clustering lots or buildings in a development
is to preserve environmentally sensitive areas, open space and agricultural
lands. Clustered development patterns shall be permitted according to the
provisions of this section.
   B.   Clustering Of Single-Family Residential Dwellings Permitted: In any
single-family subdivision in any residential district, a developer may create
lots that are smaller and arranged differently than those required by this
title if the developer complies with the provisions of this section and follows
the planned unit development process in subsection
10-4-3C of this title.
   C.   Application For Cluster Development: Applicants seeking approval of a
cluster development shall proceed according to the requirements for major
subdivision approval, but shall label all submissions "Cluster Subdivision
Application" and shall comply with the provisions of this section.
   D.   Project Size And Density: No cluster in the RE district shall establish
more than twenty (20) lots. The maximum allowable residential density for
clustered development varies by zoning district, but shall not exceed one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of the maximum density allowed as of right in the
underlying zoning district.
   E.   Open Space Standards:
      1.   Minimum Open Space: All cluster developments shall have a minimum of
thirty percent (30%) of the gross land area preserved as open space.
      2.   Dedication Of Open Space: Where possible, open space to be dedicated
for public use shall be located to provide access to or provide protection of
adjacent public lands.
      3.   Ownership And Maintenance Of Open Space:
         a.   The applicant for cluster development shall:
            (1)   Offer to dedicate land to the public; or
            (2)   Convey open space to be held in common to subsequent owners
of lots and parcels in the development; or
            (3)   Where agricultural land is to be preserved, create an
agricultural easement over that portion of the property to be protected.
            (4)   City approval of the form of the dedication or conveyance is
required.
         b.   Open space that is to be held in common shall be owned and
maintained by an organization established by the applicant/developer and
approved by the city. The applicant shall submit covenants and restrictions
regarding permanent maintenance of the open space, including provisions
addressing:
            (1)   Maintenance duties of the organization;
            (2)   The manner in which lot owners will be assessed by the
organization;
            (3)   Conditions of default; and
            (4)   The manner of enforcement by the city.
      4.   Open Space Allocation: Open space shall be provided for each phase
of a development as required by the city. If common open space will not be
provided proportionally by phase, the developer may be required by the city
council to execute a reservation of common open space by grant of an easement
or covenant in favor of the city, dedicating to the city all or a portion of
such reserved area as common open space in the event that the development is
not completed.
      5.   Open Space Design And Improvements:
         a.   Open space areas shall be arranged to maximize access and use by
residents of the cluster development.
         b.   Where open space improvements are provided, a safe, secure and
barrier free system of trails, paths and walkways shall be designed. The
walkways shall link residences with recreation areas, schools, commercial areas
and public facilities.
         c.   Improvements may include the following:
            (1)   Paved pedestrian paths, located in street rights of way or
pedestrian easements;
            (2)   Paved bikeways, designed in accordance with city standards;
            (3)   Trails for equestrians, paved with soft materials such as
wood chips or gravel; and
            (4)   Other improvements as required by the city.
   F.   Project Landscaping And Compatibility Requirements:
      1.   Buffering: The perimeter of a cluster development shall be buffered
from adjacent property pursuant to section
10-8-5 of this chapter. If the cluster development has the same zoning as the
adjacent lot, a type B buffer yard shall be required. Project landscaping
design shall be established in conjunction with the preliminary plat approval.
      2.   Design And Installation:
         a.   A project landscape, open space and screening plan shall be
prepared by a registered landscape architect.
         b.   The developer will be required to establish a permanent ground
cover in the landscape area to stabilize the soil to prevent erosion.
         c.   Berms or screening walls shall be approved by the city and
completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
         d.   Material colors for screening walls shall be limited to earth
tone colors. The color shall be uniform for the entire length of the wall.
         e.   All landscaping plants shall be living and maintained in a sound,
healthy, vigorous growing condition.
   G.   Phasing: An applicant may propose that a cluster development project be
developed in phases, or the city may require the applicant to divide the
project into phases in order to meet requirements and standards contained in
this title. Each phase must contain a mix of residential uses, densities and
open space so as to make the phase self-sufficient, meeting the requirements,
standards and conditions applicable to the project as a whole. Each phase of
the project shall be supported by adequate facilities and services. The public
works director shall determine the adequacy of emergency access, and the city
may require secondary access for any cluster subdivision establishing thirty
(30) or more homes. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-8-4: PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS:
   A.   Parking Required For All Structures: For all buildings or structures
hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, off street
parking shall be provided. Such parking spaces shall be located entirely on the
same property as the main use, with no portion, other than the necessary
drives, extending into any street right of way or other public way.
   B.   Minimum Parking Requirements:
      1.   Number Of Spaces: In all districts, the minimum number of off street
parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements in
table 8-3 (subsection B9 of this section) and shall comply with the rules and
regulations as detailed in the Illinois accessibility code at the time any
building or structure is erected or structurally altered. The city planner may
grant commercial developments up to a ten percent (10%) reduction in the number
of required spaces for pedestrian oriented commercial development in the
university influence area. Only independently accessible spaces shall be
counted toward required parking; tandem parking spaces shall not be counted,
except for detached single-family and duplex dwellings.
         a.   Exception: No off street parking shall be required for the area
known as the "Courthouse Square". The "Courthouse Square" shall be defined as
the area from the center of 5th Street to the center of 8th Street and from the
center of Van Buren Avenue to the center of Madison Avenue.
      2.   Standards For Unlisted Uses: The community development director, or
their designee, shall determine the number of parking spaces required for uses
not referenced in
table 8-3  (subsection B9 of this section) by applying the standard for the
most similar use or uses as listed in the table. If there is no similar use,
the community development director, or their designee, shall make a
determination based on available parking studies or standards.
      3.   Calculation Of Space: Any fraction of a parking space calculated as
required under this section shall be counted as a full parking space.
      4.   Location: Parking shall be provided on the same lot with the use
except as permitted by this section.
      5.   Spaces For Persons With Disabilities: Spaces for persons with
disabilities shall be designed and provided as required by the Americans with
disabilities act (ADA) standards and shall comply with the rules and
regulations as detailed in the Illinois accessibility code.
      6.   Additional Parking Required: Whenever a building or use constructed
or established after the effective date hereof is changed or enlarged in floor
area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or
otherwise, to create a need for additional parking, parking requirements shall
be met for all uses on the site.
      7.   Existing Parking Facilities Maintained: Facilities being used for
off street parking on the effective date hereof shall not be reduced in
capacity to less than the number of spaces prescribed, or altered in design or
function, to less than the minimum standards prescribed herein.
      8.   Head-In Parking: Head-in parking from any public street that
requires the applicant to back into the street to enter or exit the space shall
not be permitted, except for a single driveway from a detached single-family
residence or duplex. Head-in parking may be allowed along an alley. (Ord. 03-O-
9, 3-18-2003)
      9.   Table Of Off Street Parking Requirements:
TABLE 8-3: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Use Categories Specific Uses Vehicle Spaces
Use Categories           Specific Uses              Vehicle Spaces
Commercial
                                                    Minimum 1 per service
                                                    position, plus 1 per
                                                    employee on largest shift,
Drive-through uses (see                             plus 1 per 50 square feet
subsection               Fuel sales                 of retail floor area in the
10-7-11E of this title)                             building up to 200 square
                                                    feet, plus 1 per 200 square
                                                    feet for additional retail
                                                    floor area
                         General offices;           1 per 300 square feet
                         governmental offices
Office                                              1.3 per exam room, plus 1
                         Medical/dental             per 100 square feet of
                                                    waiting room
                         Amusement center           1 per game table, video
                                                    game, amusement device
                                                    1 per 4 seats or 1 per 50
Recreation and           Assembly/auditorium        square feet of gross floor
entertainment, indoor                               area if not permanent seats
                         Bowling alley              4 per lane
                         Clubs/lodges               1 per 100 square feet of
                                                    meeting room
                         Health club/fitness center 1 per 200 square feet
Recreation and           Driving range              1 per tee
entertainment, outdoor   Miniature golf             2 per hole
                                                    1 per 300 square feet of
                         Banks (branch and drive-   floor area, plus required
                         in)                        stacking spaces for drive-
                                                    through
                         Convenience store          1 per 200 square feet of
                                                    retail floor area
                         Dance, assembly, or        1 per 100 square feet of
                         exhibition halls (without  floor area
                         fixed seats)
                         Hotels/motels, cabin,      1 per sleeping room, plus 1
                         tourist home, bed and      per 200 square feet of
                         breakfast inns             office, dining and retail
                                                    floor area
                                                    1 per 50 square feet of
                                                    floor space in slumber
                         Mortuary/funeral home      rooms, parlors or
                                                    individual funeral service
                                                    rooms
                         Nightclub, cafe            1 per 75 square feet of
                                                    gross floor area
                         Private club or lodge      0.5 per seat based on
                                                    maximum occupancy
                                                    1 per each 2 seats in
                         Restaurants                dining room or 1 per 4 feet
                                                    of bench length where bench
                                                    seating is provided
Retail sales and service Shopping centers            
                         Less than 15,000 square    1 per 200 square feet
                         feet                       1 per 250 square feet
                         15,000+ square feet
                         Theaters                   1 per 4 seats
                         Vehicle sales, new and
                         used, including            Spaces equal to 10 percent
                         recreational vehicles/     of vehicle display area
                         boats
                         Other retail sales, high
                         volume, standalone (e.g.,
                         supermarkets, clothing and
                         department stores,
                         shopping complexes,        1 per 200 square feet of
                         hardware, building         sales and display area
                         supplies, bookstores, big
                         box stores, cannabis
                         dispensary, medical
                         cannabis dispensary, and
                         similar uses)
                         Other retail sales/
                         services, low volume,
                         standalone (e.g.,          1 per 400 square feet
                         appliance and sales,       (includes employee parking)
                         repair shops, nurseries,
                         greenhouses and similar
                         uses)
                                                    1 per employee, plus 1 per
                         Bulk or tank stations      facility vehicle, plus 1
                                                    per 10,000 square feet of
Storage                                             loading space
                                                    1 per 8 storage units, plus
                         Self-service               1 per employee on maximum
                                                    shift
                         Car wash, full service     10 per bay
                         Car wash, self-service     3 per bay
                         Other limited vehicle      2 per service bay, plus 1
                         service                    per employee
Vehicle service, limited                            4 per service bay, plus
                         Service stations; oil,     required stacking spaces
                         lube, muffler service      (see subsection
                                                    10-7-11E of this title)
                         Tire, batteries, accessory 3.3 per 1,000 square feet
                         retailers                  of gross floor area
Industrial
                         Industrial establishment,
                         research testing
                         laboratory, creamery,
                         bottling plant, cannabis
Manufacturing and        craft grower, cannabis     1 per employee on the
production               cultivation center,        maximum shift
                         cannabis infuser, cannabis
                         processor, medical
                         cannabis cultivation
                         center
                         Warehouse and freight      1 per 1.5 employees or
Warehouse and freight    movement, including        1,000 square feet,
movement                 cannabis transporter       whichever results in more
                                                    spaces
Wholesale sales                                    1 per employee
Institutional
College, vocational/                               1 per 2 students
technical schools
                                                    10, plus 1 additional space
Community services       Community center/          per 300 square feet of
                         library/museum/gallery     floor area in excess of
                                                    2,000 square feet
                                                    1.5 per employee, plus drop
Daycare                                            off/pick up area as
                                                    required in section
                                                    10-7-8 of this title
                         Jails, honor camps,        1 per employee on maximum
Detention facilities     reformatories, law         shift; 1 per service
                         enforcement rehabilitation vehicle
                         centers
Hospital/clinic                                    1 per bed, plus 1 per
                                                    employee
                                                    1 per (10 foot x 30 foot)
                                                    campsite, plus 1 per (10
                         Campground                 foot x 30 foot) per 6
                                                    campsites for additional
                                                    RVs, plus 4 per laundry and
Parks and open areas                                shower facility
                         Golf course                6 per hole
                                                    20 per athletic field or
                         All other                  ball diamond or 1 per 4
                                                    seats, whichever results in
                                                    more spaces
Religious assembly                                 1 per 4 seats (1 seat
                                                    equals 18 inches)
                                                    1 per employee, plus 1 per
                         Fire or police station;    each 3 volunteer personnel
Safety service           emergency response service on normal shift, plus 1 per
                                                    200 square feet usable
                                                    office space
                                                    1 per 10 seats in the
                         Elementary and junior      auditorium or main assembly
                         highs                      room, or 2 per classroom,
                                                    whichever is greater
                                                    1.2 per classroom, plus 1
Schools                                             per 10 students based upon
                         High schools               the maximum number of
                                                    students attending the
                                                    school at any 1 period of
                                                    the day
                         Schools of private         1 per 200 square feet, plus
                         instruction                1 per instructor
Residential
                         Boarding or lodging house  1 per maximum occupancy,
                                                    plus 1
                         Nursing homes; assisted
Group living             living facility; treatment
                         facility; small group and  1 per 3 beds
                         large group living
                         facilities
                         Other group living         1 per 4 beds
                                                    1 per guestroom, plus 2 for
                         Bed and breakfast          owner's portion, plus 1 per
                                                    employee
                         Business residence         2 per residence, plus
                                                    business parking
                         Single-family, duplex, or
                         multi-family in any R-2U,  1.33 per bedroom
                         R-3U or R-4U district
Household living         Single-family or duplex in 2 per dwelling unit
                         all districts
                         Multi-family in any other  1.33 per bedroom
                         district (apartment)
                         Multiple occupancy
                         dwellings in any district
                         (group dwelling greater    1.33 per occupant
                         than 3 occupants in 1
                         unit)
                         All other household living 1 per unit
 
   C.   Off Site Or Remote Parking: The community development director, or
their designee, may approve off site parking when:
      1.   Both the primary use and the off site parking are located in an area
zoned for the primary use served by the off site parking;
      2.   The required spaces may be located not to exceed three hundred feet
(300') from any building served;
      3.   The applicant has provided a written agreement that assures the
ongoing availability of the parking and that has been approved as to form by
the city attorney; and
      4.   Adequate parking is provided on site for persons with disabilities.
   D.   Parking For Mixed And Multiple Use Developments: The community
development director, or their designee, may authorize a reduction in the total
parking requirement for separate uses located on the same site or adjoining
sites that are served by a common parking facility. Reductions pursuant to this
section shall not be granted for facilities using off site or remote parking.
In determining whether to approve an adjustment for a mixed use development,
the community development director, or their designee, shall consider all
relevant factors, including:
      1.   The characteristics of each use and the differences in projected
peak parking demand, including days and hours of operation;
      2.   The potential reduction in vehicle movements afforded by
multipurpose use of the parking facility by employees, customers or residents
of the uses served; and
      3.   The potential improvements in parking facility design, circulation
and access afforded by a joint parking facility.
   E.   Parking For Persons With Disabilities:
      1.   Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be provided in
all parking lots in accordance with Americans with disabilities act
accessibility guidelines (ADAAG) for buildings and facilities.
      2.   The number of parking spaces to be provided for persons with
disabilities shall comply with the Illinois accessibility code.
      3.   All handicapped accessible spaces shall be clearly marked.
   F.   Parking Design Standards:
      1.   Minimum Standards:
         a.   (Rep. by Ord. 08-O-28, 10-7-2008)
         b.   In a residential district, no recreational vehicle or trailer may
park other than on private property and shall not cause a visibility
obstruction at the intersection of street rights of way. Recreational vehicles,
boats and trailers stored on a residential lot for more than seven (7)
consecutive days shall be stored behind the front building line behind an
opaque screen or fence at least six feet (6') in height. No vehicle or trailer
shall be used as a dwelling while parked on private property.
         c.   Trucks and trailers in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds,
designed and manufactured for or used for specific commercial purposes,
including, but not limited to, wreckers, dump trucks, tracked vehicles, buses,
construction vehicles, equipment carriers, bottling works delivery trucks,
grain trucks, and refrigerated trucks, are prohibited from parking in an R
district. No vehicle in excess of twelve thousand (12,000) pounds' gross
vehicle weight, excluding recreational trailers and recreational vehicles,
shall be parked in an R district.
         d.   (Rep. by Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
         e.   Any type commercial vehicle, regardless of gross vehicle weight,
delivering or picking up merchandise for delivery or employed in performing a
repair or construction service, may park for the purpose of making such pick up
or delivery, or for the duration of the period during which a repair or
construction service is being performed on or to property in the area where
parked.
         f.   The following table 8-5 establishes the minimum design standards
for parking areas. The community development director, or their designee, may
require modifications to parking lot design to ensure the safety of
pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists. These standards are for nonhandicapped
parking spaces. Design standards for handicapped parking spaces shall be
designed and provided as required by the Americans with disabilities standards
and shall comply with the rules and regulations as detailed in the Illinois
accessibility code. The community development director, or their designee, may
allow for up to a ten percent (10%) decrease in aisle widths for redevelopment
sites when parking space widths are increased by twelve inches (12").
TABLE 8-5: MINIMUM PARKING FACILITY DESIGN STANDARDS
 
                                           Total Width Of 2   Parking Space
Parking    Maneuvering Lane Parking Space  Rows Of Spaces And Striping
Angle      Width            Dimensions     Maneuvering Lane   Dimensions 4"
                                                              Thick Stripes
           One-Way Two-Way  Width 1 Length One-Way Two-Way    Width Length
30° to 50�12'     20'      9'      18'    48'     56'        9'    18'
51° to 75�13'     22'      9'      18'    49'     58'        9'    18'
76° to 90�n/a     24'      9'      18'    n/a     60'        9'    18'
 
Note:
    1.    Measure width of space from center of stripe to center of stripe.
         g.   Any new driveway or existing driveway widened from a single
driveway to a double driveway in any zoning district, except A and RE, shall be
constructed of concrete or bituminous concrete.
         h.   Landscaping shall be required for any off street parking lot
containing over ten (10) spaces, as required in section
10-8-5 of this chapter.
      2.   Timing Of Parking: All parking areas and drives shall be ready for
use prior to occupancy of a building or site, and shall be approved by the
community development director, or their designee. The building official may
grant special permission to delay this requirement due to weather conditions
not being satisfactory for proper installation of surfacing materials.
      3.   Location:
         a.   All off street parking shall be located outside of required
landscape areas.
         b.   Off street parking facilities and required parking facilities in
any C or I district may be located in the front yard.
         c.   No part of any parking space shall be closer than five feet (5')
to any established highway, road or street right of way line. In case a parking
lot serving a commercial, industrial or multi-family development adjoins an RE,
R-1 or R-2 residential district, a type D buffer yard shall separate it from
the adjacent lot. Buffer yards, fences and walls and landscaping shall be
developed in conformance with section
10-8-5 of this chapter.
         d.   Off street parking areas for residential structures in the R-2,
R-2U, R-3, R-3U, R-4 and R-4U districts may locate up to three (3) parking
spaces in the front yard of a parcel (see exhibit 8-5 of this section) and
driveways and surfaced parking areas shall not occupy more than thirty percent
(30%) or up to twenty four feet (24') wide (whichever is greater) of the front
yard of any parcel in an R district.
   Exhibit 8-5: Acceptable Parking Options For The R-2, R-2U, R-3, R-3U, R-
4 And R-4U Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1572.gif]
 
         e.   Off street parking and loading areas may not occupy any part of
required open space, but may occupy a part of the required yard area, subject
to the provisions of this title.
      4.   Maintenance Of Required Spaces: All required parking facilities
shall be maintained for the duration of the use requiring such facilities.
Required parking facilities shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking
of passenger automobiles, motor vehicles or light trucks not exceeding one ton
in capacity, and shall not be used for the sale, display or storage of
merchandise, or for the storage or repair of vehicles or equipment.
      5.   Accessibility: Each standard parking space shall consist of an
independently accessible rectangular or trapezoidal area.
      6.   Vertical Clearance: Each parking space shall have a vertical
clearance of at least eight feet (8').
      7.   Circulation: Each parking and loading area shall have adequate
drives, aisles and turning and maneuvering areas for access and usability, and
shall at all times have access to a street or alley and provide sidewalk access
to buildings.
   G.   Parking Area Paving And Drainage:
      1.   When Paving Required:
         a.   Driveways for use in the A and RE districts shall not be required
to be paved, provided the driveway has an all weather surface to facilitate
access by emergency vehicles.
         b.   All parking areas and driveways for uses in the A district that
are projected to generate one hundred (100) or more average daily trips shall
be paved.
         c.   Driveways providing access to residential lots in the R-1, R-2,
R-3 and R-4 districts shall be paved.
         d.   All commercial and industrial parking lots, access drives and
loading areas shall be paved.
      2.   Pavement Materials:
         a.   All Weather Surface: Driveway surfacing may be either eight
inches (8") of gravel or chip and seal. All gravel driveways shall be coated
with a dust palliative to prevent airborne dust particles in the A and RE
districts.
         b.   Residential Parking And Driveway Surface: Paving surfaces shall
consist of either two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete over a six inch (6")
rolled stone base or four inches (4") of Portland cement concrete.
         c.   Commercial And Industrial Parking, Driveway And Loading Area
Surfaces: At a minimum, the parking, driveways and loading areas shall consist
of either two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete overlay over an eight inch (8")
rolled stone base or seven inches (7") of Portland cement concrete.
         d.   Heavy Equipment Storage Areas: Heavy equipment storage areas that
are accessory uses for agricultural service establishments and nonagricultural
commercial uses in the agricultural, commercial and industrial districts may be
surfaced and maintained with chip and seal or a similar durable, dustless
surface. However, all driveways leading to such areas shall be paved as
required in subsection G2c of this section.
      3.   Engineered Plans Required: The community development director, or
their designee, shall require engineering design plans, signed by a
professional engineer, for commercial and industrial lots of more than one
acre. All parking and loading facilities shall be designed, graded and provided
with permanent storm drainage facilities that prevent standing water on any
parking area, and do not increase the flow of water onto adjacent properties,
streets or alleys.
   H.   Parking Area Lighting: On site lighting shall be provided for multi-
family, commercial and industrial parking lots. The lighting of parking areas,
walks and drives shall be required in such manner and during such hours as may
be deemed necessary in the interest of public safety and security. Such
lighting may be attached to a building or freestanding fixture. All lighting
shall comply with section
10-8-6 of this chapter.
   I.   Off Street Loading Requirements: Excepting the C-3 district, every
building or part thereof erected or occupied for commercial or industrial
purposes involving the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by
truck shall provide and maintain on the same premises loading space in
accordance with the following requirements:
      1.   In the C-1, C-2, I-1 and I-2 districts loading spaces shall be
provided in accordance with table 8-6 of this section.
TABLE 8-6: REQUIRED LOADING SPACES
 
Gross Floor Area Required Loading Spaces
(Square Feet)
0 - 1,999        None
2,000 - 19,999   1
20,000 - 99,999  1, plus 1 per 20,000 square feet or fraction thereof over
                 20,000 square feet
100,000          5, plus 1 per 40,000 square feet or fraction thereof over
                 100,000 square feet
 
      2.   Each loading space shall be not less than twelve feet (12') in width
by seventy feet (70') in length with a fifteen foot (15') vertical clearance.
      3.   Such space may occupy all or part of any required side or rear yard,
except when adjoining a residential district, in which case, it shall be set
back twenty five feet (25') and shall be screened from the adjacent property by
a type E buffer yard fence.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007; Ord. 07-O-58, 11-20-2007;
Ord. 09-O-60, 12-1-2009; Ord. 14-O-41, 10-7-2014; Ord. 15-O-9, 1-20-2015; Ord.
20-O-22, 6-16-2020; Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-8-5: LANDSCAPING, BUFFER YARDS AND SCREENING:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: The purpose of this section is to promote
the public health, safety and welfare by establishing efficient, effective
minimum standards for buffering between land uses of different intensities,
screening of land uses and utility and equipment areas that may create a
negative impact, the protection of natural resources, and the installation and
continued maintenance of landscaped areas within the city. Where necessary to
interpret the precise meaning of technical landscaping terms used in this
section, reference shall be made to "The American Standard For Nursery Stock",
as published by the American Association of Nurserymen (AAN). All new
development or redevelopment required to submit a site plan shall comply with
the landscaping standards in accordance with table 8-7 of this section. (Ord.
03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
TABLE 8-7: LANDSCAPE STANDARDS APPLICABILITY TABLE
                Applicability
Zoning District Buffer Yards Street Trees Parking Lots Other Landscaping
                      Applicability
Zoning District       Buffer Yards Street Trees Parking Lots Other Landscaping
Agricultural And Residential Districts
A, RE                                                      
R-1, R-2, R-2U                                             
R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U,                                      
M
Commercial Districts
C-1, C-2                                                   
C-3                                                        
Industrial Districts      
I-1, I-2                                                   
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code)
   B.   Exceptions: Landscaping standards shall not apply to agricultural uses,
or commercial remodeling projects that do not increase floor area, or
commercial remodeling projects that increase the total floor area.
   C.   Landscaping Plan Required: A plan showing required buffer yards and
landscaping of the buffer yards shall be submitted in support of a site plan or
building permit for any development within a development area, except for
farms, single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. All landscaping plans
for buffer yards and related areas shall include the following information:
      1.   The locations, varieties, number and size of plants to be planted
within required landscaped buffer yard areas;
      2.   Topographic information showing the final site grading and drainage
for landscape area and properly specify planting for areas needing slope
protection;
      3.   Impervious surfaces, including sidewalks, pavement areas and
building footprints;
      4.   Property boundaries;
      5.   Mature sizes of plant materials shall be drawn to scale;
      6.   Existing trees which shall be preserved, eight inch (8") caliper or
larger, measured two and one-half feet (21/2') above ground level that are
proposed to remain; and
      7.   The boundaries and edge treatments of all landscaped and buffer yard
areas.
   D.   Minimum Plantings And Sizes Of Landscape Materials:
      1.   Landscape Material Sizes: Landscape materials shall measure the
minimum sizes at the time of planting as described below: (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-
2003)
         a.   Trees:
            (1)   Large trees: Two and one-half inch (21/2") caliper measured
at two and one-half feet (21/2') above ground level as shown in exhibit 8-6 of
this section.
            (2)   Medium to small trees: One and one-fourth inch (11/4")
caliper measured at two and one-half feet (21/2') above ground level and at
least eight feet (8') tall at time of planting. Trees must be adequately
secured and maintained for a period of no less than twelve (12) months after
the time of planting. (Ord. 14-O-41, 10-7-2014)
EXHIBIT 8-6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1574.gif]
 
         b.   Shrubs: Twenty four inches (24") tall from ground level to the
top of the shrub.
      2.   Total Landscape Area Requirements: All subject development shall
provide required screening, foundation landscaping, parking lot landscaping,
buffer yards and street trees. If the total landscape area resulting from these
provisions does not meet the requirements of table 8-8 of this section, the
applicant shall provide supplemental landscaping. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
TABLE 8-8: MINIMUM PERCENTAGE OF LOT TO BE LANDSCAPED
 
District                   Minimum Percentage Of Lot Area To Be Landscaped
A, RE, R-1, R-2            0 percent, plus required buffer yards and/or street
                           trees (see table 8-7 of this section)
R-2U, R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U 15 percent
C-1, C-2, I-1              15 percent
                           0 percent, plus required street trees and parking
C-3                        lot landscaping as applicable pursuant to table 8-
                           7 of this section
I-2                        15 percent
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
      3.   Required Numbers Of Plants: The minimum number of plants per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of required landscape area shall comply with the
standards in table 8-9 of this section.
TABLE 8-9: REQUIRED PLANTINGS
 
Type Of Plant Number Of Plants Per 1,000 Square Feet Of Required Landscape Area
              1
Trees         1 large or 2 medium to small
Shrubs        4
 
   Note:
      1.    See table 8-8 of this section for percentage of lot area to be
landscaped.
   E.   Buffer Yard Standards: The following buffer yard standards shall apply
to all subdivisions and to all multi-family, commercial and industrial projects
for which site plans are required. Site plans shall include detailed drawings
of enclosure and screening methods as provided. Table 8-10 of this section
lists the types of buffer yards required between adjacent land uses. Exhibit 8-
7 of this section illustrates the minimum widths and plantings for each type of
buffer yard listed in table 8-10 of this section.
      1.   Buffer Yards Required: Buffer yards shall be required between
parcels with different zoning designations and as otherwise required herein.
The full buffer yard is required in addition to other landscaping requirements;
provided however, that buffer yard plantings may be counted toward total
landscape area requirements. The board may authorize a reduction of buffer yard
requirements where the zoning on abutting property is not consistent with the
adopted future land use plan.
      2.   Types Of Buffer Yards Required:
         a.   Table 8-10 (subsection E3 of this section) shows the type of
buffer yard required to buffer an adjacent property based on its zoning
district. Exhibit 8-7 (subsection E3 of this section) illustrates a typical
buffer yard for each type. The applicant may choose to install any of the
subtypes of buffer yards. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
         b.   For example, if the proposed development is located in an R-4
(multi-family) zoning district and the "adjacent development" is zoned I-1
(industrial), then the applicant shall install a type D buffer. The applicant
may choose between the D-1, D-2 or D-3 buffer yard design. If the applicant
chooses a D-1 buffer yard, a minimum width of twenty feet (20') is required
with a berm or fence and plantings of three (3) evergreen trees, two (2)
deciduous trees and twenty (20) shrubs per one hundred feet (100') of common
property line. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. 2006 Code)
      3.   Table 8-10 And Exhibit 8-7:
TABLE 8-10: REQUIRED BUFFER YARDS
                  Proposed Development
Adjacent District Single-/   Multi-Family Office Commercial Industrial
                  Two-Family
               Proposed Development
Adjacent       Single-/     Multi-Family Office       Commercial   Industrial
District       Two-Family
A Agricultural B            B            B            B            Not required
RE residential
estates, R-
1 single-
family
residential    Not required B            C            D            E
and R-2 (and
R-2U) two-
family/
duplex
residential
R-3 (and R-3U)
limited multi-
family
residential    B            Not required A            B            D
and R-4 (and
R-4U) multi-
family
residential
C-
1 neighborhood C            A            Not required A            C
commercial
C-2 general    D            B            A            Not required B
commercial
I-1 light
industrial and E            D            C            C            Not required
I-2 heavy
industrial
 
(Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
Exhibit 8-7
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1577.gif]
 
   F.   Buffer Yard Location: Buffer yards and open spaces shall be provided on
the site of the new development, regardless of existing setbacks, buffer yards
or open space otherwise provided on the adjacent property. Buffer yards may be
included within required building setbacks and shall be shown as landscape
easements on the plat and site plan. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
   G.   Screening And Fence Standards:
      1.   Screening Of Utility Areas And Equipment:
         a.   Solid Waste Collection Areas: Solid waste receptacles, shipping
pallets, bundled cardboard and similar waste materials stored for collection
shall be enclosed on all sides and screened from public view of adjoining
residential properties or any street right of way with a six foot (6') high
(plus or minus 8 inches), solid enclosure with a gate and shall be constructed
of cedar, redwood, masonry or other compatible building material. The floor of
the gated enclosure shall be a concrete pad which shall extend five feet (5')
beyond the gate. Trash enclosures shall be located a minimum of fifty feet
(50') from any RE, R-1, R-2 or R-2U zoning district. (Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
         b.   Mechanical Equipment:
            (1)   Roof Mounted Equipment: Roof mounted equipment, including
ventilators and satellite dishes, shall be screened from view or isolated so as
not to be visible from any public right of way or any RE, R-1, R-2 or R-2U
zoning district within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the subject lot as
viewed from five feet (5') above ground level. Roof screens and parapet walls
shall be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance.
            (2)   Ground Level Equipment: All electrical and mechanical
equipment, other than public utility equipment, that is located at ground level
shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from the right
of way of an arterial street or RE, R-1, R-2 or R-2U zoning district within
three hundred feet (300') of the subject lot. Such screens and enclosures shall
be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance.
      2.   Fence Standards:
         a.   Height: Fences shall not exceed six feet (6') in height in
residential districts except where used for public utilities, public or private
schools, public or private recreation facilities or industrial properties, and
where required for wrecking/disposal operations and junk or salvage yards.
         b.   Electric Fences: Electric fences are prohibited.
         c.   Barbed Wire Fencing: Barbed wire fences or barbed wire assemblies
atop fences shall be permitted only in industrial districts and may be
incorporated into fencing for utility substations regardless of the zoning
district.
         d.   Front Yard Fences: No fence shall be allowed in the front yard,
except:
            (1)   Picket fences not exceeding three feet (3') in height and
sixty percent (60%) opacity;
            (2)   Wrought iron fences; or
            (3)   Brick or masonry fences not exceeding two feet (2').
      3.   Commercial And Industrial Equipment And Lot Screening:
         a.   Purpose: The intent of commercial and industrial lot screening is
to ensure that items that cannot be enclosed within a building are screened on
all sides from the view of adjacent rights of way and more restrictive zoning
districts. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
         b.   Boundary Landscaping: In all C and I districts, except the C-
3 district, five feet (5') of boundary landscaping shall be provided along the
abutting public right of way (the 5 foot boundary landscaping may include the
public right of way) (except an alley). Such landscaping shall consist of a
combination of ground covers and deciduous and evergreen shrubs and may include
trees if they will not obstruct sight distances or vehicular or pedestrian
circulation. No specific spacing shall be required for boundary landscaping if
the landscaping is appropriate to the character of the site and the landscaped
areas are of a size to allow proper owner maintenance. (Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
         c.   Salvage Yards And Junkyards: The operator of a junkyard/salvage
yard or industrial storage yard shall comply with all federal, state and local
health and safety regulations.
         d.   Outside Storage: The outside storage of salvage or scrap
materials, household goods or furniture, or business equipment or materials for
more than twenty four (24) hours shall not be allowed except where permitted by
this title and shall be in compliance with the following screening standards:
            (1)   Loading, Storage And Service Areas: Loading, storage and
service areas shall be visually screened from view of residentially zoned
properties with a decorative fence or wall, dense landscape plantings or berms.
Such screening shall provide at least seventy five percent (75%) overall visual
screening of the loading and service area(s) as viewed from vantage points on
lines perpendicular to the surface of the object(s) being screened.
            (2)   Wrecking/Disposal Operations, Junkyards/Salvage Yards And
Outside Storage Lots: Wrecking/disposal operations, junkyards/salvage yards and
open storage:
               (A)   Shall be screened with a wall, or combination wall and
berm, not less than eight feet (8') in height, which shall be of solid, one
hundred percent (100%) opaque construction. The wall design and construction
materials shall be approved by the board of appeals and planning in conjunction
with the issuance of a special use permit.
               (B)   Shall be screened on all sides from the view of all
surrounding uses and all streets and rights of way. Junkyards/salvage yards may
be entirely enclosed within an approved building.
      4.   Parking Lot Landscaping: For any off street parking lot containing
over ten (10) spaces, or for any combination of parking areas on a single lot
providing more than ten (10) spaces, compliance with minimum landscaping shall
be required. The landscaping shall consist of a combination of ground cover and
deciduous and evergreen shrubs and trees. The required landscaping may be
located within or adjacent to a parking lot, and no specific spacing shall be
required; provided, that the landscaping is appropriate to the character of the
site, and that the landscaped areas are sufficient in size to allow proper
owner maintenance. A minimum of a type B buffer yard with a fence shall be
provided where a parking lot abuts a single-family residence in an RE, R-1, R-
2 and R-2U district.
   H.   Irrigation Design Standards: Irrigation systems are beneficial in
efficiently adding water to the cultivated landscape. Irrigation systems,
either manual or automatic, may be used for any landscape areas but shall be
required for development projects that are larger than one-half (1/2) acre in
size. Automatic systems, soaker, spray and drip irrigation systems should be
used as applicable for the type of planting design.
   I.   Timing Of Installation Of Required Landscaping: All required
landscaping materials shall be in place prior to occupancy, weather permitting.
In periods of adverse weather conditions, temporary approval to occupy may be
granted, subject to the posting of a cash escrow or irrevocable letter of
credit in an amount equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the estimated cost
of the landscaping, with the estimated cost to be certified by a landscaping
provider. The cash escrow or irrevocable letter of credit may be forfeited if
the landscaping is not completed within one year after the approval of the
temporary occupancy. Forfeiture of any cash escrow or irrevocable letter of
credit shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility to maintain the
required landscaping.
   J.   General Landscaping And Site Maintenance:
      1.   The applicant, property owner and/or subsequent or successor owners
and their agents shall be responsible for maintenance of any landscaping and
any landscaped buffer yard on the property on a continuing basis for the life
of the development as specified in this section. All required landscaping shall
be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include,
but not be limited to, mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding
and other activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Failure to
maintain the landscape plantings shall be considered a violation of this title.
      2.   Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and
other materials or plants not a part of the landscaping.
      3.   All required plant material shall be maintained in a healthy,
growing condition as is appropriate for the season. Plant materials that
exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease and/or damage shall be appropriately
treated and dead plants promptly removed and replaced within the next planting
season.
   K.   Planting List For Parkways: Table 8-11 of this section lists trees that
may be planted in medians or within the parkway adjacent to public streets.
Other trees are subject to written approval by the director of public works
prior to planting. The director of public works should be consulted prior to
planting any trees in the right of way to ensure that the trees will not
interfere with existing or planned public facilities.
TABLE 8-11: TREES SUITABLE FOR PARKWAY PLANTING
Species Mature Height Spread Form Character
Species            Mature Height Spread   Form            Character
Ash, autumn purple 50 to 80      50 to 80 Rounded/oval    Purple in fall
white
Ash, Marshall      50 to 60      30       Upright/rounded Yellow in fall
seedless green
Bald cypress       60 to 80      20 to 45 Conical         Deciduous conifer
Flowering crab     15 to 30      15 to 25 Rounded/oval    Fragrant flower
Ginkgo             50 to 60      40       Open/pyramidal  Yellow in fall
Kentucky coffee    60 to 75      45 to 65 Irregular/oval  Provides light shade/
                                                          native
Kousa dogwood      20 to 30      20 to 30 Rounded         Spring flower
Linden, glenleven  40 to 60      30 to 60 Rounded         Fragrant flower
Linden, littleleaf 60            30 to 40 Upright/oval    Fragrant flower
Macho Amur cork    35 to 40      30 to 40 Rounded         Thrives with ample
                                                          root space
Maple, Amur        15 to 20      15 to 20 Oval            Red in fall
Maple, hedge       30 to 40      25 to 35 Rounded/oval    Very adaptable
Oak, English       75            75       Rounded         Columnar varieties
                                                          available
Oak, red           60 to 75      40 to 50 Rounded         Red in fall
Oak, shingle       50 to 60      50 to 60 Rounded         Attractive summer
                                                          foliage
Oak, white         50 to 80      50 to 80 Rounded         Majestic
Pear, aristocrat   35 to 40      25 to 35 Pyramidal       Superior branch
                                                          structure
Pear, Cleveland    35 to 40      15 to 20 Upright         Fragrant flower/good
select                                                    fall color
Serviceberry       25            15       Oval            Spring flower/red in
                                                          fall
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-8-6: LIGHTING:
   A.   Contained Lighting:
      1.   Any light used for illumination of buildings, signs, parking areas,
security, or for any other purpose shall be arranged so as to contain direct
lighting on the property on which the light source is located and away from
nearby residential properties and the vision of motorists on adjacent streets.
      2.   The cone of light from any light source other than a streetlight
shall not extend onto adjacent residential property or street pavement.
   B.   Location Of Light Standards: Light posts and standards shall be located
so that they do not create a pedestrian or vehicular hazard.
   C.   Maximum Height Of Lighting Fixtures: Except for city approved safety
and street lighting, lighting fixtures shall not be elevated from grade level
any higher on a building exterior or lighting standard than as follows:
      1.   Thirty feet (30').
      2.   Luminaries and historic lighting are subject to site development
plan review and approval by the board of zoning appeals and planning.
   D.   Luminaries:
      1.   Luminary types permitted: downlight, indirect, diffused or shielded.
      2.   Luminary types not permitted: bare bulbs or string lamps, unless
used for a special event for a temporary use for which a permit has been
issued. Wattage shall not exceed seventy five (75) watts per bulb.
      3.   Decorative lighting standards shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in
height. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
CHAPTER 9
PUBLIC FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
10-9-1: Adequate Public Facilities Required
10-9-2: Water System
10-9-3: Centralized Wastewater Systems
10-9-4: Private (On Site) Wastewater Systems
10-9-5: Storm Water Management
10-9-6: Streets
10-9-7: Parks, Playgrounds And Open Space Areas
10-9-1: ADEQUATE PUBLIC FACILITIES REQUIRED:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to promote development that is
served by public facilities at the levels of service established by the city,
which are adequate to support and service the area of the proposed development.
   B.   General Requirements:
      1.   Land shall not be approved for development unless and until adequate
public facilities exist or provision has been made for the following essential
public facilities: water service, wastewater treatment and disposal, storm
water management, electrical service, telecommunications service, gas service
and streets and public transportation facilities.
      2.   New development shall provide adequate facilities and services,
including required easements, to accommodate demands from proposed development
in conformance with the minimum standards established in this chapter and other
design manuals adopted by the city pursuant to subsection
10-4-3N of this title.
      3.   Unconstructed improvements shall be bonded prior to the recording of
the final plat in conformance with subsection
10-4-3I of this title.
      4.   New development shall be phased at a pace that will ensure the
provision of adequate community facilities and services for proposed and future
development.
      5.   Each development project shall be designed so that the project is
capable of functioning effectively and independently at completion of each
phase.
      6.   Adequate roadway facilities shall be provided concurrently with new
development and shall be designed and constructed in conformance with
applicable city standards.
      7.   All required facilities shall be inspected and approved by the city
prior to issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy, as
applicable.
   C.   Compliance With Comprehensive Plan: Proposed public improvements shall
conform to and be properly related to the city comprehensive plan and
applicable capital improvements plans.
   D.   Water System: All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be
connected to a public or private water system capable of providing water for
health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection as required
in section
10-9-2 of this chapter.
   E.   Wastewater Collection And Treatment: All habitable buildings and
buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection
and treatment as required in section
10-9-3 or
10-9-4 of this chapter.
   F.   Storm Water Management: Drainage improvements shall accommodate
potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed
to prevent increases in peaks or velocity of downstream flooding. The city
shall require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or
the construction of off site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of
the proposed development pursuant to section
10-9-5 of this chapter.
   G.   Streets: Proposed streets shall provide a safe, convenient and
functional system for vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle circulation; shall be
properly related to the comprehensive plan; and shall be appropriate for the
particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. Adequate
street capacity and street design and construction shall be done in conformance
with the standards in section
10-9-6 of this chapter. New development shall contribute to the construction of
the transportation facilities needed to meet the demands attributable to the
development. Such roadways shall be provided concurrently with new development.
The subdivider shall provide the grading of the entire street right of way,
alley or public place and pave the streets in conformance with section
10-9-6 of this chapter. Dedication of rights of way and other access easements
necessary for needed transportation facilities for current and future phases
shall be required of new development.
   H.   Parks And Open Space: Parks and open space shall be provided in
accordance with section
10-9-7 of this chapter.
   I.   Utilities: All utilities provided as new installations within a
subdivision shall be placed in the right of way or in easements and shall be
provided underground unless a variance has been granted by the city council
(see section 10-9-6H of this chapter). Utilities shall be installed prior to
pavement of streets.
   J.   Extension And Oversized Facilities Policies: All public improvements
and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new
development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage
facilities, electric lines and telecommunications lines shall be constructed
through new development to promote the logical extension of public
infrastructure to serve future growth. The city may require the applicant of a
subdivision to extend off site improvements to reach the subdivision or to
oversize required public facilities to serve anticipated future development as
a condition of plat or plan approval. The city shall have the option to
establish a public improvement district that will reimburse the developer for
excess improvements, to use an "excess capacity" sharing arrangement between
the applicant and subsequent developers of adjacent property benefiting from
the oversized facilities, or to directly reimburse the developer.
   K.   Phasing: The city may require the phasing of development or
improvements in order to maintain adopted levels of service for existing public
services and facilities or for other reasons based upon maintaining the health,
safety and general welfare of the city's inhabitants.
   L.   Easements; Rights Of Way:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided in this title, an applicant for a
development approval shall ensure that adequate on site and off site easements
are provided for future roadways, water, wastewater and other public utilities.
      2.   The property owner shall grant adequate utility easements for all
public and private utilities as required by the public works director. Utility
easements shall be shown on the plat and dedicated in conjunction with
recordation of the final plat.
      3.   Easements of at least ten feet (10') in width shall be dedicated on
each side of the right of way, as determined by the public works director to be
necessary, for city utilities and storm sewers. Unless otherwise authorized or
required by the public works director, utilities within or adjacent to street
rights of way shall be scheduled consistent with exhibit 9-1 (subsection Q of
this section).
      4.   Except where prohibited by topography, easements shall be located on
the centerline of lot lines. All easements for drainage or sewer shall be
selectively cleared of undergrowth, trees and other obstructions by the
developers prior to final approval. No buildings or structures, except as
necessary for utilities, shall be permitted within or on easements.
      5.   The applicant shall provide adequate on site rights of way for
anticipated traffic demands in a manner consistent with this title, the
comprehensive plan and project specific traffic impact analysis (TIA), if
applicable. If a TIA, prepared in accordance with subsection
10-9-6I of this chapter, shows that a proposed development creates the need for
additional off site right of way, the applicant shall be required to provide
right of way prior to development approval.
      6.   Whenever any stream or surface drainage course is located in an area
being subdivided, the subdivider shall provide an adequate easement along each
side of the stream for the purpose of widening, deepening, sloping, improving,
maintaining or protecting the watercourse, and such easement shall be dedicated
to the city or other appropriate public agency.
   M.   Construction And Materials: Except as otherwise provided in this title,
the construction and material specifications of all public improvements shall
comply with adopted improvement standards.
   N.   Inspections And Acceptance: The city or its authorized agent shall
inspect public improvements to ensure that such improvements are constructed to
city standards and specifications. City acceptance of required improvements
shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of
occupancy, as applicable, and in conformance with subsections
10-4-2C and D of this title. The cost of inspection shall be borne by the
applicant in accordance with subsection
10-4-3E5h of this title.
   O.   Maintenance: The city shall require performance bonds and/or
maintenance guarantees for all public improvements as a condition of accepting
such improvement in accordance with subsection
10-4-3I8 of this title.
   P.   Scheduling Utilities And Streets: Construction of utilities shall be
completed prior to required road improvements to minimize damage to new
pavement. The public works director shall approve the locations and designs of
all public improvements. Generally, utilities within or adjacent to public
rights of way shall be arranged in accordance with exhibit 9-1 of this section.
   Q.   Exhibit 9-1:
Exhibit 9-1: Typical Cross Section
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1689.png]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-9-2: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   Inside City Limits: Where a subdivision is located within the city
limits, each lot therein shall be provided with a connection to the city water
system. Fire hydrants shall also be installed in all subdivisions within the
corporate limits and any area receiving city service. The water supply system
shall be constructed under the direction and control of the city and shall
conform to state and federal standards. The applicant shall pay all applicable
fees as a condition of extension of water service. Prior to receiving approval
of a subdivision that will receive city water service, owners of properties
located outside the city limits shall enter into an annexation agreement
requiring annexation of said property when it becomes contiguous with the city
limits. Individual service connections within single-family residential
subdivisions shall be extended from the main to each lot, and clearly marked.
      2.   Outside City Limits: In subdivisions outside the city limits,
pending availability of a public water supply, the subdivider shall construct
wells or a private water supply system in such a manner that an adequate supply
of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision at the time
improvements are erected thereon. The installation shall conform to standards
and requirements and be subject to the approval of appropriate county and state
authorities.
   B.   Design:
      1.   Designs shall conform to the current edition of the "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois" and subtitle
F of title 35 of the Illinois administrative code as amended.
      2.   The minimum size for water mains shall be eight inches (8"). Water
mains shall loop into existing mains. Fire hydrants shall be spaced such that
no residence, commercial, or industrial building is more than three hundred
feet (300') from a fire hydrant.
      3.   Exceptions to these requirements must be obtained from the public
works director, in writing, under the following conditions:
         a.   Flow: In no case shall the design result in less than five
hundred (500) gallons per minute (gpm) at twenty (20) pounds per square inch
(psi) residual pressure where said flow rate is available at existing water
mains.
         b.   Size: The minimum size for water mains will be reduced to six
inches (6") if the main will ultimately serve less than one hundred (100)
population equivalents, adequate flow can be maintained, and there is no
potential for future extension of the main.
         c.   Loops: The requirement to loop to existing mains may be waived if
all the requirements for size reduction are met. The loop requirement may also
be waived if the city intends to extend the main as part of a future
improvement. The city may participate in the cost of water main extensions
required for loops that exceed five hundred feet (500') outside the subdivision
limits. The amount of city participation will be determined on a case by case
basis.
   C.   Construction: Construction shall be in accordance with the current
edition of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois" and the following:
      1.   Poured concrete thrust blocks are not allowed. Restrained and
blocked joints shall be used at all bends, Ts, and caps. The final three (3)
joints on any capped line shall be restrained.
      2.   The contractor shall contact the public works director immediately
after the completion of water mains to arrange for testing in accordance with
the above specifications.
   D.   Materials: Materials shall conform to the current city specifications
for water and sewer materials. A copy of these specifications is available from
the public works director. Water mains shall be constructed of class 52, cement
lined, bituminous coated, ductile iron pipe.
   E.   On And Off Site Improvements: The developer shall provide for on site
and off site improvements required to adequately serve a proposed development.
In no event shall approval be granted to allow occupancy prior to connection to
an adequate public water supply.
   F.   Extensions; Oversizing: Water lines shall be a minimum of eight inches
(8") in diameter unless otherwise approved by the public works director. The
city council may require that water lines be oversized and be phased in
coordination with the pace of new development to ensure the development will be
adequately served by community facilities and services. The subdivider shall be
required to provide water systems with adequate capacity to serve the
subdivision. Water systems shall be extended to the boundaries of the
subdivision when required to facilitate future extensions of such systems. When
oversizing of a water main in excess of the design standards of these
regulations is required by the city council to facilitate system expansion, the
city may provide for reimbursement as per subsection
10-9-1J of this chapter.
   G.   Easements: The applicant shall dedicate easements required to
accommodate all water system facilities to serve new development, except
individual service lines. The public works director shall approve the location
and dimensions of required easements. Easements shall follow property lines to
the greatest extent possible. In no case shall easements be less than twelve
feet (12') wide.
   H.   Individual Wells And Central Water Systems:
      1.   Public Water Supply Unavailable: In areas outside the city limits,
where public water supply is not available and the density of the subdivision
is one unit per acre or less, individual wells may be used to provide water to
each and every lot within the subdivision. The applicant shall demonstrate the
availability of water for domestic use and shall submit samples of the water to
the county health department for its approval. Individual wells shall be
approved by the health department, and such approvals shall be submitted to the
city council for approval prior to recording the final subdivision plat.
      2.   Future Connection To Public Water Supply: If the city council
requires that a connection to a public water main be made in the future when
the main becomes available, the applicant shall make arrangements for future
connection to the water system prior to recording of the final plat. The city
council may require a performance or cash bond to ensure compliance. (Ord. 03-
O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-9-3: CENTRALIZED WASTEWATER SYSTEMS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an
approved means of wastewater collection and treatment as described herein. In
addition, all new development located within four hundred feet (400') of an
existing or proposed publicly owned sewer main or other collection system shall
be connected to the wastewater system.
      2.   Where the subdivision is located within the city limits, each lot
therein shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer.
      3.   In subdivisions beyond the city limits where plans for the
installation of sanitary sewers in the vicinity of the subdivision have been
prepared by the city, the applicant may be required to install sewers in
conformity with such plans.
      4.   In subdivisions beyond the city limits where no plans have been made
for the installation of sanitary sewers, the applicant may install a private
sewage disposal system for each lot at the time improvements are erected
thereon.
      5.   The applicant shall pay appropriate fees as a condition of
connection to the public sanitary sewer system.
      6.   Centralized wastewater systems shall be used only for sewage
disposal. Flow from footing drains, gutters or other extraneous sources shall
not be directed to the wastewater system.
      7.   Prior to receiving approval of a subdivision that will receive city
wastewater service, owners of properties located outside the city limits shall
enter into an annexation agreement requiring annexation of said property when
it becomes contiguous with the city limits.
   B.   Wastewater Facilities:
      1.   Wastewater connections shall extend to each lot. All connections
between the city sewer system and the subdivision sewer system shall comply
with the applicable adopted ordinance of the city pertaining to sewers 1 , and
all construction of the system shall be subject to the direction and approval
of the public works director.
      2.   In cases where a sanitary sewer is not available or cannot be
extended until a connection can be made with the public sewer system, the use
of an alternate central treatment facility may be permitted, provided such
facilities are approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency and in
accordance with city standards pertaining to sanitary sewage disposal. The city
may require the system to be designed for ultimate connection into the city
system.
      3.   All private sewage disposal systems shall be approved by and
constructed in accordance with the Illinois department of public health and/or
the Illinois environmental protection agency under the direction and control of
the appropriate city, county, or state authorities. Where private sewage
disposal systems are to be utilized, applicable permits to install such systems
shall be obtained from the county health department in accordance with the
county sewage ordinance.
      4.   All lots shall be individually sewered with the grades and sizes as
required by the public works director.
   C.   Design Criteria:
      1.   General Guidelines: All wastewater systems shall be designed to
conform to the current edition of the "Standard Specifications For Water And
Sewer Main Construction In Illinois", and to subtitle C and subtitle F of title
35 of the Illinois administrative code, as amended. These design standards are
not intended to cover extraordinary situations. Deviations will be allowed and
may be required in those instances where recommended by the public works
director.
      2.   Design Factors: Wastewater systems shall be designed for the
ultimate tributary population. Sewer capacities shall be adequate to handle
anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewage and industrial waste together
with an adequate allowance for infiltration and other extraneous flow.
      3.   Sewerage Locations: Wastewater lines shall be located within street
or alley rights of way unless topography dictates otherwise. When located in
easements on private property, access easements shall be provided to all
manholes. A manhole shall be provided at each street or alley crossing. End
lines shall be extended to provide access from street or alley right of way
when possible. Imposed loading shall be considered in all locations.
      4.   Cleanouts And Lamp Holes: Cleanouts and lamp holes will not be
permitted unless otherwise authorized by the public works director.
      5.   Water Supply Interconnections: There shall be no physical connection
between a public or private potable water supply system and a sewer that may
permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water into the potable supply.
Sewers shall be kept removed from water supply wells or other water supply
sources and structures.
      6.   Relation Of Sewers To Water Mains: A minimum horizontal distance of
ten feet (10') shall be maintained between parallel water and sewer lines. At
points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer shall be constructed of
ductile iron pipe or encased in concrete for a distance of ten feet (10') in
each direction from the crossing, measured perpendicular to the water line.
This will not be required when the water main is at least two feet (2') above
the sewer.
   D.   Construction: Construction shall be in accordance with the current
edition of the "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction
In Illinois" and the following:
      1.   All sewer taps shall be made by means of Ts or saddles. Flexible
couplings such as "Fernco's" shall not be used on sewer mains. Splicing shall
be accomplished using rigid couplings or manholes.
      2.   The contractor shall contact the public works director immediately
after the completion of sanitary sewers to arrange for testing in accordance
with the above specifications.
   E.   Materials: Materials shall conform to the current city specifications
for water and sewer materials. A copy of these specifications is available from
the public works director. Sanitary sewer mains constructed less than twelve
feet (12') below existing or finished grade shall be SDR-35 PVC pipe. Sanitary
sewer mains constructed twelve feet (12') or more below existing or finished
grade shall be SDR-26 PVC pipe.
   F.   On And Off Site Improvements: The developer of a parcel shall provide
for on site and off site improvements required to adequately serve a proposed
development; provided, however, that the public works director may authorize
development to proceed if the service provider certifies that the necessary
capital improvements have been funded for construction within two (2) years of
recordation of the final plat. In no event shall approval be granted to allow
occupancy prior to connection to an approved wastewater system unless the
council has approved an interim service plan and has received a performance
bond.
   G.   Extensions; Oversizing: The council may require that wastewater systems
be oversized to accommodate future development. The subdivider shall be
required to provide wastewater systems with adequate capacity to serve the
subdivision. Wastewater systems shall be extended to the boundaries of the
subdivision when required to facilitate future extensions of such systems. When
oversizing of a sewer main in excess of the design standards of this chapter is
required by the city council for system expansion, the city may provide for the
reimbursement of excess construction costs as per subsection
10-9-1J of this chapter.
   H.   Easements: The developer shall dedicate adequate easements to
accommodate all wastewater system facilities required to serve new development,
except individual service lines. The public works director shall approve the
location and dimensions of required easements, but in no instance shall an
easement be narrower than twelve feet (12') in width. Easements should follow
property lines to the greatest extent possible. Where other utility lines are
placed adjacent to the sewer, additional easements shall be required. (Ord. 03-
O-9, 3-18-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 8, chapter 2 of this code.
10-9-4: PRIVATE (ON SITE) WASTEWATER SYSTEMS:
   A.   General Requirements: Where septic tanks or other individual sewage
disposal systems are proposed, their use shall be subject to city approval and
their design and installation shall be in compliance with applicable city,
county and state regulations 1 . The city council shall determine that public
sanitary sewer will not be reasonably available and that the private wastewater
treatment system will not impair the ability to extend services in the future.
Furthermore, the county health department shall determine that the proposed
geological and soil conditions and lot configuration are adequate to support
the use of the private wastewater system. Adequate area shall be available to
relocate the absorption filtration field in case of soil saturation for any lot
or lots authorized for the private wastewater system.
   B.   Permit Required To Construct, Alter Or Extend:
      1.   Application: Any person who desires to construct, alter or extend a
private waste treatment system shall make a written application for approval.
No person shall install, add to, alter, expand or repair a private waste
treatment system without a valid permit.
      2.   Private Waste Treatment, Issuance Of Permit: The community
development director, or their designee, shall issue the appropriate permit in
compliance with this section and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to
this section, and payment of the appropriate fee 2 .
   C.   One Residence Per Individual On Site System: Only one residence shall
be connected to an individual on site wastewater treatment system; except, that
the community development director, or their designee, may authorize connection
of an accessory unit upon finding that the system can accommodate both uses.
   D.   Private Wastewater Treatment Standards: The city may require connection
to or the provision for future connection to its centralized wastewater system
for any development on lots of less than three (3) acres. All private
wastewater disposal systems shall be installed, altered, expanded, repaired or
operated according to city and state regulations and the following standards:
      1.   Factors Considered: When reviewing an application for an individual
wastewater system, consideration shall be given to the size and shape of the
lot, number of structures proposed in the development, slope of natural and
finished grade, soil type and classification, depth of ground water, proximity
of existing or future water supplies and possible expansion of the system. The
minimum size of an individual lot shall be two (2) acres.
      2.   Community Treatment Design For Developments Of More Than One Lot:
Where rural lots are clustered to provide open space, a community treatment
system may be approved at the discretion of the city council.
      3.   Designed To Receive All Sewage: Wastewater systems shall be designed
to adequately receive all sewage from the dwelling. Neither footing nor roof
drainage shall enter any part of the system.
      4.   Sewage Treatment, Issuance Of Rules And Regulations: The city may
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this
section pursuant to subsection
10-4-3N of this title.
   E.   Nuisance Conditions Prohibited: The location and installation of
private wastewater systems shall be such that, with reasonable maintenance, the
private wastewater system will function in a sanitary manner and will not
create a nuisance, health hazard or endanger the safety of any domestic water
supply. Any private wastewater treatment system installed, added to, altered,
expanded or repaired in violation of this section and the rules and regulations
of the city, county or state is a threat to the health, safety and welfare of
the city and is a public nuisance.
   F.   Failure To Comply With Orders: Failure to comply with a stop work order
or other lawful order of the public works director issued pursuant to this
section is a violation of this title.
   G.   Alternative Method Of Sewage Disposal: If a failing system cannot be
reinstalled in compliance with this section, the public works director may
approve an alternative method of sewage disposal, including requiring
connection to the city centralized wastewater system. Connection shall be
required if the failed system is located within four hundred feet (400') of an
existing sewer line with available capacity. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  8-2-2 of this code.
2 1. See subsection
  8-2-2B4 of this code.
10-9-5: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT:
   A.   Purpose: Development shall be laid out to provide proper drainage of
the area being subdivided, including facilities such as curb and gutter, catch
basins, culverts, bridges and natural waterways. Drainage improvements shall
accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall
be designed to reduce or prevent increases in downstream flooding. Storm water
drainage systems shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer
system, whether public or private. The city shall require the use of control
methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off site
drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development to
achieve these purposes.
   B.   Design Standards:
      1.   The design of the storm drainage system shall be done in accordance
with the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Design And Environment Manual"
and the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Drainage Manual", unless
otherwise stated in this section. The public works director must grant
exceptions to these requirements in writing.
      2.   Where appropriate, natural drainageways shall be retained to
minimize interference with potential floodwater conveyance, floodwater storage,
wetlands, and both surface and subsurface hydrology. The public works director
may recommend approval of modifications to natural channels that are consistent
with other provisions of this title.
      3.   Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by a registered
professional engineer to satisfy the following design criteria:
         a.   Along principal and minor arterial and collector streets, flow
from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center twenty feet (20') of the
pavement.
         b.   Along local streets, flow from a 10-year storm shall not top the
curb.
      4.   On site storm water detention or retention basins shall be required
where needed to protect public or private property from increased volumes or
velocity of storm water runoff.
      5.   Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be required during and
after new construction as needed to prevent increased erosion or increased
deposits of material downstream from the development.
      6.   Development design shall accommodate storm water runoff from 100-
year floods and more frequent, smaller storm events along major and minor
waterways without damage to private property or public facilities. Erosion
protection shall be provided downstream of storm sewer outlets until the
velocity is five feet (5') per second or less.
      7.   Storm water systems shall be designed to minimize future operational
and maintenance expenses.
      8.   Culverts and inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not
carried across any intersections nor for a distance of more than four hundred
feet (400') in the gutter. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for
each lot and block of the subdivision. Culverts for pass through drainage under
streets, ditches and waterways shall accommodate the 30-year storm. Channel
lining shall accommodate the 5-year storm. Manhole spacing shall not exceed
four hundred feet (400'), and the minimum pipe size for storm sewers shall be
twelve inches (12").
      9.   Storm water drainage easements shall be provided where necessary for
city maintenance of dedicated storm water facilities. Where topography or other
conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities
within the road right of way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least
fifteen feet (15') wide for drainage facilities shall be provided across
property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road.
Drainage easements shall extend from the road to a natural watercourse or to
other drainage facilities.
      10.   Low lying land along watercourses subject to overflowing or
flooding during storms and land in floodplains shall not be used for
drainageways, and surface water drainage shall be diverted away from this area.
The area shall be preserved and retained in its natural state. Such land or
lands subject to periodic flooding shall not be computed in determining the
area requirement of any lot.
      11.   Storm water facilities shall be designed so that existing spring
water or surface water runoff created by new development is piped away from the
site to a public open drainage ditch or storm sewer system.
      12.   Maximum discharge from a development shall not exceed the volume or
velocity of runoff from the 10-year storm event based on predevelopment
conditions.
      13.   Runoff determinations shall be made using the rational method and
the IDOT drainage manual, and shall be approved by the public works director.
      14.   Easements shall be provided over all storm sewers, ditches,
retention/detention facilities and outlets. Easements shall be a minimum width
of twelve feet (12').
   C.   Construction: Construction shall be in accordance with the current
edition of the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications
For Road And Bridge Construction" and the following:
      1.   Mastic for concrete pipes shall completely fill the joint.
      2.   Mastic shall be applied to both ends of concrete pipe.
      3.   The inside joint shall be wiped smooth on all pipes greater than
twenty four inches (24") in diameter.
   D.   Materials: Materials shall conform to the current edition of the
"Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction" and the following:
      1.   SDR-35 PVC pipe or reinforced concrete pipe shall be used for storm
sewers constructed less than twelve feet (12') below existing or finished
grade.
      2.   SDR-26 PVC pipe or reinforced concrete pipe shall be used for storm
sewers constructed twelve feet (12') or more below existing or finished grade.
      3.   Concrete pipe classes shall be in accordance with the above
mentioned specifications.
   E.   Storm Water Detention And Retention Facilities: The policies and
criteria set forth in this subsection shall be applied to the design and
development of the final storm water management facility, if required by the
city. In general, the storm water detention or retention facility shall be
designed to accommodate the rate of flow from new development. The rate of flow
from the new development shall not exceed the rate of flow that existed prior
to the new development. Design plans and calculations for the storm water
detention facility shall be provided as part of the subdivision construction
plans and site plan review submission. The public works director may waive site
plan submittals if adequate information has been provided in conjunction with
the subdivision process.
      1.   Detention/Retention Design:
         a.   Storm water detention shall be provided for all improvements
which increase the amount of paved or roof area by more than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet.
         b.   Detention shall accommodate the 100-year storm for the developed
site, while releasing not more than the 10-year storm for the existing site.
         c.   Storm water detention shall be designed using the rational method
and the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Drainage Manual". Detention
basin outlets shall not be smaller than twelve inch (12") pipe. A restriction
or weir shall be placed at the upstream end of the outlet pipe to control the
release. Restrictions will not be required to be smaller than six inches (6")
in diameter.
         d.   Pass through drainage shall be routed around the detention basin,
or the basin designed to accommodate the pass through drainage.
         e.   Erosion protection shall be provided downstream of the detention
basin outlet until the water has slowed to a velocity of five feet (5') per
second or less. In addition to the construction plans for the storm water
detention/retention facility, the applicant shall provide complete design
calculations prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state of
Illinois. The public works director shall review, approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove these calculations in conjunction with the facility plans
prior to the issuance of a building permit or recordation of the final plat.
Exceptions must be granted in writing by the public works director.
      2.   Detention Facility Types Permitted:
         a.   Parking Lot Storage: Parking lots may be used for temporary
storage of water, provided vehicles are not endangered and standing water does
not exceed four inches (4") on more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
parking lot.
         b.   Underground Detention: Storm water may be detained in underground
pipes, tanks or reservoirs.
         c.   Wet Basins With Permanent Pools; Retention Basins: Minimum depth
before introduction of storm water shall be four feet (4'). Aeration may be
required as needed to prevent pollution of water and resulting odors.
         d.   Dry Basins; Detention Basins: Shallow ditches shall be provided
in the bottom of the basin for low flow conditions. The bottom of the basin
shall be sloped in each direction to the ditches at a minimum slope of eight
percent (8%). The developer shall maintain (seed and mow) the basin until a
grass turf is established. Alternate channel protection methods may be required
for ditches if a grass turf cannot be established.
      3.   Maintenance And Repair Of Facility: The owner of a nonresidential
facility and the owner, homeowners' association or similar entity of a facility
serving a residential development shall be responsible for the maintenance and
repair of the storm water detention facility. For subdivisions, this
responsibility shall be documented in the subdivision covenants that shall be
recorded with the final plat.
         a.   Transfer Of Ownership: In the event the property upon which the
facility is located is sold or transferred to another owner or entity, the
transferring owner or entity shall execute a legally binding, recorded document
transferring ownership rights and maintenance and repair responsibilities to
the successors in title, a certified copy of which shall be provided to the
city clerk.
         b.   Guarantees Required: The owner of a private facility serving
multiple lots shall provide and maintain sufficient financial guarantees in an
amount determined by the public works director to ensure that maintenance and
repair will be provided for the facility.
         c.   Notice Required: The public works director shall notify the owner
or entity, in writing, within fourteen (14) business days, of potential danger
(s) to health and safety or of nuisance conditions involving the facility. The
owner or entity shall have a specified period of time in which to cure the
violation. The public works director shall determine the time period, based
upon the severity and immediacy of the violation. If the owner or entity fails
to respond to the written notice and request for service within the time period
established, the public works director shall cause the maintenance or repair of
the facility and shall use the financial guarantee to reimburse the city's
expenses. Should the expenses exceed the bond proceeds, the city clerk shall
bill the owner or entity for the costs. If the costs are not paid within the
time frame established by the city, the city attorney shall file a lien against
the facility for collection of the expenses, plus an interest rate of one
percent (1%) above the prime interest rate per annum. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-9-6: STREETS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All development shall be provided with safe and adequate access
designed to accommodate development at maximum planned densities unless the
applicant restricts future subdivision through deed restrictions. Street
systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with this section.
      2.   No development shall be approved if such development, at full
occupancy, will result in an increase of traffic on an arterial or collector
street within one mile of the development so that the street does not function
at a level of service "D" or better as defined by the transportation research
board, national research council in the highway capacity manual. The applicant
may propose and construct approved traffic mitigation measures to provide
adequate roadway capacity for the proposed development. The applicant shall
submit a traffic impact analysis in accordance with subsection I of this
section, as applicable.
   B.   Street Design:
      1.   Application Of Provisions: The standards established by this section
shall apply to all public and private roads in the city or subject to its
extraterritorial subdivision authority.
      2.   Guidelines And State Requirements: The city comprehensive plan,
major street map shall serve as a guide for the location and scale of future
arterial and collector streets. Street and sidewalk design and construction
shall be in conformance with the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Design
And Environmental Manual" and chapter 5 of the "Illinois Department Of
Transportation Federal Aid Procedures For Local Highway Improvements" and the
requirements of this section.
      3.   Exceptions: Exceptions to the requirements of this section shall be
obtained in writing from the public works director.
      4.   Street Classification: All streets shall be classified as major
arterial, minor arterial, collector or local streets. Any street that is not
already classified in the city road system shall be classified by the community
development director, or their designee, in consultation with the public works
director, subject to confirmation by the city council. In classifying streets,
the city shall consider projected traffic demands after twenty (20) years of
development. All section line roads shall be considered arterial streets unless
specifically designated otherwise in the adopted major street map, or unless
the public works director finds that there will be no future need for an
arterial road along a particular section boundary.
      5.   Street Design Standards: All street improvements intended to become
a part of the city road system shall be designed according to the standards
shown in table 9-1 of this section.
TABLE 9-1: STREET DESIGN AND CLASSIFICATION
               Street Classification
Design Standard Principal Or Major Arterial Minor Arterial And Local Street
                Street                      Collector Street
                     Street Classification
Design Standard       Principal Or Major    Minor Arterial And Local Street
                      Arterial Street       Collector Street
Minimum right of way  80                    60                 50
width feet
Minimum paved street
width feet measured   Site specific design
between curb faces or required              30                 30
between flow lines of
gutters
Maximum grade         Not <0-5 percent; not Not >10 percent    Not >10 percent
                      >5 percent
Traffic lanes         2-4                   21                 2
Horizontal
curvatures, minimum   R = 500 feet          R = 500 feet       R = 125 feet
centerline radius
designated "R"
Design speed mph      45-552                30-352             302
Shoulder not required
if curbs and gutters  4 feet each side      2 feet each side   2 feet each side
are provided
Curb and gutter       Required              Required3          Required3
On street parking     Not permitted         Controlled         Controlled
 
Notes:
      1.   Turn lanes may be required by the city council.
      2.   Lower design speeds may be approved by the city council for
principal arterials running through the city.
      3.   Gutter only may be approved by the public works director on a case
by case basis.
      6.   Topography And Arrangement:
         a.   Street grades and alignment shall be related and integrated with
the existing topography. However, a combination of steep grades and curves
shall be avoided. Local streets shall be curved wherever possible to avoid the
appearance of rigid conformity. All streets shall be arranged in order to gain
as many building sites as possible at or above the grades of the streets.
         b.   All streets shall be aligned with the existing and proposed
system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights of way as established in the
comprehensive plan, major street map or adopted technical standards for public
improvements.
         c.   All streets shall be properly related to special traffic
generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and
shopping centers to population densities, and to the pattern of existing and
proposed land uses.
         d.   Collector and local streets shall be designed to conform as much
as possible to the topography to discourage use by through traffic, to permit
efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of
streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.
         e.   Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, unless the city council finds that the extension is
prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless, in the opinion
of the city council, such extension is not necessary or desirable for the
coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the
most advantageous future development of adjacent tracts.
         f.   In business and industrial developments, the streets and other
access shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location
of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering
areas, and sidewalks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement
between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian.
      7.   Street Arrangement:
         a.   Adequate Traffic Circulation: Provisions shall be made for
adequate traffic circulation. Local streets shall be designed to limit through
traffic.
         b.   Lot Access: Every lot shall have approved access to a public
right of way accepted by the city council. Multiple driveways shall be reviewed
and may be approved by the public works director.
         c.   Street Connections: Streets should connect with those already
dedicated in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions and provide for future
connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts whenever possible.
         d.   Dead End Streets: If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the
street must temporarily be a dead end street, the right of way shall be
extended to the property line. A temporary cul-de- sac, T or L shaped turnabout
shall be provided on all temporary dead end streets, with the notation on the
subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right of way shall revert
to abutting property owners whenever the street is continued. The city may
limit the length of temporary dead end streets in accordance with these
regulations.
         e.   Street Alignment; Jogs: Offset streets shall be avoided where
possible. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street
intersection has divided lanes without median breaks.
         f.   Intersection Of Streets: The angle of intersection between
streets shall not vary by more than ten degrees (10°) from a right angle.
         g.   Minimum Curb Radius: At the intersection of two (2) local or
collector streets, the minimum curb radius shall be at least twenty five feet
(25'). At an intersection involving a collector street classification, minimum
curb radius shall be at least twenty five feet (25'). Alley intersections shall
have a curb radius of fifteen feet (15'). The radii at all intersections with
arterial streets shall be designed according to the IDOT design manual.
         h.   Cross Slope: The cross slopes of all streets, including
intersections, shall not exceed three percent (3%).
      8.   Cul-De-Sac Streets:
         a.   Cul-De-Sac Approaches: Cul-de-sac approaches shall have a minimum
right of way width of fifty feet (50'). Development on cul-de-sacs longer than
three hundred feet (300') shall not generate more than three hundred (300)
vehicle trips per day as projected using the current institute of
transportation engineers trip generation manual. A cul-de-sac street shall not
exceed six hundred feet (600') in length.
         b.   Cul-De-Sac Turnarounds: Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a
minimum paved diameter of sixty feet (60') and a minimum eighty foot (80')
diameter right of way, or twenty feet (20') greater than the paved area, to
include sufficient area for easements needed for utilities, drainage and mail
service.
         c.   Temporary Cul-De-Sac: A temporary dead end street in a phased
development may be constructed without a turnaround if such street is less than
one hundred twenty feet (120') in length. A street constructed in a phased
development that is longer than one hundred twenty feet (120') shall have a
temporary turnaround.
      9.   Alleys: Alleys with a twenty foot (20') wide right of way and
eighteen feet (18') of paved roadway may be required in commercial areas, in
the rear lots of multiple-family districts unless other adequate provisions are
made for service and deliveries, and where justified by special conditions such
as the continuation of an existing alley in the same block. Alleys are not
required in residential districts. Dead end alleys are prohibited.
      10.   Half Streets: Half streets are prohibited, except where an existing
platted half street abuts the subdivision. Where a platted half street exists,
the other half street shall be required to be completed by the applicant.
      11.   Private Streets: No private streets shall be platted in any
subdivision.
      12.   Secondary Access: Secondary access shall be provided for any
development projected to generate more than three hundred (300) trips per day
or to take sole access from a street projected to carry more than three hundred
(300) trips per day.
      13.   Curbs And Gutters: Curbs and gutters shall be required by the
council for any development on lots of one-half (1/2) acre or less, or along
streets located within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the city unless the council
deems otherwise.
      14.   Street Names: Streets in alignment with existing streets shall bear
the names of the existing streets. Proposed street names that are in conflict
with existing street names shall not be approved.
      15.   Street Dedication And Maintenance: No road or street shall be
accepted by the city unless it meets the design standards established by this
title and all other design standards established by the city.
      16.   Minimum Pavement Thickness: The minimum pavement thickness shall be
seven inches (7") of concrete or eight inches (8") of class I bituminous
concrete. Both options require a four inch (4") CA-06 compacted aggregate
subbase. Pavement thickness for streets with anticipated traffic volumes
exceeding five thousand (5,000) ADT or ten (10) motor units shall be designed
in accordance with chapter 54 of the IDOT design manual.
      17.   Streets Outside City: Streets constructed outside the city limits,
which are not expected to be incorporated into the city limits within the next
twenty (20) years, may be exempted from the requirements of this subsection if
approved by the council. Minimum pavement width shall be twenty four feet (24')
with two foot (2') earthen shoulders. Pavement thickness shall be three inches
(3") bituminous concrete pavement, placed in two (2) lifts, on six inches (6")
of compacted aggregate base.
   C.   Street Construction Standards: Construction shall be in accordance with
the current edition of the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction" and the following:
      1.   Prior to constructing any pavement, the developer shall demonstrate
satisfactory subgrade and subbase construction by proof rolling with a legally
loaded tandem axle dumpbody truck. All soft areas shall be removed and
replaced.
      2.   Asphalt pavement shall be constructed in the following lifts:
initial lift of four inch (4") to six inch (6") compacted thickness of binder,
intermediate lift of two inch (2") to three inch (3") compacted thickness of
binder, and a final lift of one and one-half inches (11/2") to two inches (2")
of surface mix. Each lift shall be allowed to cool overnight prior to placing
the next lift. No traffic construction equipment shall be allowed on the
pavement between lifts.
      3.   All pavements shall be cored for acceptance by the city. Areas of
pavement in excess of one-fourth inch (1/4") deficient in thickness shall be
corrected as approved by the public works director.
   D.   Materials: Material shall be in accordance with the current edition of
the "Illinois Department Of Transportation Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction" and the following:
      1.   Concrete pavement, sidewalks, and curb and gutters shall be
constructed of class SI (class X) concrete.
      2.   Bituminous concrete binder shall be type B. Bituminous concrete
surface course shall be type 2. All bituminous mixtures shall be class I.
      3.   Aggregate subbase shall be CA-06 limestone or crushed gravel.
      4.   Developer shall provide notice and opportunity for the city to
measure densities for asphalt pavement and collect material samples for
concrete, asphalt, and subbase. Pavement will not be accepted if notice of
paving operations is not provided.
   E.   Traffic Control: Traffic control devices shall be provided for new
development pursuant to standards adopted by the city.
   F.   Access Standards:
      1.   Purpose: The purpose of regulating the amount and nature of
vehicular access points is to balance the need for providing access to
individual private properties with the need to preserve an adequate level of
capacity on the streets providing access. Vehicular access restrictions may be
required to be shown on subdivision plats.
      2.   Access To Primary Arterials: Where a residential subdivision borders
on or contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the city may require
that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means:
         a.   Lots shall back onto the primary arterial and front onto a
parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the primary arterial;
or
         b.   A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered
from and designed generally at right angles to the primary arterial; or
         c.   A marginal access or service road (separated from the primary
arterial by a 10 foot wide planting strip and having access at suitable
points).
      3.   Railroads And Limited Access Highways: Railroad rights of way and
limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows:
         a.   In residential districts, a type E buffer yard shall be provided
adjacent to the railroad right of way or limited access highway. This strip
shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat.
         b.   In districts zoned for business, commercial or industrial uses,
wherever practicable, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately
parallel to the railroad right of way shall be a sufficient distance from the
railroad right of way to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial
sites.
         c.   When streets parallel to the railroad right of way intersect a
street that crosses the railroad right of way at grade, they shall, to the
extent practicable, be a distance of at least one hundred fifty feet (150')
from the railroad right of way. Such distance shall be determined with due
consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades
by means of appropriate approach gradients.
      4.   Lot Access: No building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel
that does not abut a public street.
      5.   Driveways:
         a.   Permits: A driveway permit, issued by the public works director,
is required prior to the construction of any new access point. When a traffic
study is required pursuant to subsection I of this section, no driveway permit
will be issued until the traffic study process has been completed. Any
nonresidential change in use resulting in the following will require a new
driveway permit:
            (1)   An increase of greater than fifty (50) peak hour trips; or
            (2)   A ten percent (10%) increase in average daily trips; or
            (3)   Over ten (10) additional daily vehicle trips made by vehicles
exceeding thirty thousand (30,000) pounds in gross vehicle weight.
         b.   Determination Of Boundaries: For the purposes of evaluating
driveway permit requests, the boundary of the site is considered to be all
contiguous parcels under the same ownership on the effective date hereof.
         c.   Driveway Design Standards:
            (1)   The minimum driveway width shall be twelve feet (12') for
residential and fifteen feet (15') for nonresidential land uses, and the
maximum driveway width shall be twenty four feet (24') for residential and
thirty five feet (35') for nonresidential land uses. The minimum thickness
shall be six inches (6") within the right of way.
            (2)   The driveways accessing paved roads shall provide an asphalt
or concrete driveway approach from the property line to the roadbed edge.
      6.   Access Spacing Standards: Minimum spacing between adjacent driveways
or a proposed driveway and an adjacent street intersection is shown in table 9-
2 of this section.
TABLE 9-2: ACCESS SPACING STANDARDS
 
                         Minimum Separation Between Minimum Separation Between
Road Classification1     Driveways2                 Driveways And Intersecting
                                                    Streets3
Local streets projected  None                       35 feet
traffic <3,000 vpd
Local collector and one-
way frontage streets     60 feet                    60 feet
projected traffic 3,000
vpd and <6,000 vpd
Collector and frontage
roads projected traffic  125 feet5                  150 feet
6,000 vpd
Arterial4                400 feet                   480 feet
 
   Notes:
   (vpd = vehicles per day)
      1.   Roadway types refer to anticipated cross section based on major
street map. All traffic volumes refer to 20 year forecast.
      2.   Access separation between driveways shall be measured from
centerline to centerline.
      3.   Access separation between a driveway and intersecting street shall
be measured from the centerline of the driveway and the nearest point of
curvature of the intersecting street.
      4.   May require installation of turn lanes.
      5.   This standard is not applicable to single-family and duplex
residential lots existing as of the effective date hereof.
      7.   Design Objectives: In reviewing an application for a driveway or
access permit for any nonresidential or multi-family use, the public works
director shall determine that the following objectives have been met:
         a.   Adequate clearance from any adjacent street intersection has been
provided, and spacing from adjacent driveways is sufficient to safely minimize
conflicts between traffic entering and exiting adjacent driveways.
         b.   Auxiliary lanes are provided as needed to:
            (1)   Minimize speed differentials with mainline highway traffic;
            (2)   Prevent the encroachment of turning vehicles on mainline
traffic; and
            (3)   Prevent the queuing of inbound traffic from impacting
mainline traffic.
         c.   Sufficient storage distance between the curb line and the first
point of conflict for traffic on the site is provided to prevent the backup of
traffic onto public streets. This distance shall be adequate to absorb the
maximum peak period inbound traffic during the normal weekday.
         d.   Appropriate conflict reduction measures have been provided to
safely manage inbound and outbound traffic. Median design features and driveway
channelization shall be used, as appropriate, to accomplish conflict reduction.
         e.   Access locations have been properly offset from driveways or
street intersections located across the roadway in order to limit conflicts
within the mainline or median of the street.
         f.   The design of the access satisfies standard geometric guidelines
for turning radii, driveway slope, angle of entry, design speed and width. The
access grade within the public right of way shall not exceed three percent
(3%). The drainage design of the access should not interfere with the drainage
system in the public right of way.
         g.   The access provides for the safe crossing of pedestrians, the
handicapped and bicyclists.
         h.   The installation of necessary traffic control devices for the
safe and proper operation of the access meets the requirements adopted by the
city and, in the case of traffic signals, are located so as to allow for proper
signal coordination and adequate left turn storage needs at the access and
nearby intersections.
         i.   Except in the A zoning district, no single-family or two- family
lot smaller than one acre shall be created which is accessed from an arterial
street or a major collector street.
         j.   These standards are not intended to preclude access to existing
lots. Where the city standards would preclude access to a lot, the board of
appeals and planning may vary the access standard.
      8.   Substandard Access: Where access standards of subsection F6 of this
section, or the design objectives of subsection F7 of this section cannot be
met, the public works director may grant a reduction in spacing standards of up
to twenty percent (20%). If this is not a feasible alternative, a substandard
access permit may be granted subject to the variance provisions of subsection
10-4-3J of this title and the following findings:
         a.   Conditions or circumstances exist which limit the strict
application of the requirements of this title, including the lack of a
secondary access to another public street, the inability to use joint access,
and the lack of engineering or construction solutions that can be applied to
mitigate the condition;
         b.   The proposed access will not result in undue delay or congestion
or be detrimental to the safety of the motoring public using the roadway; and
         c.   The limiting access will create an exceptional and undue hardship
on the applicant and that the permit issued will allow a reasonable use of the
property.
   G.   Oversizing Streets:
      1.   Where a street runs through the proposed subdivision, the applicant
shall be responsible for the construction of such street to a collector street
standard.
      2.   If the traffic impact analysis indicates that the street will exceed
the collector standard, the applicant shall be required to construct the
designated street, subject to reimbursement by the city for the construction
cost of the difference between the collector street and a minor arterial
street. Should reimbursement funds by the city not be available, the
applicant's responsibility for construction shall be limited to a collector
standard; however, the design shall be modified to facilitate future expansion
of such street. Any required improvements deleted by the public works director
in order to facilitate the future street expansion shall not relieve the
responsibility of the subdivider for such improvements. The cost of such
deleted improvements shall be paid to the city. Such monies shall be deposited
in a street construction fund such as a transportation improvement fee fund,
which may be expended by the city council for the purpose of construction of
arterial and collector streets within the city. Should the subdivider make such
payments, he shall be relieved of any obligation for the completion of such
deleted improvements.
   H.   Other Improvements:
      1.   Sidewalks And Pedestrian Path Standards:
         a.   Sidewalks or pedestrian paths shall be required along all
streets.
         b.   Sidewalks or pedestrian paths shall be required along all
collector and arterial streets located within one mile of the city, unless
otherwise approved by the city council.
         c.   Walkways shall be designed to comply with the Illinois Americans
with disabilities act; provided, that the council may approve a different
standard for walkways across private property.
         d.   All required walkways shall be located within a dedicated right
of way or access easement. A median strip of grass or landscaped area at least
three feet (3') wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs unless
approved by the public works director.
         e.   Sidewalk and path easements shall be a minimum of ten feet (10')
in width if adjacent to a public street or land. The minimum width of the
sidewalk/path easement between the rear or side lot lines of a parcel shall be
fifteen feet (15'), unless approved otherwise by the city council.
      2.   Street Signs: The applicant shall deposit with the local government
at the time of final subdivision approval the set fee for each road sign
required by the public works director. The city shall install all road signs
before issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any residence on the streets
approved. Street name signs shall be placed at all intersections within or
abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which shall be approved by
the public works director.
      3.   Street Lighting: Installation of streetlights shall be required in
accordance with design and specification standards approved by the public works
director.
      4.   Utilities:
         a.   Location: All utility facilities, including, but not limited to,
gas, electric power, telephone and CATV cables, shall be located underground
throughout the subdivision. All utility facilities existing and proposed
throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
         b.   Easements: Easements, as required by the public works director,
shall be provided for utilities (private and municipal), and such easements
shall be at least ten feet (10') wide. Proper coordination shall be established
between the subdivider and the applicable utility companies for the
establishment of utility easements established in adjoining properties.
      5.   Street Trees: Street trees shall be planted in accordance with
section
10-8-5 of this title unless the board of appeals and planning, upon
recommendation of the public works director, grants a waiver. The waiver shall
be granted only if there are trees growing along the right of way or on the
abutting property that, in the opinion of the board of appeals and planning,
comply with these regulations.
   I.   Traffic Impact Analysis:
      1.   Intent: The intent of this subsection is to provide the information
necessary to allow decision makers to assess the transportation implications of
traffic associated with a proposed development, to address the transportation
related issues associated with development proposals that may be of concern to
neighboring residents, business owners and property owners, and to provide a
basis for negotiation regarding improvements and funding participation in
conjunction with an application for development. This subsection establishes
requirements for the analysis and evaluation of transportation impacts
associated with proposed developments.
      2.   Scope And Purpose: A traffic impact analysis will be required for
certain permitted and special uses, major subdivisions and site plans exceeding
specific trip generation thresholds. The purpose of a traffic impact analysis
will be to:
         a.   Evaluate traffic operations and impacts at site access points
under projected traffic loads.
         b.   Evaluate the impact of site generated traffic on affected
intersections in the vicinity of the development site.
         c.   Evaluate the impact of site generated traffic on the quality of
traffic flow on public streets located in the vicinity of the site.
         d.   Evaluate the impact of the proposed development on residential
streets in the vicinity of the site.
         e.   Ensure that site access and other improvements needed to mitigate
the traffic impact of the development meet commonly accepted engineering design
standards.
         f.   Ensure that adequate facilities for pedestrians, transit users
and bicyclists have been provided.
         g.   Identify transportation infrastructure needs and related costs
created by the development and cost sharing on needed improvements.
      3.   Applicability: Traffic impact analysis shall be required for any
land use plan amendment, amendment to the zoning map, land subdivision permit,
special use permit, rezoning or site plan under the following conditions:
         a.   The proposed use will generate more than one hundred twenty five
(125) trips per acre per day according to the most current versions of the ITE
trip generation informational report or comparable research data published by a
public agency or institution, and which will generate, based on the size of the
development, seven hundred fifty (750) or more average daily trips; or
         b.   The proposed development will concentrate one thousand five
hundred (1,500) or more trips per day through a single access point.
      4.   Waiver: The requirements of this subsection for a traffic impact
analysis may be waived by the public works director when it is determined that
such report is not necessary to determine needed road improvements or that no
unsafe or hazardous conditions will be created by the development as proposed.
      5.   Preparation: The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by an
Illinois professional engineer, with experience in the preparation of such
analysis.
      6.   Traffic Service Standards: The standards for traffic service that
shall be used to evaluate the findings of traffic impact studies are:
         a.   Capacity: A volume to capacity (V/C) ratio of 0.90 shall not be
consistently exceeded on any arterial or collector street as designated on the
thoroughfare plan. "Consistently" means that the V/C ratios are exceeded based
on average daily peak hour traffic counts, projections or estimates.
         b.   Level Of Service: For local streets, a level of service C or
better shall be maintained. On any arterial or collector street, a level of
service D or better shall be maintained. Where the existing level of service is
below these standards, the traffic impact analysis shall identify those
improvements needed to maintain the existing level of service and what
additional improvements would be needed to raise the level of service to the
standards indicated.
         c.   Number Of Access Points: The spacing of access points shall
comply with ASHTO standards.
         d.   Local Street Impact: Average daily traffic (ADT) on local streets
shall be within the ranges spelled out in the thoroughfare plan for the class
of street involved. No nonresidential development shall increase the traffic on
a local street with at least three hundred (300) average daily trips by more
than twenty five percent (25%).
         e.   Internal Circulation: On site vehicle circulation and parking
patterns shall be designed so as not to interfere with the flow of traffic on
any public street and shall accommodate all anticipated types of site traffic.
         f.   Safety: Access points shall be designed to provide for adequate
sight distance and appropriate facilities to accommodate acceleration and
deceleration of site traffic.
      7.   Contents: A traffic impact analysis shall contain information
addressing the following factors:
         a.   Site Description: The report shall contain illustrations and
narrative that describe the characteristics of the site and adjacent land uses
as well as expected development in the vicinity which will influence future
traffic conditions. A description of the proposed development, including access
plans, staging plans and an indication of land use and intensity, shall be
provided.
         b.   Study Area: The analysis shall identify the geographic area under
study and identify the roadway segments, critical intersections and access
points to be analyzed. The focus shall be on intersections and access points
adjacent to the site and roadways or intersections within one-fourth (1/4) mile
of the site.
         c.   Existing Traffic Conditions: The report shall contain a summary
of the data used in the analysis of existing traffic conditions, including:
            (1)   Traffic count and turning movement information, including the
source of and date when traffic count information was collected;
            (2)   Correction factors that were used to convert collected
traffic data into representative design hour traffic volumes;
            (3)   Roadway characteristics, including the design configuration
of existing or proposed roadways, existing traffic control measures (speed
limits, traffic signals, etc.) and existing driveways and turning movement
conflicts in the vicinity of the site; and
            (4)   The existing level of service for roadways and intersections
without project development traffic using methods documented in the "Special
Report 209: Highway Capacity Manual", published by the transportation research
board, or comparable accepted methods of evaluation. Level of service should be
calculated for the weekday peak hour and, in the case of uses generating high
levels of weekend traffic, the Saturday peak hour.
         d.   Horizon Year(s) And Background Traffic Growth: The report shall
identify the horizon year(s) that were analyzed in the study, the background
traffic growth factors for each horizon year, and the method and assumptions
used to develop the background traffic growth. Unless otherwise approved by the
public works director, the impact of development shall be analyzed for the year
after the development is completed and twenty (20) years after the development
is completed.
         e.   Traffic Assignment: The report shall identify projected design
hour traffic volumes for roadway segments, intersections or driveways in the
study area, with and without the proposed development, for the horizon year(s)
of the study.
         f.   Mitigation/Alternatives: In situations where the traffic level of
service standards are exceeded, the report shall evaluate each of the following
alternatives for achieving the traffic service standards:
            (1)   Identify where additional right of way is needed to implement
mitigation strategies;
            (2)   Identify suggested phasing of improvements where needed to
maintain compliance with traffic service standards; and
            (3)   Identify the anticipated cost of recommended improvements.
      8.   Process For Review And Preparation Of A Traffic Impact Analysis: The
following steps provide an outline of the steps to be included in the
preparation and review of a traffic impact analysis:
         a.   The public works director and community development director, or
their designee, shall be consulted for assistance in determining whether a
traffic impact study needs to be prepared for a proposed development
application.
         b.   The public works director and community development director, or
their designee, shall meet with applicants to identify study issues,
assumptions, horizon years and time periods to be analyzed, analysis
procedures, available sources of data, past and related studies, report
requirements and other topics relevant to study requirements.
         c.   Following initial completion of a traffic impact analysis, the
report shall be submitted to the community development director, or their
designee, for distribution to the staff of all jurisdictions involved in the
construction and maintenance of public roadways serving the development.
         d.   Within ten (10) working days, staff shall complete an initial
review to determine the completeness of the report and shall provide a written
summary to the applicant outlining the need for any supplemental study or
analysis to adequately address any deficiencies. A meeting to discuss the
contents and findings of the report and the need for additional study may be
requested by the applicant.
         e.   Following a determination that the analysis is complete, staff
shall prepare a report outlining recommendations that have been developed to
address the findings and conclusions included in the study regarding the
proposed development's access needs and impacts on the transportation system.
Depending on the type of application, the recommendations may be presented to
the board and/or council.
         f.   In the case of a traffic impact analysis showing deficiencies
requiring mitigation within the public right of way, negotiations based on the
findings and conclusions resulting from the traffic study shall be held with
the city council. A development agreement, detailing the applicant's
responsibilities and the city's responsibilities for implementing identified
mitigation measures, shall be prepared following the negotiations for action by
both parties.
      9.   Remedial Action When Standards Not Met: If staff finds that the
proposed development will not meet applicable service level standards, staff
shall recommend one or more of the following actions by the public or the
applicant:
         a.   Reduce the size, scale, scope or density of the development to
reduce traffic generation.
         b.   Divide the project into phases and authorize only one phase at a
time until traffic capacity is adequate for the next phase of development.
         c.   Dedicate right of way for street improvements.
         d.   Construct new streets.
         e.   Expand the capacity of existing streets.
         f.   Redesign ingress and egress to the project to reduce traffic
conflicts.
         g.   Alter the use and type of development to reduce peak hour
traffic.
         h.   Reduce background (existing) traffic.
         i.   Eliminate the potential for additional traffic generation from
undeveloped properties in the vicinity of the proposed development.
         j.   Integrate nonvehicular design components (e.g., pedestrian and
bicycle paths or transit improvements) to reduce trip generation.
         k.   Implement traffic demand management strategies (e.g., car or van
pool programs, flex time, staggered work hours, telecommuting, etc.) to reduce
trip generation.
         l.   Recommend denial of the application for development for which the
traffic analysis is submitted. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-
18-2025)
10-9-7: PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND OPEN SPACE AREAS:
   A.   General Requirements:
      1.   All residential subdivisions shall be designed to satisfy the
neighborhood park and open space needs of the subdivision residents as shown in
this section. Such needs shall be met by dedication and acceptance of public
park land and/or by a reservation by covenant of private space, provided there
shall exist sufficient covenants, running with the land, to ensure adequate
maintenance by the property owners identified in the covenants.
      2.   The city council shall determine the acceptability of dedicated
lands or the development of park and recreational facilities in the
subdivision, as the council deems appropriate, to meet the requirements of this
section.
      3.   No building permit shall be issued until the provisions of this
section are satisfied.
      4.   This section applies to the development of all land for residential
use in the city, regardless of the zoning.
   B.   Dedication Of Open Space Lands:
      1.   Schedule:
         a.   Minimum Requirement: If the city council determines that the
dedication of land by the applicant is acceptable and in compliance with this
section, such dedication shall be by warranty deed from the applicant to the
city or shall be dedicated by the plat. The amount of land required to be
dedicated shall be not less than one-half (1/2) acre per one hundred (100)
dwelling units.
         b.   Calculation Of Open Space: The minimum required dedication of
open space shall be in addition to minimum required yard areas and space
reserved for off street parking required in section
10-8-4 of this title. The percentage of space required to be dedicated shall be
based upon the total area of the development or subdivision used for
residential development, excluding any commercial use.
      2.   General Requirements: All lands to be dedicated shall meet the
following general requirements:
         a.   Size And Shape: The tract shall not contain less than four (4)
acres unless the city council finds the tract to be of an adequate size to
efficiently meet the parks and recreation needs of the city.
         b.   Location And Accessibility: The tract shall be located in or
adjacent to the subdivision and easily accessible to same. Consideration shall
be given to placing parks where they can be added to by future subdivisions, or
are in addition to an existing park.
         c.   Topography; Drainage: At least fifty percent (50%) of the park
area shall have a grade less than four percent (4%). The balance may be covered
with steep slope, streams, ditches, lakes or other natural features.
         d.   Natural Features: Features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and
views shall be preserved whenever possible. The subdivider shall designate or
show, at the time of filing the final plat, the trees and other natural
features that are to be retained. The preservation and creation of lakes and
wooded areas are encouraged.
      3.   Private Recreation Facilities: The city council may, at its sole
discretion, authorize open space, parks or recreation facilities to be
constructed and maintained by the applicant or other persons to satisfy the
requirements of this section.
      4.   Recreation Sites: Land reserved for recreation purposes shall be of
a character and location suitable for use as a playground, play field, or for
other recreation purposes, and shall be relatively level and dry, and shall be
improved by the developer to the standards required by the board of appeals and
planning, which improvements shall be included in the development improvement
agreement and security. A recreation site shall have a total frontage on one or
more streets of at least two hundred feet (200'), and no other dimension of the
site shall be less than two hundred feet (200') in depth and a size in
conformance with the National Recreation and Park Association standards. The
board of zoning appeals and planning may refer any subdivision proposed to
contain a dedicated park to the parks and recreation advisory board for a
recommendation. All land to be reserved for dedication to the city for park
purposes shall have prior approval of the city council and shall be shown
marked on the plat "Reserved For Park And/Or Recreation Purposes".
      5.   Other Recreation Reservations: The provisions of this section are
minimum standards. None of the provisions of this section shall be construed as
prohibiting a developer from reserving other land for recreation purposes in
addition to the requirements of this section.
      6.   Cash Payment In Lieu Of Land Dedication:
         a.   The city council may require the payment of a fee in lieu of
dedication of land based on the appraised value of the land being platted and
the amount of land required to be dedicated, if, in the judgment of the city
council, the quantity of land to be subdivided is of a size or configuration
that dedication of a portion thereof:
            (1)   Is not feasible or practical; or
            (2)   Will not create a parcel suitable for neighborhood park
development or for usable open space or trails; or
            (3)   The land is adjacent or readily accessible to already
existing public park or recreational facilities or publicly maintained open
space.
         b.   The fee shall be paid at the time of final platting.
         c.   The developer shall furnish an appraisal of land value for the
purpose of determining the cash payment due in lieu of land dedication. The
appraisal shall be prepared by a state of Illinois certified appraiser and
shall indicate the average value of the land within the proposed subdivision
prior to development.
         d.   All fees in lieu of dedication payments shall be deposited in a
separate fund established by the city, and such funds and the interest thereon
shall be used only for the purchase and development of neighborhood park and
recreational facilities.
   C.   Resubdividing; Open Space Requirements: Any lands resubdivided after
the effective date hereof shall be subject to the provisions of subsection B of
this section; except, that land previously dedicated or cash payments made in
lieu of land dedication will be credited against the obligations of the
subdivider. In no instance will lands dedicated to the city, or cash payments
made in lieu of land dedication, be returned to the applicant as a result of
resubdivision. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
CHAPTER 10
SIGN REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-10-1: Purpose And Objectives
10-10-2: Compliance With Provisions
10-10-3: Application And Interpretation
10-10-4: Size And Height
10-10-5: Permitted Sign Standards
10-10-6: Prohibited Signs
10-10-7: Exempt Signs
10-10-8: Permit Requirements
10-10-9: Master Or Common Signage Plan
10-10-10: Temporary Signs
10-10-11: Flags And Flagpoles
10-10-12: Nonconforming Signs
10-10-13: Maintenance
10-10-1: PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES:
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that persons and businesses desiring
to exercise their rights, under the first amendment of the U.S. constitution,
by expressing commercial and noncommercial messages, shall be treated uniformly
while ensuring that the public health, safety and welfare are protected. This
chapter has the following specific objectives:
   A.   To ensure that signs are designed, constructed, installed and
maintained so that the public safety and traffic safety are not compromised;
   B.   To allow and promote positive conditions for sign communications while
at the same time avoiding nuisances to nearby properties and promoting an
attractive environment;
   C.   To reflect and support the desired character and development patterns
of the various zoning districts;
   D.   To allow for adequate and effective signs in commercial and industrial
zones while preventing signs from dominating the appearance of the area; and
   E.   To ensure that the constitutionally guaranteed right of free speech is
protected. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-10-2: COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS:
Other than lawful nonconforming signs, no signs shall be permitted in any
zoning district except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and
shall require a sign permit in conformance with the provisions in subsection
10-4-2F of this title. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-10-3: APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the erection, alteration,
reconstruction, construction and maintenance of all on premises and off
premises signs and billboards within the city.
   B.   To the extent that any other provision of this title shall be more
restrictive than the provisions set forth in this chapter, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
   C.   The sections, paragraphs, clauses, and phrases of this chapter are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
chapter shall be declared unlawful by the valid judgment, decree or injunction
order of a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
chapter. In the event that, contrary to the policies, interests, and values of
the city, a court of competent jurisdiction issues a judgment, decree or
injunction order that this chapter is unlawful because of any omission or
prohibition in this chapter, then all provisions of this chapter not
specifically declared to be unlawful shall remain in full force and effect. In
the event that a judgment, decree or injunction order declaring all or a
portion of this chapter to be unlawful is reversed or vacated by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the provisions contained in this chapter shall remain
in full force and effect.
   D.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no sign shall be
subject to any limitation based on the content of message contained on such
sign. Any sign authorized in this chapter may contain noncommercial copy in
lieu of any other copy. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-10-4: SIZE AND HEIGHT:
   A.   Maximum On Premises Sign Area Per Lot, Tract Or Parcel:
      1.   The maximum allowable sign area permitted for on premises signs for
any lot or parcel shall be computed by applying the maximum sign area permitted
in a zoning district contained in table 10-1 (subsection A3 of this section).
Lots fronting on two (2) or more streets are allowed to include the sum of all
street frontages when calculating total allowable maximum on premises sign
area. For example, the property shown in exhibit 10-1 (subsection A3 of this
section) would have a total of two hundred thirty feet (230') of frontage (150'
+ 80').
      2.   The total square footage for window signs, wall signs and awning
signs on the exterior of the building shall not exceed twenty five percent
(25%) of the building face on any elevation. These totals do not count towards
the maximum sign area allowed pursuant to table 10-1 (subsection A3 of this
section). Projecting signs do count towards the maximum sign area. Banners are
allowed and do not count toward maximum sign area if located in an interior
side or rear yard and they are placed more than twenty five feet (25') from the
right of way line. Banners that are placed less than twenty five feet (25')
from any right of way shall be treated as temporary signs pursuant to section
10-10-10 of this chapter.
      3.   Exhibit 10-1:
Exhibit 10-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1581.gif]
 
   B.   Sign Face Area: On premises signs shall be calculated by measuring from
the extreme boundaries of each sign face. The message area shall include any
emblem, logo, trademark, representation or other display, together with any
material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or
used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it
is placed, but shall not include the supporting framework, bracing, poles,
apron, supports, structural members, decorative fence or wall that is clearly
incidental to the sign and not a part of the message. The sign area of on
premises directional signs shall not be included in the measurement of the
total sign area. Billboards and off premises sign area calculations shall
include the border and trim.
      1.   Cabinet Signs: The sign area is determined by multiplying the width
by the height as shown in exhibit 10-2 (subsection B4 of this section). The
sign area of round cabinet signs shall be calculated based on the radius of the
sign with the formula shown in exhibit 10-2 of this section.
      2.   Back To Back Signs: The sign area of back to back signs shall be
calculated as shown in exhibit 10-3 (subsection B4 of this section). If the
sign faces are parallel or within ten degrees (10°) of parallel, then only one
sign face is measured. If there is a separation of more than three feet (3')
between faces or an angle greater than ten degrees (10°), then each sign face
shall be calculated.
      3.   Multiple Signs: The sign area for multiple signs shall be calculated
by taking the sum of the sign area for each individual cabinet. For example, in
exhibit 10-4 (subsection B4 of this section), the sign area would be:
(A x B) + (C x D) + (E x F)
      4.   Exhibits:
Exhibit 10-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1583.gif]
 
Exhibit 10-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1585.gif]
 
Exhibit 10-4
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1589.gif]
 
   C.   Sign Height: The height of the sign shall be measured from the ground,
excluding berms, filling, mounding or excavations, at the base of the sign or
from the grade level of the adjacent street or highway centerline, whichever is
higher, to the top of highest attached component of the sign. In cases where
the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined due to multiple levels of the
building or topography, the sign height shall be computed on the assumption
that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the
elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or grade of the
land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the lot, whichever
is lower. Exhibit 10-5 at the end of this subsection shows the method for
calculating sign height. Where topography neighboring buildings or existing
landscaping would obscure a sign from the adjoining street, the applicant may
request a variance in conformance with subsection
10-4-3J of this title.
Exhibit 10-5
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1587.gif]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-10-5: PERMITTED SIGN STANDARDS:
   A.   The type of sign permitted, maximum number of signs, maximum size,
maximum height, maximum projection, minimum setback, lighting method, and
permit requirement shall be in conformance with table 10-1 of this section.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
TABLE 10-1: SIGNS PERMITTED WITH AND WITHOUT PERMITS IN ZONING DISTRICTS
Zoning                Structural Maximum   Maximum Sign Maximum Additional
District Type Of Sign Type       Number Of Area         Height  Regulations
                                 Signs
Zoning                  Structural Maximum     Maximum   Maximum    Additional
District Type Of Sign   Type       Number Of   Sign Area Height     Regulations
                                   Signs
On Premises Signs - Permanent
                        Monument,  1 per       20 square
         Subdivision    ground     street      feet per  5 feet     Permit
         sign           sign       entrance to sign face            required
                                   subdivision
                        Monument,
                        ground     No limit -            5 feet
         Building       sign       see area    4 square             Permit
         identification            and         feet      Under eave required
         sign           Wall sign  separation            of
A, RE,                             standards             building
R-1, R-
2, R-2U,                Monument,
R-3, R-                 ground                 Maximum   5 feet
3U, R-4,                sign                   total
R-4U                                           sign area            Permit not
         Other signs,              No limit -  square               required if
         including                 see area    footage              sign face
         church and                and         per lot,             area is
         public                    separation  not more  Under eave less than
         bulletin       Wall sign  standards   than 1    of         10 square
         boards                                square    building   feet
                                               foot per
                                               4 feet of
                                               frontage

                                               50 square
                                               feet per
                                               sign face
                                               for pole/
                                               post or
                                               monument
                                               sign or
                                               ground
                                               sign
                                                
                                   1 per 100   Total
                                   feet of     sign area 12 foot
                        Pole/post  frontage    not more  pole/post;
                        or         for pole/   than 1    5 foot     Permit
         Advertising    monument   post or     square    monument;  required
                        or ground  monument    foot per  5 foot
                        sign       base or     linear    ground
                                   ground sign foot of   sign
                                               frontage
                                               up to 100
                                               feet,
                                               plus 0.5
                                               square
C-1                                            foot per
                                               1 linear
                                               foot of
                                               frontage
                                               over 100
                                               feet
                                               Wall,
                                               window
                                               and
                                   Any number  awning
                                   of signs    signs are
                                   not to      not       Under eave
                        Wall sign, exceed      counted   or parapet
                        awning,    maximum     toward    for wall,
                        marquee or total sign  the       awning,
                       projecting area,       total, if marquee,    
                        sign or    except not  they do   window or
                        window     more than 1 not       projecting
                        sign       projecting  exceed 25 sign
                                   sign per    percent
                                   business    of the
                                               area of
                                               any
                                               building
                                               face
                                               Maximum   30 foot
                                               total     pole/post;
                                               sign area 5 foot
                                               not more  monument;
                                               than 2    5 foot
                                   1 per 100   square    ground
                        Pole/post  feet of     feet per  sign. The
                        or         frontage    linear    bottom of
                        monument   for pole/   foot of   all signs
                        or ground  post or     frontage  on a pole
                        sign       monument or for up to sign shall
                                   ground sign 100 feet, not be
                                               plus 0.5  lower than
                                               square    8 feet
                                               foot per  from
                                               linear    finished
                                               foot of   grade
                                               frontage
C-2, I-                                        over 100
1,       Advertising                           feet                 Permit
I-2                                                                required
                                               Wall,
                                               window
                                               and
                                               awning    Under eave
                        Wall,      Any number  signs are or parapet
                        awning,    of signs,   not       for wall,
                        marquee or except not  counted   awning,
                        projecting more than 1 toward    marquee,
                        sign or    projecting  the       window or
                        window     sign per    total, if projecting
                        sign       business    they do   sign
                                               not
                                               exceed 25
                                               percent
                                               of the
                                               area of
                                               any
                                               building
                                               face
C-3      See "Existing Design Guidelines For Central Area Neighborhood In
         Charleston, Illinois", which is hereby incorporated by reference
PUD      Shall comply with the restrictions in the underlying zoning district
Temporary Signs - See section
10-10-10 of this chapter
 
(Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007; amd. Ord. 09-O-60, 12-1-2009)
   B.   The requirements for sign standards are based on the zoning districts
in which the signs are located. See chapter 5 of this title for more detail on
the zoning districts. In addition to the standards established in table 10-1
(subsection A of this section), the following standards shall apply:
      1.   Projecting Signs: Projecting signs, when allowed, may extend up to
six feet (6') into the required front, rear or side setback areas. (Ord. 03-O-
9, 3-18-2003)
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   Signs In Setback Areas: Signs may be allowed within required
setback areas, provided they do not interfere with the required sight triangle
as described in subsection
10-8-2F2 of this title, and they are not located within the distance of an
electrical or telecommunications distribution line prescribed by the service
provider. (Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
         b.   Extension Of Sign Into Right Of Way: No sign shall be permitted
to extend into or onto a public right of way.
         c.   Setbacks From A And R Districts:
            (1)   On premises advertising signs in any R-3, R-3U, R-4, R-4U, C-
1, C-2, C-3, I-1 or I-2 district shall be located at least twenty feet (20')
from any RE, R-1 or R-2 district. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
            (2)   Off premises signs and billboards allowed under section
10-10-7 and subsection
10-10-10C of this chapter in any district shall be located at least seventy
five feet (75') from any R district. (Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
      3.   Sign Separation: A ground mounted sign (e.g., pole and monument
signs) shall not be located closer to another ground mounted sign than the
distance indicated in table 10-2 of this section, measured parallel to the
right of way. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
TABLE 10-2: MINIMUM SIGN SEPARATION
 
Roadway Type 1                                         Local Collector Arterial
Minimum separation on same side of right of way (feet) 50    50        100
 
Note:
      1.   Arterial roadways shall include Lincoln Avenue/Route 16, 18th
Street/Route 130, and State Street/Route 316. In circumstances where existing
signs would preclude the installation of a sign, in conformance with these
spacing standards, on a lot or parcel legally existing on the effective date
hereof, 1 freestanding sign shall be authorized for the parcel.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
10-10-6: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs shall not be permitted in any district: (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-
2003)
   A.   Signs with flashing, moving, rotating, pulsating or glaring parts,
excluding message boards that have disabled the flashing mode. The interval
between new messages and/or scenes for electronic message boards shall be a
minimum of two (2) seconds. (Ord. 07-O-58, 11-20-2007)
   B.   Signs which resemble traffic control signs or devices or use the words
"stop", "slow", "danger", "caution" or the like, which may confuse motorists
and cause traffic hazards.
   C.   Strings of lights, pennants, strings and loops of strings or ribbons,
garlands, searchlights, beacons, paper posters applied directly to a wall,
pole, fence or building surface, and banners and streamers (except as allowed
in section
10-10-10 of this chapter).
   D.   Signs containing obscene messages, scenes or graphics, or false or
misleading advertising or information.
   E.   Portable or temporary signs other than those specifically permitted in
section
10-10-10 of this chapter.
   F.   Billboards and off premises signs, except as allowed under section
10-10-7 and subsection
10-10-10C of this chapter or as allowed within sports and entertainment
facilities.
   G.   Snipe signs or signs attached to trees, telephone poles, public
benches, streetlights, utility poles, or fences, or placed on any public
property or public right of way, except as authorized by the city.
   H.   Signs placed on vehicles or trailers that are parked or located for the
primary purpose of displaying said sign, except as allowed in section
10-10-7 of this chapter.
   I.   Signs placed on or extending over the public right of way. Subdivision
signs in medians may be authorized pursuant to subsection
10-4-2G of this title.
   J.   Any sign on which the illuminating or lighting device is so placed as
to reflect or shine directly into the adjacent highways or streets in such a
manner as to hamper the vision of a motor vehicle operator thereon.
   K.   Roof signs.
   L.   Business, company, or other nongovernmental flags displayed on roof
mounted poles. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
   M.   Street blimps and balloons. (Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007)
   N.   Mobile billboard signs on trailers, except as allowed in section
10-10-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-10-7: EXEMPT SIGNS:
Except as noted below, the following signs are excluded from regulation under
this chapter. Exemption from this chapter does not exempt property owners from
duties and responsibilities established by private deed restrictions or
covenants.
   A.   Residential Signs: Signs not exceeding one square foot in area that are
customarily associated with residential use, such as signs identifying names or
numbers or signs on mailboxes, and are not of a commercial nature, except for
permitted home occupations.
   B.   Governmental Signs: Signs erected by, or on behalf of, or pursuant to
the authorization by a governmental body.
   C.   Flags: The United States flag, the Illinois state flag and any local
government flag shall be excluded from the maximum allowable sign area;
however, business, company, institutional and any other nongovernmental flags
shall be included in the total allowable signage of a premises.
   D.   Decorative/Architectural Features: Holiday season decorations and
signage; historic plaques, cornerstones and commemorative plaques; integral
decorative or architectural features of buildings or works of art, so long as
such features or works do not contain letters, trademarks or moving parts; and
seasonal and festive pennants; provided, that any commercial message does not
exceed the lesser of two (2) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the pennant.
   E.   Directional Signs: On premises, directional signs visible from an
abutting street; provided, that they do not exceed six (6) square feet per sign
face or three feet (3') in height or interfere with visibility for pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
   F.   Vehicular Signs: Signs painted on or otherwise permanently attached to
currently licensed and operable motor vehicles.
   G.   Noncommercial Signs: Signs expressing constitutionally protected speech
not otherwise addressed herein; church, school and college bulletin boards not
exceeding twenty (20) square feet; periodic events signs; community carnival
and event signs.
   H.   Traffic Signs: Traffic signs authorized by act of the city council or
other public agency having authority over public use of right of way.
   I.   Warning Signs: Warning signs, no trespassing, no hunting and similar
signs.
   J.   Political Signs: Political signs posted no more than thirty (30) days
prior to an election and removed within seven (7) days of the election. All
other political signs shall be considered temporary signs and shall comply with
subsection
10-10-10B of this chapter.
   K.   Community Events Signs: Community events signs shall have the same size
restrictions as temporary signs and may be displayed up to thirty (30) days
prior to the first day of the event and must be taken down no later than seven
(7) days after the last day of the event. Community signs must not be attached
to any existing sign structure. Community events signs do not count as
temporary signs for the business and do not count toward the maximum sign area
for the site on which they are located.
   L.   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs placed on the premises of the
property that is for sale or lease. They shall not be placed in the public
right of way or on the boulevard. Sign size shall be limited to nine (9) square
feet in any residential district and thirty two (32) square feet in any
commercial or industrial district. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-10-8: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a sign permit is to ensure that signs are
safely constructed and comply with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Permit Required: No person shall erect or alter a nonexempt sign until
a sign permit has been issued by the community development director, or their
designee.
   C.   Exemptions From Permit: The following signs and sign activities shall
not require permits if no structural change is made to the sign or its support
structure:
      1.   Replacing or altering changeable copy on theater marquees,
billboards and similar signs.
      2.   Touching up or repainting existing letters, symbols and sign cases
and poles.
      3.   Actions taken to ensure that the sign is safe and maintained.
      4.   Replacing a sign face; provided, that the face is the same size and
fits into the existing frame.
      5.   Traffic or other municipal or informational signs; legal notices;
railroad crossing signs; danger, warning and such temporary, emergency or
nonadvertising signs necessary for traffic control or as may be approved by the
city council.
      6.   Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection,
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other metal.
   D.   Submittal Requirements:
      1.   Materials And Application Deadlines: Current application materials
and schedules for submittal are available during normal business hours from the
office of the community development director, or their designee.
      2.   Application Fees: Any action on an application for the erection,
change of sign face or structure or display of a sign pursuant to this chapter
shall be subject to the required fee in the amount as established by the city
council.
      3.   Required Information:
         a.   A master signage plan shall be required for shopping centers,
office and business parks and industrial parks in conformance with subsection
10-10-9B of this chapter.
         b.   Written and graphic information shall be sufficient to
demonstrate that the sign is in compliance with the city's adopted building and
electrical codes.
   E.   Review Criteria: All signs shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the requirements of this title and the city's adopted building
and electrical codes.
   F.   Validity: The sign shall be completed within six (6) months, or as
otherwise indicated in the sign permit. If no construction of the sign has
commenced within this time period, the permit shall be no longer valid, and a
new sign application shall be required. The sign permit shall be valid as long
as the use and sign are in compliance with applicable codes. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-
18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-10-9: MASTER OR COMMON SIGNAGE PLAN:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of a master signage plan is to ensure that signage
for multi-tenant properties is coordinated and consistent with the standards of
this title.
   B.   Plan Required: All applications for new construction or reconstruction
of shopping centers, business and industrial parks and other multi-tenant
developments shall be accompanied by a master signage or common signage plan or
amendments thereto. The owner of the property shall be responsible for
allocating sign area to tenants of the property.
   C.   Contents: Any site plan application for applicable development projects
shall include a master signage plan that includes the following information:
      1.   Plan:
         a.   Plot plan at scale.
         b.   Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways and landscaped
areas.
         c.   Computation of the total frontage of the lot, parcel or tract and
maximum total sign area, maximum area of individual signs, heights of signs,
and number of pole/post signs.
         d.   Location and placement of all signs.
         e.   Setbacks and sign dimensions.
         f.   Landscaping and other site improvements to be coordinated with
the sign placement.
      2.   Consent: The master signage plan shall be signed by the property
owners or their authorized agents.
   D.   Sign Area Bonus: The maximum total sign area allowed for a multi-tenant
development may be increased ten percent (10%) if the master signage plan
demonstrates the use of uniform wall signage, graphics, lettering, sizes,
colors, materials, and placement. The plan may provide for design variations
for colors and lettering that are part of a corporate logo or identification
scheme. A single menu sign that incorporates and coordinates with these methods
of signage shall be used rather than multiple pole/post signs for the property.
Exhibit 10-6 of this section provides an example of the type of master signage
plan that could be eligible for a ten percent (10%) increase in maximum total
sign area.
Exhibit 10-6
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/ae379dd857da0efb1955ecfc21c4a8b9daedddf0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1593.gif]
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-10-10: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
Temporary signs shall be permitted in conformance with table 10-1 (subsection
10-10-5A of this chapter) and the following regulations:
   A.   Appearance And Installation: Temporary signs for special events may be
approved, provided the signs do not have moving parts, blinking or flashing
lights, glaring lights, animated neon or extensive use of bright, offensive
colors. All temporary signs shall be secured on at least two (2) sides to the
ground or a building or structure to prevent the sign from being moved by
physical or weather forces.
   B.   Requirements:
      1.   Banners and portable signs are allowed without permits subject to
the following requirements:
         a.   No more than one temporary sign may be posted per one hundred
(100) linear feet of frontage;
         b.   The maximum size of a banner or portable sign shall be twelve
(12) square feet;
         c.   Signs must be placed on the property, and location shall not
interfere with visibility for pedestrian or vehicular traffic; and
         d.   The signs shall only be displayed between the hours of seven
o’clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) P.M.
   2.   All other temporary signs larger than twelve (12) square feet are
subject to the following requirements and require a permit:
         a.   Term: Temporary signs may be permitted for up to thirty (30)
consecutive days but not more than four (4) times within one calendar year.
         b.   Maximum number: One per one hundred (100) linear feet of
frontage.
   C.   Street Banners: The community development director, or their designee,
may authorize the installation of street banners within the public right of way
to advertise special events beneficial to the public and community.
   D.   Removal Of Temporary Signs: Temporary signs and appurtenances shall be
removed upon expiration of the temporary sign permit, or if no sign permit is
required, the temporary sign shall be removed within thirty (30) days after
establishment of the sign. Any temporary sign or appurtenance that is not
removed within five (5) days of the expiration of the permit shall be a
violation of this section. However, temporary banners permitted by the
community development director, or their designee, for the public convenience,
and banner brackets or mounting hardware may remain in place. The removal of
such signs shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises on which
the sign is located. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 07-O-16, 4-3-2007; Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-10-11: FLAGS AND FLAGPOLES:
The design and construction of flagpoles shall comply with table 10-4 of this
section. Business, company, institutional and any other nongovernmental flags
shall be included in the calculation of total allowable signage. No flagpole
shall be erected or installed without first obtaining a permit. Decorative
flags and banners, such as birthday, holiday, crests and similar kinds used on
residential dwellings, are exempt from these requirements.
TABLE 10-4: FLAG AND FLAGPOLE STANDARDS
 
                                 Maximum Number
Zoning District Types Of Flags   Of Flags In     Maximum Flagpole Maximum Flag
                Permitted        Addition To     Height           Size
                                 Signs
                Any city,
                county, state,
                national, United
                Nations,         1 per lot,                       6 feet by 10
                military or      parcel or tract 30 feet          feet
                governmental
All districts   flag and
                organizational
                flags
                United States
                flag and the     No maximum      50 feet          10 feet by 15
                Illinois state   number                           feet
                flag
Commercial and  Official or      2               See above        See above
industrial      organizational
 
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003)
10-10-12: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulation
of signs and sign structures that legally existed prior to the effective date
hereof, but which fail to comply with one or more of the applicable regulations
or standards. It is the intent of this section to specify those circumstances
and conditions under which such nonconformities shall be permitted to continue.
   B.   Applicability: This section applies to nonconforming signs and sign
structures that were originally allowed and have been maintained over time.
These signs and sign structures have legal nonconforming status and may
continue so long as they are otherwise legal. Nonconforming signs and sign
structures that were not permitted when they were established and have been
maintained over time have no legal right to continue and shall be terminated.
   C.   Status Of Legal Nonconforming Signs: Any on premises or off premises
sign or billboard which was lawfully established, erected or affixed prior to
the effective date hereof and which complied with all regulations in force at
the time it was erected or affixed, but which fails to conform to all
applicable regulations and restrictions of this title, shall be considered a
legal nonconforming sign or billboard. A legal nonconforming sign or billboard
may be continued so long as it is otherwise in conformance with these standards
and is maintained in good condition. The owner of a nonconforming sign or
billboard shall register the sign or billboard with the community development
director, or their designee, and shall provide documentation of the prior
existence of the nonconformity within twelve (12) months of notification by the
city of the nonconformity. Documentation shall include:
      1.   A dated receipt for sale or erection from a sign contractor or sign
shop; or
      2.   Dated utility bills for separate meter to service the sign or
billboard; or
      3.   Advertisements with a photograph of the sign or billboard in dated
publications; or
      4.   Other evidence showing that the sign existed prior to the effective
date hereof.
   D.   Certificate Of Nonconforming Use: If the community development
director, or their designee, determines that the nonconforming sign was
permitted at the time and has been legally maintained over time, the community
development director, or their designee, will issue a certificate of
nonconforming use to the applicant.
   E.   Conditions Under Which Legal Nonconforming Signs Are Permitted: An
existing nonconforming sign may continue to be used subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   The message displayed on a nonconforming sign or billboard may be
changed, and painted messages on a nonconforming sign or billboard may be
repainted.
      2.   A nonilluminated, nonconforming sign or billboard shall not be
illuminated.
      3.   A nonconforming on premises sign may be changed or altered for the
express purpose of making it a conforming sign.
      4.   In order to eliminate an unsafe condition(s), the community
development director, or their designee, may order that repairs and/or
alterations be made to a nonconforming sign or billboard. Such ordered repairs
shall be the minimum necessary to correct an unsafe situation(s).
      5.   The type of materials used in the construction of the structural
elements of a sign or billboard shall not be changed after the date the sign or
billboard becomes a nonconforming sign nor shall structural alterations be made
to a nonconforming sign or billboard.
      6.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to permit
the enlargement of a nonconforming sign or billboard.
   F.   Conditions Under Which Nonconforming Signs And Billboards Are Not
Permitted: Under the following conditions, a nonconforming sign shall be
removed or brought into conformance with this title:
      1.   Illegal Sign Or Billboard: The sign or billboard was not established
or expanded in conformance with the regulations of this chapter or previous
ordinances adopted by the city to regulate advertising and signs.
      2.   Destruction Or Damage: If any nonconforming sign or billboard is
destroyed or damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of the
replacement cost of the sign and its structure, as determined by a certified
real estate appraiser, the sign or billboard shall not be replaced.
      3.   Excessive Maintenance Or Repairs: If the value of maintenance or
repairs to ensure the safety and compliance of the sign or billboard with the
regulations of this chapter is fifty percent (50%) or more of the fair market
value of the sign prior to the repairs, as determined by a state certified real
estate appraiser, the sign or billboard shall be brought into conformance with
the provisions of this chapter. Value shall be based on material costs and
labor based on prevailing wage rates.
      4.   Cessation Of Use Of Property: A nonconforming sign shall be removed
or made to conform to all the requirements of this chapter if one of the
following occurs:
         a.   The use of the property for which the sign was intended to
advertise is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days.
         b.   The products or services offered on the site for which the sign
was intended are no longer offered for a period of ninety (90) consecutive
days.
         c.   The nonconforming sign or billboard ceases to be used for the
purpose for which it was intended for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days.
      5.   Prohibited Nonconforming Signs And Billboards: Any sign that is
prohibited under this chapter shall be removed or made to conform to the
current sign regulations within thirty (30) days of receipt of a notice of
nonconformity. Provided, however that the owner may appeal the removal
requirement, which may be heard in accordance with subsection
10-4-3 L of this title, if the applicant files the appeal within one hundred
twenty (120) days of receipt of the notice. (Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord.
2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-10-13: MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Maintenance Requirements: Every on premises and off premises sign or
billboard and its supporting structure shall be maintained in good repair. All
structural members and all advertising copy shall be kept painted and clean so
as to prevent deterioration, oxidation, paint fading, paint peeling or other
unsightly conditions. Owners that are found to be improperly maintaining on or
off premises signs or billboards shall be given written notice to correct the
condition within thirty (30) days. All electrical signs shall continuously
conform to the electrical code adopted by the city.
   B.   Inspections: The community development director, or their designee,
shall inspect or cause to be inspected all signs and shall require the removal
of any sign found to have been established in violation of this chapter. The
community development director, or their designee, shall require the removal or
repair of any sign that is:
      1.   Not securely affixed to a substantial structure or anchored to the
ground.
      2.   Not in good repair.
      3.   Related to a business or product which is no longer in operation or
unavailable.
      4.   Unclean or faded to such an extent as to be unsightly.
      5.   Creating a dangerous or unsafe condition for traffic or pedestrians.
(Ord. 03-O-9, 3-18-2003; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
CHAPTER 11
EROSION, SEDIMENTATION, PESTICIDE AND HERBICIDE CONTROL
SECTION:
10-11-1: Purpose
10-11-2: Definitions
10-11-3: Site Development Permit
10-11-4: Operation Standards And Requirements
10-11-5: Exceptions And Variations
10-11-6: Suspension Or Revocation Of Permit
10-11-7: Violations; Penalties
10-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent
damage to the environment and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating
and controlling the use of pesticides and herbicides, the design, the
construction, uses and maintenance of any development or other activity which
disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth on
land situated in the Charleston side channel watershed. (Ord. 93-O-14, 3-2-
1993)
10-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the
method of "average and areas".
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man and/or equipment to a new location and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the
grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
HERBICIDE: Any chemical or chemical compound used for the control or removal of
vegetation.
LOGGING: The cutting and removal of trees for commercial sale.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
PESTICIDES: Any chemical or chemical compound used for the extermination or
control of insects, vermin, etc.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or
killing by spraying.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the city for the construction or
alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion,
runoff and grading.
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover, including
tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil. (Ord. 93-O-14, 3-2-
1993)
10-11-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person shall commence or perform any grading, stripping, excavating, or filling
of land, cut trees (logging), use any type of pesticide or herbicide, and
replace, install, or renovate any existing septic system without having first
obtained a site development permit from the building and zoning department of
the city.
   B.   Exceptions: A permit shall not be required for any of the following:
      1.   Soil disturbing agricultural land use; provided, that the affected
area is participating in conservation practices approved by the soil and water
conservation district.
      2.   The use of herbicides, pesticides (including termite control
chemicals) and lawn care products. The exception will occur when the above
substances are used on: a) a previously developed site; or b) as part of
agricultural practices. Provided, that the user adheres to all federal and
state rules and regulations governing the use of said substances and has
submitted to the city a Charleston side channel reservoir watershed toxic
substances tracking card.
   C.   Application For Permit; Fee: Application for a site development permit
shall be made by the owner of the property or their authorized agent to the
community development director, or their designee, on a form furnished for that
purpose. Each application shall have the name(s) and address(es) of the owner
or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant,
together with the name of the applicant’s principal contact at such firm. Each
application shall be signed by a licensed professional engineer and shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Each application
shall include certification that any chemical application, land clearing,
construction or development involving the movement of earth shall be in
accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit.
   D.   Submissions:
      1.   Each application for a site development permit shall include the
following information:
         a.   A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in
the field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including the
boundary line and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning, and a
legend and scale.
         b.   A development plan of the site showing:
            (1)   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within
approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries, drawn at no greater
than two foot (2') contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation
and drainage pattern of the area, at a scale of not less than one inch equals
fifty feet (1" = 50'), except in the case of sites larger than fifty (50)
acres, in which case, the plan shall be to a scale of not less than one inch
equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
            (2)   The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities,
water bodies, floodplains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas
and other significant natural or manmade features on the site and adjacent land
within approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundary.
            (3)   A general description of the predominant soil types on the
site, their location and their limitations for the proposed use.
            (4)   Proposed use of the site, including present development and
planned utilization; areas of excavation, grading and filling; proposed
contours, finished grades and street profiles; provisions for storm drainage,
including the control of accelerated runoff, with a drainage area map and
computations; kinds and locations of utilities; and areas and acreages proposed
to be chemically treated, logged, paved, covered, sodded or seeded,
vegetatively stabilized or left undisturbed.
         c.   An erosion and sedimentation control plan showing:
            (1)   All erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to
meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction and
permanently after completion of development of the site.
            (2)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures.
            (3)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
            (4)   Identification of the person(s) or entity which shall have
legal responsibilities for maintenance of erosion control structures and
measures after development is completed.
         d.   The proposed phasing of development of the site, including
stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading of
landscaping. Phasing shall identify the expected date on which clearing,
chemical treatment or logging shall begin, the estimated duration of exposure
of cleared areas, and the sequence of clearing, chemical treatment and/or
logging, and the installation of temporary sediment control measures,
installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas, and
establishment of permanent vegetative cover.
      2.   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the standards
and requirements contained in "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion
And Sedimentation Control In Illinois", prepared by the Northeastern Illinois
soil erosion and sedimentation control steering committee and adopted by the
county soil and water conservation district, which standards and requirements
are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference.
      3.   The city may waive specific requirements for the content of
submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to show
that the work shall comply with the objectives and principles of this chapter.
   E.   Bonds: The applicant shall be required to file with the city a faithful
performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security
satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount deemed sufficient by the city to
cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of improvements and
landscaping, and chemical cleanups for such period as specified by the city,
and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of
improvements installed on the site. This subsection may be waived by the city
engineer in the case of minimal property disturbance.
   F.   Review And Approval: Each application for a site development permit
shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
      1.   The city shall review each application for a site development permit
to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. For major
projects affecting the county soil and water conservation district, Illinois
department of conservation (division of forestry), and/or other local
government or public agencies within whose jurisdiction the site is located,
the city shall refer said applications to said governmental entity for input,
review and comment. Said governmental entity shall provide input, review and
comment, and said input, review and comment shall be advisory in nature and not
binding upon the city. It shall be the sole discretion of the community
development director, or their designee, as to what constitutes a “major
project”. Within a reasonable time after receiving an application, the city
shall in writing: a) approve the permit application if it is found to be in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and issue the permit; b)
approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be
necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter, and issue the
permit subject to these conditions; or c) disapprove the permit application,
indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised
application and/or submission.
      2.   No site development permit shall be issued for a proposed
development site unless:
         a.   The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and
planned unit developments, has been approved by the city where applicable; or
         b.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the city; or
         c.   The proposed earth moving, logging, and use of herbicides,
pesticides and other chemicals is coordinated with any overall development
program previously approved by the city for the area in which the site is
situated, provided all of the new rules and regulations are met in the
previously approved program.
   G.   Appeals: The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice
of the filing of the application, may appeal the decision of the city to board
of zoning appeals and planning. Upon receipt of an appeal, board of zoning
appeals and planning shall schedule and hold a public hearing. Notice of not
more than thirty (30) days and not less than fifteen (15) days shall be given.
Said notice shall be published in the legal notice section of the local
newspaper. The board of zoning appeals and planning shall render a decision
within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing. Factors to be
considered on review shall include, but need not be limited to:
      1.   The effects of the proposed development on the surface water flow to
tributary and downstream lands, any comprehensive watershed management plans,
or the use of any retention facilities;
      2.   Possible saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both
natural and domestic;
      3.   Runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of
drainageways;
      4.   Nature and type of soil or rock when disturbed by the proposed
development activities may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot
be landscaped;
      5.   Excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape through
grading or removal of vegetation;
      6.   Logging which would contribute to the erosion of soil; and
      7.   Chemical use which may leach into the waterways and reservoir of the
city whereby adversely effecting the potable drinking water of the city.
   H.   Retention Of Plans: Plans, specifications and reports for all site
developments shall be retained in original form or on microfilm by the city.
(Ord. 93-O-14, 3-2-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-11-4: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: All grading, stripping, excavating and filling, which is
subject to the permit requirements of this chapter, and any grading, stripping,
excavating and filling which is exempted from the permit requirements by
subsection
10-11-3B1 of this chapter, shall be subject to the applicable standards and
requirements set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Handbook Adopted By Reference: The standards and specifications
contained in "Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation
Control In Illinois", cited in paragraph D of article IV, are hereby
incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by reference for the
purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under site
development and erosion and sedimentation control plans approved under section
10-11-3 of this chapter. In the event of conflict between provisions of said
manual and of this chapter, this chapter shall govern.
   C.   Inspections:
      1.   The city shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall
either approve that portion of work completed or shall notify the permittee
wherein the work fails to comply with the site development or erosion,
sedimentation, logging or chemical use control plan as approved. Plans for
grading, stripping, excavating, filling work, logging and/or chemical treatment
bearing the stamp of approval of the city shall be maintained at the site
during the progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections, the permittee
shall notify the city at least two (2) working days before the completion of:
         a.   Start of work.
         b.   Stripping and clearing.
         c.   Rough grading.
         d.   Final grading.
         e.   Final landscaping.
         f.   Final chemical application.
      2.   If stripping, clearing, grading, logging or chemical applications
are to be done in phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request
inspection at the completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or
area. Results of inspections shall be given within a reasonable time. The
permittee may continue work at the permittee's own risk with the permission of
the city engineer prior to written results of the inspection being available.
   D.   Special Precautions:
      1.   If, at any stage of the grading of any development site, the city
determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such that further work
authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public way,
watercourse or drainage structure, the city may require, as a condition of
allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable special precautions to be
taken as is considered advisable to avoid the likelihood of such peril.
"Special precautions" may include, but shall not be limited to, a more level
exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, berms,
terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion
control and recommendations of a registered soils engineer and/or engineering
geologist which may make requirements for further work. (Costs inure to the
developer.)
      2.   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on
any development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee
required to install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be
required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the community
development director, or their designee, may specify the time of starting
grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be conducted
in specified stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or
devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
   E.   Amendment Of Plans: Major amendments of the site development or
erosion, sedimentation, logging or chemical control plans shall be submitted to
the city and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner
as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized
by the community development director, or their designee, by written
authorization to the permittee.
   F.   Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire and
become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed by a date
which shall be specified in the permit; except, that the city may, if the
permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have
prevented work being commenced or completed within the specified time limits,
grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the
expiration date of the permit. (Ord. 93-O-14, 3-2-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-
18-2025)
10-11-5: EXCEPTIONS AND VARIATIONS:
   A.   Authority: The board of zoning appeals and planning may, in accordance
with the procedures of this section, authorize exceptions to any of the
requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Application For Exception: Application for any exception shall be made
by a verified petition of the applicant for a site development permit, stating
fully the grounds of the petition and the facts relied upon by the applicant.
Said petition shall be filed with the site development permit application. In
order for the petition to be granted, it shall be necessary that the board of
zoning appeals and planning find all of the following facts with respect to the
land referred to in the petition:
      1.   That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it
is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter;
      2.   That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
      3.   That the granting of the exception shall not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
   C.   Review And Recommendation: Each application for an exception shall be
referred to the staff of the city for review. The city shall transmit its
recommendations to the board of zoning appeals and planning, which shall review
such recommendations prior to granting or denying the exception.
   D.   Hearing And Decision: The board of zoning appeals and planning shall
hold a public hearing on each application for exception, within forty five (45)
days after receiving application, in the manner provided with respect to
appeals 1 . After public hearing, the board of zoning appeals and planning may
approve the site development permit application with the exceptions and
conditions it deems necessary, or it may disapprove such site development
permit application and exception, or it may take such other action as
appropriate. (Ord. 93-O-14, 3-2-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-4-3J of this title.
10-11-6: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Revocation Or Suspension Authorized: In the event any person holding a
site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the
permit, or carries on site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood of the development site or so as to be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the neighborhood, the city may suspend or revoke the site development permit.
   B.   Stop Work Order: Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work
order issued by the community development director, or their designee, and
delivered to the permittee or their agent or the person performing the work.
The stop work order shall be effective immediately, shall state the specific
violations cited and shall state the conditions under which work may be
resumed. A stop work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the board of zoning appeals and planning at which the
conditions of subsection C of this section can be met.
   C.   Notice Requirements:
      1.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the board of zoning appeals and planning. Written
notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee, either personally or
by registered mail, and shall state:
         a.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or
revocation, in clear and concise language.
         b.   The time when and place where such hearing shall be held.
      2.   Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days
prior to the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on
his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the board of zoning appeals and
planning shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 93-O-14, 3-2-1993; amd. Ord. 2025-O-5, 2-18-2025)
10-11-7: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any terms of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an ordinance violation, and each day
during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon
conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership or corporation shall
be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each
offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any
person, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be required to restore the site to the condition existing
prior to commission of the violation or to bear the expense of such
restoration. (Ord. 93-O-14, 3-2-1993)
CHAPTER 12
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Definitions
10-12-2: Conditional Use Permit Required
10-12-3: Conditional Use Permit Application
10-12-4: Restrictions And Requirements Of Conditional Use
10-12-5: Prohibited Acts; Penalty
10-12-6: Amortization Clause
10-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined as
follows:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other periodicals which
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which features
topless or nude dancers and/or waitresses, strippers, male or female
impersonators and/or similar entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER: An enclosed building with the capacity for less
than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by
patrons therein.
ADULT GIFT SHOP: An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its stock in trade pictures, photographs, drawings, diagrams,
paraphernalia, apparatus or other objects which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted for the sale or display of such material.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) persons
or more used primarily for presenting material distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
the female breast below a point immediately above the areola to a point
immediately below the areola, said opaque cover covering the entire areola.
   B.   The display of the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
real or simulated, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Actual or simulated human genitals in a state of
sexual stimulation or arousal; acts or simulated acts of human masturbation,
sexual intercourse or sodomy; acts or simulated acts of oral sexual conduct;
fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast. (Ord. 97-O-1, 1-7-1997)
10-12-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
In order for an adult bookstore, adult entertainment center, adult gift shop,
adult movie theater, or an adult entertainment cabaret to operate within the
zoning jurisdiction of the city, it must first obtain a conditional use permit
pursuant to the conditions of subsection
10-4-3D of this title and comply with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. (Ord. 97-O-1, 1-7-1997)
10-12-3: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT APPLICATION:
The conditional use application shall contain the exact name and addresses of
the applicant and shall set forth specific reference to the purpose to which
the conditional use shall be utilized. Said use shall not be expanded without
further approval by the board of zoning appeals and planning as set forth
herein. (Ord. 97-O-1, 1-7-1997)
10-12-4: RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS OF CONDITIONAL USE:
The following restrictions and requirements shall apply to an applicant for an
adult bookstore, adult entertainment center, adult gift shop, adult movie
theater, and/or adult entertainment cabaret. No conditional use shall be
approved for a premises which:
   A.   Is located within one thousand feet (1,000') of any existing school;
church; mortuary or undertaking establishment; home for the aged or indigent
persons, veterans or their spouses or children; establishments selling
alcoholic beverages; township, municipal or other governmental unit; park;
recreation facility; teen or youth center; or residence.
   B.   Is located within one thousand feet (1,000') of another establishment
already operating a business defined herein.
   C.   Has more than one outdoor sign advertising its existence or location.
   D.   Has an outdoor sign exceeding ten feet (10') in length or three feet
(3') in width.
   E.   Has an outdoor sign which contains any emphasis either by wording or
picture or otherwise of matters relating to sexual activities.
   F.   Displays the stock in trade of adult entertainment establishments to
the public view from outside the establishment.
   G.   Fails to post a notice at the door that entry by persons under age
eighteen (18) is forbidden. (Ord. 97-O-1, 1-7-1997)
   H.   The conditional use permit shall only be granted into areas designated
by this title as I-1 light industrial or I-2 heavy industrial. (Ord. 97-O-1, 1-
7-1997; amd. 2006 Code)
   I.   For the purposes of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
property line of the lot or parcel containing the adult use to the property
line of the lot or parcel containing the nearest adult use; school; church;
mortuary or undertaking establishment; home for the aged or indigent persons,
veterans or their spouses or children; establishments selling alcoholic
beverages; township, municipal or other governmental unit; park; recreation
facility; teen or youth center; or residence.
   J.   There shall be a five foot (5') buffer zone existing between any and
all topless or nude dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or other
similar live entertainers and the nearest customer. (Ord. 97-O-1, 1-7-1997)
10-12-5: PROHIBITED ACTS; PENALTY:
   A.   It shall be deemed a violation of this chapter to do any of following:
      1.   Violate any conditions as set forth in this subsection.
      2.   No owner, operator, employee of an operator, or customer shall, on
the premises, engage in or permit the occurrence of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse, oral sex, sodomy, or other contact stimulation of the genitalia or
engage in or permit the occurrence of any act constituting the offense of
obscenity under the Illinois criminal code 1 .
      3.   No owner, operator, employee of an operator, or customer shall
allow, permit, or authorize the physical contact between any employee,
entertainer, or agent of the establishment and a customer.
   B.   Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each
day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 97-O-1, 1-7-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
10-12-6: AMORTIZATION CLAUSE:
All business establishments not complying with this chapter shall be required
to obtain a conditional use permit in conformity with this chapter within one
year of the effective date hereof or cease operations. (Ord. 97-O-1, 1-7-1997)
CHAPTER 13
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-13-1: Purpose
10-13-2: Findings
10-13-3: Interpretation
10-13-4: Definitions
10-13-5: General Location Regulations
10-13-6: Regulations For Locations Of Special Historical, Architectural Or
Economic Significance
10-13-7: Tower And Antenna Design Requirements
10-13-8: City Owned Land
10-13-9: Preference For Shared Use
10-13-10: Conditions
10-13-11: Nonconformities
10-13-12: Abandoned Or Unused Towers Or Antennas; Enforcement; Lien
10-13-13: Interference With Public Safety Telecommunications
10-13-14: Additional Application Requirements
10-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide specific regulations for the
placement, construction and modification of personal wireless service
facilities. In order to accommodate the communication needs of residents and
businesses while protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare of
the community, the city council finds that these regulations are necessary in
order to:
   A.   Facilitate the efficient provision of personal wireless services to the
residents of the city, as well as to other persons, firms, and/or corporations
in the vicinity of the city;
   B.   Minimize adverse visual effects of personal wireless service
facilities, through careful design, siting, screening, and landscape buffering
standards;
   C.   Minimize the impacts of personal wireless service facilities on, and
reduce conflicts with, the architectural, historical, tourism and economic
significance of historic structures and districts designated by the federal,
state and local governments;
   D.   Minimize the impacts of personal wireless service facilities on, and
reduce conflicts with, the architectural, historical, tourism and economic
significance of the city's principal commercial and tourist corridor;
   E.   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from falling ice and
tower failure through structural standards and setback requirements;
   F.   Promote, encourage and maximize the shared use of existing and approved
towers and base stations to accommodate new personal wireless service
facilities in order to reduce the number of towers needed to serve the
community; and
   G.   Promote, encourage and maximize the use of existing tall structures
that have been established within the community for the collocation of new
personal wireless service facilities. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-2: FINDINGS:
The city council makes the following legislative findings concerning the
relationship these regulations have with the city's general planning efforts:
   A.   The city of Charleston adopted an update and amendment to its
comprehensive plan on December 1, 2009 (the "2009 comp plan"), following the
completion of an in depth study of the existing uses and the trends of
development in the city's jurisdiction and within one and one-half (11/2) miles
thereof. The 2009 comp plan incorporates goals and recommendations from earlier
comprehensive plans, provides status reports on activities taken to implement
earlier recommendations and adopts new recommendations to facilitate the goals
described.
   B.   The 2009 comp plan recommended, and the city has implemented, a zoning
overlay district called the residential transition area to create a transition
between high density residential and commercial developments and low density
residential uses in order to balance a growing economy with neighborhood
preservation.
   C.   A primary characteristic of the residential transition area is the
height restriction applicable therein which limits structures to no greater
than thirty five feet (35').
   D.   The 2009 comp plan states the city of Charleston is committed to
preserving, restoring, and rehabilitating historic structures and the areas
that are significant to Charleston's heritage. The city has expressed that
commitment by taking the following affirmative steps:
      1.   On October 19, 2004, a historic preservation ordinance was
established;
      2.   On January 10, 2007, the city was granted certified local
governments (CLG) status; and
      3.   On February 19, 2008, ordinance 08-O-05 granting historic district
designation of 6th and 7th Streets was approved by the city council.
   E.   In addition to the historic district, the most historically and
architecturally significant individual buildings within the city are the "Old
Main" building on the campus of Eastern Illinois University and the Coles
County Courthouse, located downtown.
   F.   The 2009 comp plan recommends the establishment of gateway features at
the four (4) major approaches to the city, including the easterly and westerly
approaches along Lincoln Avenue, to maintain, enhance, and promote tourism,
economic welfare and the natural and aesthetic qualities of Charleston through
encouragement of quality development and beautification efforts by the city and
its residents.
   G.   The 2009 comp plan supplements and complements the "1996 Charleston
Tomorrow" strategic plan, which expresses a goal to maintain and preserve the
Lincoln Avenue (IL 16) corridor as a gateway entrance to the city.
   H.   The city has taken affirmative steps to enhance and beautify the
Lincoln Avenue corridor as a gateway entrance to the city, including:
      1.   The 2003 unified development code contains special sign regulations
for the Lincoln Avenue corridor; and
      2.   The city has implemented corner flower projects and constructed new
sidewalks along the Lincoln Avenue corridor. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-3: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to and shall not be
interpreted or applied so as to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the
provision of personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this
chapter be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between
providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. To the extent
that any provision or provisions of this chapter are inconsistent or in
conflict with any provision of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed to control.
   B.   In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required under
this chapter made by an applicant to provide personal wireless service or to
install personal wireless service facilities, the city council shall act within
a reasonable period of time after a complete request is duly filed with the
city, taking into account the nature and scope of the request. There shall be a
rebuttable presumption that a reasonable period of time to take final action on
applications for collocated facilities is ninety (90) days and for new
facilities one hundred fifty (150) days; provided that such period shall be
tolled during any time the applicant needs to respond to reasonable requests
for additional information. Any decision to deny such a request shall be in
writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
   C.   No decision to deny an application for a conditional use permit or a
zoning variation for the construction or installation of a personal wireless
service facility may be based on the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that such facility complies with the FCC's regulations
concerning such emissions.
   D.   Nothing herein shall be construed to release any applicant from
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local building, electrical
and occupational safety laws, regulations, codes and rules. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-
2015)
10-13-4: DEFINITIONS:
BASE STATION: Includes other structures, excluding towers, that support or
house a personal wireless service facility as of the effective date hereof or
on which new personal wireless service facilities are granted permission to be
erected.
DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM: A network of spatially separated antenna nodes
connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless
service within a geographic area or structure.
DOWNTOWN: The area from the center of 5th Street (on the west) to the center of
8th Street (on the east) and from the center of Van Buren Avenue (south) to the
center of Madison Avenue (north).
ESTABLISHED HEIGHT: The elevation from the established grade on the subject
property of the highest structural component of a tower, excluding transmission
equipment and other appurtenances, at the time that tower is constructed or on
the effective date of this chapter, whichever is later.
HISTORIC DISTRICT: The 2008 6th/7th Street historic district, as defined by
ordinance 08-O-05.
LINCOLN CORRIDOR: The area nine hundred feet (900') on either side of the
centerline along Lincoln Avenue (IL 16) running between the Eastern Illinois
R.R. Co. right of way on the west and East Harrison Street on the east.
OLD MAIN: The building commonly known as Livingston C. Lord Administration
Building for Eastern Illinois University. It is the oldest building on the
campus, was completed in 1899 and was designed in a medieval style resembling a
castle. "Old Main" is one of a series of five (5) medieval buildings
constructed on public university campuses in Illinois which are collectively
known as Altgeld's castles. The building was added to the national register of
historic places on June 16, 1981.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE AND PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES: As used in
this chapter, shall be defined in the same manner as in title 47, United States
Code, section 332(c)(7)(C), as amended now or in the future. Generally, these
terms refer to licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services
including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile
radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that are marketed to the general public. For the purpose of this
chapter the term "personal wireless service facilities" includes each of its
component parts, including ground mounted support equipment, screening,
landscaping, towers and/or antennas, as deemed appropriate in the context, and
any other appurtenant improvements required as a condition of authority to
construct such facilities.
TOWER: Includes any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of
supporting a personal wireless service facility. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-5: GENERAL LOCATION REGULATIONS:
   A.   Permitted Use: Personal wireless service facilities shall be considered
a permitted use:
      1.   In the I-1 light industrial district;
      2.   In the I-2 heavy industrial district;
      3.   Only for antennas attached to or otherwise closely integrated with
structures established for public utility purposes in any zoning district;
      4.   As part of a neutral host distributed antenna system 1 ;
      5.   Only for antennas attached to the outside of nonutility buildings
and structures in any zoning district, except within the historic district, on
Old Main or in downtown; and
      6.   Only for antennas located wholly inside or incorporated within
existing nonutility buildings and structures in any zoning district, provided
no structural modifications to such buildings are required by the placement of
such antennas.
   B.   Conditional Use Permit: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
all other personal wireless service facilities, including related transmission
equipment, shall require a conditional use permit.
   C.   Height:
      1.   Any new personal wireless service facility considered a conditional
use shall require a variation for any portion of the height of the personal
wireless service facility in excess of the maximum height requirements of the
applicable district.
      2.   A personal wireless service facility considered a permitted use or
collocated on a tower or base station shall be permitted above: a) the
established height of the tower, or b) the applicable maximum height for the
district where it is located; up to twenty feet (20'), or ten percent (10%) of
the otherwise applicable limitation, whichever is greater.
   D.   Setbacks: A personal wireless service facility that is not collocated
on an existing tower or base station shall:
      1.   Location: Not be located between the front lot line and the
principal building, if any, on the property.
      2.   Setbacks:
         a.   Residential zones: Be set back from all lot lines a distance
equal to the height of the personal wireless service facility, except where it
is attached to an existing building or structure;
         b.   Nonresidential zones: Be set back from all lot lines a distance
equal to the height of the location on the tower where it is designed to fail
(as described in the information required by subsection
10-13-14B5 of this chapter), or the applicable zoning district setback,
whichever is greater.
   E.   Dispersion:
      1.   Permitted Uses: Where a personal wireless service facility is a
permitted use, no dispersion from existing personal wireless facilities shall
be required.
      2.   Conditional Uses: Where a personal wireless service facility is a
conditional use, it shall be separated from other existing personal wireless
service facilities by at least one thousand feet (1,000'). (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-
2015)
 
Notes
  1. See FCC 14-153, report and order dated October 17, 2014, pgs. 3 - 4 ("We
  likewise facilitate sharing of transmission equipment by, for example, using
  "neutral-host" DAS that can support multiple providers simultaneously.
1 Promoting shared use in this manner advances several important policy goals
  while creating little or no potential for competitive harm and, indeed,
  promoting opportunities for increased competition... Finally, sharing
  resources - rather than relying on new builds - safeguards environmental,
  aesthetic, historic, and local land-use values.").
10-13-6: REGULATIONS FOR LOCATIONS OF SPECIAL HISTORICAL, ARCHITECTURAL OR
ECONOMIC SIGNIFICANCE:
The regulations described in this section shall take precedence over the
regulations described in section
10-13-5 of this chapter to the greatest extent permitted by law.
   A.   Downtown:
      1.   No freestanding tower may be erected in downtown.
      2.   No personal wireless service facility may be attached to the sides
or roof of any building or structure located in downtown.
      3.   A personal wireless service facility may be erected as a permitted
use within existing buildings or structures, provided no structural
modifications to such building or structures are required by the placement of
such facility.
   B.   Historic District:
      1.   No freestanding tower may be erected in the historic district.
      2.   No personal wireless service facility may be attached to the sides
or roof of any building or structure located in the historic district.
      3.   A personal wireless service facility may be erected as a permitted
use within existing buildings or structures located within the historic
district, provided no structural modifications to such building or structures
are required by the placement of such facility.
   C.   Lincoln Corridor:
      1.   No freestanding tower may be erected in the Lincoln corridor.
      2.   Entities providing personal wireless service are encouraged to
implement a neutral host distributed antenna system to the extent territory
located within the Lincoln corridor cannot reasonably be served from a personal
wireless service facility located outside of the Lincoln corridor.
   D.   Old Main:
      1.   No personal wireless service facility may be attached to the sides
or roof of Old Main.
      2.   A personal wireless service facility may be erected as a permitted
use within Old Main, provided no external modifications to such building are
required by the placement of such facility. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-7: TOWER AND ANTENNA DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
All designs for personal wireless service facilities, as well as designs for
associated transmission equipment, shall be approved by the city council, or
their designee, as part of an application for a conditional use permit, by
reference to the standards described in this section. Personal wireless service
facilities that are permitted uses, as well as designs for associated
transmission equipment, shall substantially comply with the following
standards, which shall be enforced as a condition of the building permit for
such facilities.
   A.   Personal wireless service facilities shall be of a monopole design
unless the city council determines that an alternate design would better blend
into the surrounding environment.
   B.   Towers and transmission equipment shall be designed to blend into the
surrounding environment as closely as possible through the use of color,
camouflaging and/or architectural treatment, where possible. A tower shall be
painted a single, neutral color, the color of which shall be approved by the
city council. Personal wireless service facilities shall be well maintained at
all times.
   C.   Personal wireless service facilities shall not be illuminated by
artificial means and shall not display lights unless such lights are
specifically required by a federal or state authority. Lights are permitted to
be operated during ongoing maintenance activities.
   D.   Site location and development shall preserve the existing character of
the building or property as much as possible. Existing vegetation must be
preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site
must be minimized.
   E.   Personal wireless services facilities erected on property where there
are structures composed of masonry materials and having gabled or other peaked
roof type features are required to enclose ground mounted facilities and
equipment within a structure using the same building materials unless the city
council determines that an alternate design would better blend into the
surrounding environment. All other facilities shall be enclosed within a solid
six foot (6') high wooden board on board style fence. Equipment enclosures may
be required to be sized to accommodate collocation of additional facilities as
part of a conditional use permit approval.
   F.   Landscaping screening a minimum of five foot (5') in height at
installation shall be required and maintained so as to screen any proposed
ground mounted structure or transmission equipment and to discourage vandalism.
   G.   Transmission equipment attached to existing buildings or base stations
may extend not more than six feet (6') from the exterior of any wall of the
building to which it is attached. Transmission equipment attached to a tower
may not protrude from the edge of the tower more than twenty feet (20'). (Ord.
15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-8: CITY OWNED LAND:
   A.   Exemption: Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any
application for placement, construction and modification of personal wireless
service facilities on city owned real property (e.g., water towers, municipal
utility facilities) shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain either a
conditional use or variance, it being hereby declared to be the policy and
intent of the city that personal wireless service facilities are to be
considered permitted uses on city owned real property, subject to the order of
priority described in subsection B of this section.
   B.   Priority Of Users: For wireless telecommunication antennas and towers,
priority for the use of city owned land will be given to the following entities
and purposes in descending order:
      1.   City of Charleston;
      2.   Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and
ambulance services, which are not part of the city, and private entities with a
public safety agreement with the city;
      3.   Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to
public safety;
      4.   Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication
services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and
similar services that are marketed to the general public; and
      5.   Entities providing unlicensed commercial wireless information
services.
   C.   Reservation Of Rights: The city council, acting in its capacity as and
exercising the commercial rights of a property owner, reserves the right to
deny, for any reason or no reason, the use of any or all city owned property by
any one or all applicants. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-9: PREFERENCE FOR SHARED USE:
   A.   The shared use of towers, base stations and distributed antenna systems
("collocation") shall be preferred to the construction of new personal wireless
service facilities. Provided that collocation is accomplished in a manner
consistent with the terms of this chapter, then applications for collocation
facilities may be approved administratively without any new or additional
conditional use permit approval. Proper plans must be submitted and permits
obtained for such collocation facilities as required by the terms of this
title.
   B.   An applicant for a conditional use permit for a new personal wireless
service facility shall submit a report inventorying existing towers, base
stations and distributed antenna system within a reasonable distance from the
proposed site (not less than a 1,000 foot radius) outlining opportunities for
collocation as an alternative to the proposed use. The applicant must
demonstrate that the proposed personal wireless service facility cannot be
accommodated on an existing towers, base stations and distributed antenna
system due to one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Refusal of the owner to permit the collocation;
      2.   The planned equipment would exceed the structural or service
capacity of existing and approved towers, base stations and distributed antenna
systems, considering existing and approved uses for those facilities;
      3.   The planned equipment would cause interference with other existing
or approved equipment, which cannot reasonably be prevented; or
      4.   Existing or approved towers, base stations and distributed antenna
systems do not have space on which proposed equipment can be placed so it can
function effectively and reasonably.
   C.   The city council may consider existing towers and base station sites
located within one and one-half (11/2) miles of city boundaries that are
capable of serving territory within the city when examining an application for
an additional new facility. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-10: CONDITIONS:
   A.   Conform To Provisions: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
the personal wireless service facility shall conform to all applicable federal
laws and regulations concerning its use and operation, and shall also conform
to all applicable provisions of this title and all other applicable provisions
of this code.
   B.   Preferences: When collocation is not possible for the reasons described
in subsection
10-13-9B of this chapter, and more than one location is capable of providing
roughly equivalent service to close a significant gap in coverage, the city may
direct the location of the new personal wireless service facility in the
following order of preference:
      1.   Industrial district;
      2.   Commercial district;
      3.   Governmental district (other than city owned land);
      4.   Residential district;
      5.   Buildings designated by the federal, state or local government as
having historical or architectural significance; and
      6.   Geographic districts designated by the federal, state or local
government as having historical or architectural significance.
In the event a site meets more than one preference category, such site shall be
deemed to have the lowest applicable preference. All of the preferences are
subject to compliance with the special regulations described in section
10-13-6 of this chapter.
   C.   Consideration For Approval Of Permit: In considering a request for
approval of a conditional use to permit the installation of personal wireless
service facilities the city council shall, in addition to other relevant
standards for approval described in this code, also give due consideration and
weight to:
      1.   Whether the applicant has sought and been denied the opportunity for
collocation, as described in section
10-13-9 of this chapter.
      2.   Whether the applicant has sought and been denied the opportunity to
locate its personal wireless service facility on a site with a higher
preference according to subsection
10-13-10B of this chapter.
      3.   Whether a significant gap in coverage exists in each applicant's
coverage area for the provision of personal wireless service. A "gap in
coverage" exists when a remote user of such services is unable to either
connect with the land based national telephone network or to maintain a
connection capable of supporting a reasonably uninterrupted communication. This
standard shall be applied separately to each personal wireless service
provider.
      4.   Whether the means chosen to fill a significant gap in coverage are
the least intrusive on the conditions set forth in this chapter.
      5.   Whether there are specific and unique aesthetic, visual and safety
objections relative to such application and/or the subject property, either in
isolation or cumulatively, that are distinct from those generalized concerns
otherwise addressed in this chapter.
      6.   Whether the proposed site would encroach on a building or district
with historical, architectural or economic significance. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-
2015)
10-13-11: NONCONFORMITIES:
A personal wireless service facility erected prior to November 4, 2014, which
would be prohibited under this chapter shall be considered to be a legal
nonconforming use and/or legal nonconforming structure, as the case may be, and
shall be subject to the rules on nonconforming uses and structures as provided
by chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-12: ABANDONED OR UNUSED TOWERS OR ANTENNAS; ENFORCEMENT; LIEN:
   A.   Deemed Abandoned: A tower or transmission equipment shall be deemed
abandoned if, for reasons within the reasonable control of the owner, it
remains unused or unoperated for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months,
unless a shorter abandonment period is provided in the applicable lease, in
which event, the abandonment period specified in the applicable lease shall
govern, and such abandonment shall be as determined by the city council. All or
any portion of a personal wireless service facility deemed abandoned or unused
under this subsection shall be removed according to the decommissioning and
restoration plan described in this section.
   B.   Removal And Hearing: All abandoned or unused portions of a personal
wireless service facility shall be removed within six (6) months of the board's
determination that such facilities are abandoned, unless a time extension is
approved by the city council. Before the board makes a finding or issues an
order for removal of the facility resulting from its abandonment, the applicant
and the owner shall be given an opportunity for a predeprivation hearing in the
manner described below:
      1.   When the city believes all or any part of a facility has been
abandoned, the city manager shall cause a notice of facility abandonment to be
sent via first class mail to the owner of the facility. The notice of facility
abandonment shall state the name and address of the owner, the name and address
of the property owner, a summary of the grounds for the city's determination
and describe the opportunity for a hearing.
      2.   Failure to request a hearing within twenty one (21) days from the
date of the notice will result in the city council making its determination
solely on the basis of evidence presented by the city staff.
      3.   A person may challenge the validity of the notice of facility
abandonment by requesting a hearing and appearing in person to submit evidence
which would disprove abandonment, or the term for which the facility has not
been used or operated is less than twelve (12) months. Upon a request for a
hearing, the city manager shall schedule the hearing for a regular or special
city council meeting.
      4.   All parties shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present
testimony and evidence at the hearing. A request for a continuance of the
hearing date must be made in person before the city council and may be granted
upon a showing of good cause. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at
the hearing.
   C.   Notice: Written notice of the board's determination of abandonment
shall be sent via regular mail, and via certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the personal wireless service facilities and the
owner of the property, as determined by reference to the records of the chief
county assessment officer.
   D.   Decommissioning And Restoration Plan: Prior to receiving a building
permit and/or conditional use permit for the construction of a personal
wireless service facility, the owner and/or operator must include a
decommissioning and restoration plan with the application to ensure such
facility and all related equipment is properly decommissioned. The owner of the
facility and the underlying property owner(s) shall be jointly liable for the
removal of all equipment associated with the facility at the expiration of the
conditional use permit, if any, the end of the useful life of the facility, or
when the facility is abandoned as herein described. The decommissioning and
restoration plan shall contain:
      1.   Provisions for removal of the facility and all related equipment,
including those below the soil surface.
      2.   Provisions for the restoration of the property and improvements upon
completion of the decommissioning of the facility and all related equipment.
      3.   An estimated cost of decommissioning certified by an authorized
agent of the applicant and the financial resources to be used to accomplish
decommissioning.
      4.   A right of entry onto the site granted to the city, pursuant to
reasonable notice to effect or complete decommissioning and/or restoration.
   E.   Nuisance: Any facility which remains erected more than six (6) months
after the expiration of the conditional use permit, if any, the end of the
useful life of the facility, or the facility is determined to be abandoned
shall be deemed a nuisance.
   F.   Lien On Costs Of Enforcement Or Removal:
      1.   If the city incurs any costs to abate the nuisance caused by the
owner and petitioner's failure to perform the applicant's decommissioning and
restoration plan in a timely manner, that cost is a lien upon that underlying
parcel. If, for any one parcel, the city engaged in any enforcement activity or
performed plan activities on more than one occasion during the course of one
year, then the city may combine any or all of the costs of each of those
activities into a single lien.
      2.   To perfect a lien under this section, the city must, within one year
after the cost is incurred, file notice of lien in the office of the Coles
County recorder. The notice must consist of a sworn statement setting out:
         a.   A description of the underlying parcel that sufficiently
identifies the parcel;
         b.   The amount of the enforcement or removal cost; and
         c.   The date or dates when the enforcement or removal cost was
incurred by the city.
      3.   The removal cost is not a lien on the underlying parcel unless a
notice is personally served on, or sent by certified mail, to the applicant and
the person to whom the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the
taxable year was sent, not less than ten (10) days preceding the removal
activities. The notice must: a) state the substance of this section; b)
identify the underlying parcel, by common description; and c) describe the
city's proposed activity.
      4.   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose as in case of mortgages. An action to foreclose a lien under this
section must be commenced within two (2) years after the date of filing notice
of lien. Failure to file a foreclosure action does not, in any way, affect the
validity of the lien against the underlying parcel.
      5.   Upon payment of the lien cost by the applicant or owner of the
underlying parcel after notice of lien has been filed, the city shall release
the lien, and the release may be filed of record by the owner at his or her
sole expense as in the case of filing notice of lien. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-13: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
No new or existing telecommunications service shall interfere with public
safety telecommunications. All applications for new service shall be
accompanied by an intermodulation study which provides a technical evaluation
of existing and proposed transmissions and indicates all potential interference
problems related to other telecommunications facilities operating on the same
facility or adjacent property. Before the introduction of new service or
changes in existing service, telecommunication providers shall notify the city
at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of such changes and allow the city
to monitor interference levels during the testing process. If at any time it is
determined by the city council, or its designee, that public safety
communications experience interference from the new, modified, or existing
telecommunications service so as to jeopardize or impede emergency services to
residents of the city, the city shall refer the issue to the appropriate
judicial or administrative forum for dispute resolution, the city's costs for
which shall be borne entirely by the applicant. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
10-13-14: ADDITIONAL APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   In addition to the information required elsewhere in this title,
applications for a conditional use permit for a new personal wireless service
facility shall include the following supplemental information:
      1.   A statement of the applicant's purpose and need, including data
describing whether a significant gap in coverage exists in the applicant's
coverage area for the provision of personal wireless service;
      2.   An inventory of existing towers and base stations within a
reasonable distance from the proposed site, including the estimated capacity of
such sites, outlining opportunities for collocation as an alternative to the
proposed use;
      3.   Demonstration from a qualified and professional radio frequency
engineer that alternative locations with a higher preference, as designated by
subsection
10-13-10B of this chapter, are unavailable or impractical and that the
equipment cannot be mounted on an existing tower or base station;
      4.   A architectural site plan including tower and ground structure
elevations, and landscaping; and
      5.   A plan indicating how specific visual impacts created by the
proposed facilities will be minimized.
   B.   Applications for a building permit for a new personal wireless service
facility shall include a report from a qualified and licensed professional
engineer which includes, to the extent applicable, information that:
      1.   Describes the tower height and design including a cross section and
elevation;
      2.   Documents the height above grade for all potential mounting
positions for collocated transmission equipment and the minimum separation
distances between transmission equipment;
      3.   Describes the tower's capacity, including the number and type of
transmission equipment that it can accommodate;
      4.   Includes a professional engineer's stamp and registration number;
      5.   Describes the wind rating of the tower and the manner in which the
tower is designed to fail; and
      6.   Includes any other information necessary to evaluate the request.
   C.   For all new personal wireless service facilities, the applicant shall
submit to the city a letter of intent committing the owner and his or her
successors to allow the shared use of the tower or base station if an
additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for
shared use.
   D.   If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, the
applicant shall submit to the city a copy of the lease agreement pursuant to
which the applicant is granted authority to erect the proposed personal
wireless service facility.
   E.   The city shall be given not more than thirty (30) days to review an
application and provide prompt notice to the applicant of whether the
application is complete. A failure to provide notice shall result in the
application being deemed complete. (Ord. 15-O-16, 5-5-2015)
