CHATSWORTH, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local Legislation current through Ord. 2024-26-03, passed 3-26-2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
11.   TOWN STANDARDS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
Sec. 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Town of Chatsworth shall be designated as
the Code of Chatsworth and may be so cited.
Sec. 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject of
an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES or TOWN BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the town.
COUNTY. Livingston County, Illinois.
COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Livingston County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of that officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(5 ILCS 70/1.08)
HERETOFOR or HEREAFTER. HERETOFOR means any time previous to the day on which
the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any time
after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of the state, or of any town or county of the state, and all
bridges thereupon.
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofor and hereafter amended.
KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or as
a servant, agent, or employee.
LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MAYOR. The President of the Town of Chatsworth.
MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser, and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the Town of
Chatsworth. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include those persons in the
employ of a town as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
(5 ILCS 70/1.20)
PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
town, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof, or
any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public official.
PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body
of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the sale of
merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes registered
mail.
SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution of
the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
STATE. The State of Illinois.
STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
squares, and other public thoroughfares.
TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The town code hereby adopted, and as
hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new titles,
chapters, or sections.
TOWN. The Town of Chatsworth, Illinois.
UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Sec. 1 of Article VII of
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic, and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond required by law, it
shall be:
   (A)   The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is unable
to write, his or her proper mark; or
   (B)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
Sec. 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
Sec. 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (1)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (2)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (A)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (B)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (C)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (D)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (3)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (4)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (5)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (6)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (7)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (8)   The provisions of any ordinance, insofar as they are the same as those
of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
Sec. 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the town shall be as set by federal law.
Sec. 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (1)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (2)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (3) below:
      (A)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (B)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (C)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (D)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (3)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
Sec. 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (1)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (2)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (3)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
Sec. 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (1)   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.
   (2)   If the conflicting provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict
shall be construed so as to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of
the questions of the subject matter taken as a whole.
Sec. 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the
Board of Trustees.
Sec. 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end, the provisions are severable.
Sec. 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   (1)   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to
any office, officer, or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
   (2)   These references shall also include the designee or agent of the
officer or office, unless the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
Sec. 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
Sec. 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
Sec. 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to, tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the town; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
Sec. 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain town officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.
Sec. 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   (1)   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to the technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the town.
   (2)   Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
Sec. 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (1)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section.
      Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (2)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
      Example: (65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
   (3)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text
of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information.
      Example:
      Sec. 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         The town shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
      Statutory reference:
         Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
Sec. 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall
be fined in a sum not less than $25 nor more than $500.
(Prior Code, Sec. 22.1)
   (2)   Any person in default of payment of any fine or costs imposed may be
committed to the County Jail until the fine, penalty, and costs are fully paid.
(Prior Code, Sec. 22.2)
   (3)   When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this town
code, any license previously issued to him or her by the town may be revoked by
the court or by the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 22.3)
   (4)   The penalty provided in this section shall be applicable to every
section of this town code the same as though it were a part of each and every
separate section. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this
town code where any duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act
which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be unlawful,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or such act
continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this town code.
(Prior Code, Sec. 22.4)
CHAPTER 11: TOWN STANDARDS
Section
   
11.01   Town seal
   
11.02   Town flag
Sec. 11.01 TOWN SEAL.
   The seal of the town shall be a circular disk with the words “Town of
Chatsworth” in the outer circle, and in the inner circle, “corporate seal.”
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.6.1)
Sec. 11.02 TOWN FLAG.
   (1)   The town, being a community of 150 years, shall have a symbol of pride
to represent the community in the form of a flag.
   (2)   The town has, by proclamation of the Governor’s office, been declared
the Bluebird Capitol of the state, and the flag shall illustrate the “Home of
the Bluebirds.”
   (3)   The flag shall have nine stripes, four blue and five orange. In the
center shall be the great seal of the town.
   (4)   The town has lost 21 soldiers in wartime and will be represented by
the 21 white stars circling the seal on the flag.
(Res. 462, passed 5-11-2017)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   TOWN BOARD OF TRUSTEES
      
31.   OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
32.   TOWN POLICIES
      
33.   EMERGENCY MITIGATION
      
34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: TOWN BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Election; functions
   
30.02   Oath; salary
   
30.03   Meetings
   
30.04   Mayor
   
30.05   Deciding vote
   
30.06   Ordinances; approval, veto
   
30.07   Reconsideration; passing over veto
Rules of Order
   
30.20   Order of business
   
30.21   Rescinded action
   
30.22   Resolutions
   
30.23   Addressing meetings
   
30.24   Suspension of rules
   
30.25   Robert’s Rules of Order
   
30.26   Quorum
   
30.27   Committees
   
30.28   Disturbing meetings
   
30.29   Meetings open to the public
 
   
30.99   Penaltyr
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 30.01 ELECTION; FUNCTIONS.
   (1)   The Board of Trustees, consisting of six members, shall be elected to
office for a four-year term, according to the methods provided by statute.
   (2)   This Board shall be the legislative department of the town government,
and shall perform such duties and have such powers as may be delegated by
statute to it.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.1.1)
Sec. 30.02 OATH; SALARY.
   The members of the Board of Trustees shall take the oath of the office
prescribed by statute and shall receive such compensation as may be provided by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.1.2)
Sec. 30.03 MEETINGS.
   The Town Board shall holds its regular meetings in the Town Hall on the
second Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. standard time (November through
February) and 8:00 p.m. daylight saving time (March through October). No notice
of such regular meeting shall be required, commencing on May 1, 2012.
(Ord. 414, passed 4-24-2012)
Sec. 30.04 MAYOR.
   The Town Mayor shall be the presiding officer of all regular and special
meetings of the Board of Trustees and at all times when the Board meets as a
committee of the whole.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.1.4)
Sec. 30.05 DECIDING VOTE.
   (1)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees. He
or she shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution, or motion, except:
      (A)   Where the vote of the Trustees has resulted in a tie;
      (B)   Where one-half of the Trustees elected have voted in favor of an
ordinance, resolution, or motion even though there is not a tie vote; or
      (C)   Where a vote greater than a majority of the corporate authorities
is required by this code to adopt an ordinance, resolution, or motion.
   (2)   In each instance specified in division (1) above, the Mayor shall
vote.
   (3)   Nothing in this section shall deprive an Acting Mayor or Mayor pro tem
from voting in his or her capacity as Trustee, but he or she shall not be
entitled to another vote in his or her capacity as Acting Mayor or Mayor pro
tem.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.1.5)
Sec. 30.06 ORDINANCES; APPROVAL, VETO.
   (1)   (A)   All resolutions and motions which create any liability against
the Mayor, which provide for the expenditure of its money, or which sell any
town property, and all ordinances passed by the Town Board, shall be deposited
with the Town Clerk.
      (B)   If the Mayor approves of them, he or she shall sign them.
      (C)   Those of which he or she disapproves, he or she shall return to the
Town Board, with his or her written objections, at the next regular meeting of
the Town Board occurring not less than five days after their passage.
   (2)   The Town Mayor may disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated by
any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation, and if so, the
remainder shall be so effective. However, the Town Mayor may disapprove
entirely of any ordinance, resolution, or motion making an appropriation.
   (3)   If the Mayor fails to return any ordinance or any specified resolution
with his or her written objections, within the designated time, it shall be
effective despite the absence of his or her signature.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.1.6)
Sec. 30.07 RECONSIDERATION; PASSING OVER VETO.
   (1)   Every resolution and motion specified in Sec. 30.06, and every
ordinance, which is returned to the Board of Trustees by the Mayor shall be
reconsidered by the Board of Trustees. If, after such reconsideration, two-
thirds of the Trustees elected to the Town Board shall agree to pass an
ordinance, resolution, or motion, notwithstanding the Mayor’s refusal to sign
it, then it shall be effective.
   (2)   The vote on the question of passage over the Mayor’s veto shall be by
yeas and nays, and shall be recorded in the journal.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.1.7)
RULES OF ORDER
Sec. 30.20 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The order of business of the Board of Trustees of the town shall be as
follows:
   (1)   Roll call;
   (2)   Reading minutes of previous meeting;
   (3)   Reports of standing committees;
   (4)   Reports of special committees;
   (5)   Special reports;
   (6)   Unfinished business;
   (7)   Claims, petitions, ordinances, resolutions, and miscellaneous
business; and
   (8)   Adjournment.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.1)
Sec. 30.21 RESCINDED ACTION.
   No vote or action of the Board of Trustees shall be rescinded at any special
meeting of the Board of Trustees unless thereby present at such special meeting
as many members of the Board of Trustees as were present at the meeting when
such vote or action was taken, as provided by statute.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.2)
Sec. 30.22 RESOLUTIONS.
   Any resolutions submitted to the Board of Trustees shall be reduced to
writing before being voted upon request of any two members of the Board.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.3)
Sec. 30.23 ADDRESSING MEETINGS.
   No person other than the Mayor or a member of the Board shall address that
body at any regular or special meeting except upon consent of a majority of the
members present.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.4)
Sec. 30.24 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   The rules of order, other than those prescribed by statute, may be suspended
at any time by the consent of a majority of the members present at any
meetings.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.5)
Sec. 30.25 ROBERT’S RULES OF ORDER.
   Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of the Board of
Trustees except when in conflict with any of the foregoing rules.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.6)
Sec. 30.26 QUORUM.
   A majority of the Trustees, or three Trustees and the Mayor, shall
constitute a quorum to do business.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.7)
Sec. 30.27 COMMITTEES.
   (1)   The following shall be the standing committees of the Board of
Trustees:
      (A)   Street, alley, and drainage;
      (B)   Water finance and sewage;
      (C)   Law and order and animal control;
      (D)   Park, buildings, and sidewalks;
      (E)   Purchase and insurance; and
      (F)   Lights, ESDA, and civil defense.
   (2)   Special committees shall be created from time to time as directed by
the Board of Trustees.
   (3)   All standing and special committees shall consist of three members
each, including the chairperson, unless the Board shall otherwise direct.
   (4)   All committees shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.8)
Sec. 30.28 DISTURBING MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any meeting of the Board of
Trustees or of any committees thereof.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.9) Penalty, see Sec.
30.99
Sec. 30.29 MEETINGS OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
   All meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be open to the public as
provided by statute.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.10)
Sec. 30.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec. 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.
   (2)   Any person violating the provisions of Sec.
30.28 shall be fined in accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense.
(Prior Code, Sec. 2.2.9)
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Effect
   
31.002   Appointment
   
31.003   Terms of office
   
31.004   Assignment of duties
   
31.005   Records
   
31.006   Moneys received
   
31.007   Bond
   
31.008   Salaries
   
31.009   Termination of office
   
31.010   Impersonation
   
31.011   Interfering with officers
   
31.012   Inspections by town officers
   
31.013   Employee residency requirements
Town Mayor
   
31.020   Elections; term of office
   
31.021   Duties
   
31.022   Designation of duties
   
31.023   Bond, oath, salary
   
31.024   President pro tem
Town Clerk
   
31.035   Town Clerk to be appointed
   
31.036   Duties
   
31.037   Financial responsibilities
   
31.038   Bond
   
31.039   Vacancies
   
31.040   Term
Town Treasurer
   
31.055   Appointment; term
   
31.056   Bond
   
31.057   General duties
   
31.058   Deposit of funds
   
31.059   Records
   
31.060   Accounts
   
31.061   Reports
   
31.062   Special assessment funds
   
31.063   Warrants; transfer of funds
Corporate Counsel
   
31.075   Creation; appointment
   
31.076   Special counsel
   
31.077   Duties and action
   
31.078   Judgments
   
31.079   Advice
   
31.080   Special assessments
Superintendent of Public Works
   
31.095   Office created
   
31.096   Streets
   
31.097   Waterworks
   
31.098   Buildings
   
31.099   Employees
   
31.100   Other physical property
Police Department
   
31.115   Creation
   
31.116   Conservators of the peace; service of warrants
   
31.117   Operation and management; Chief of Police
   
31.118   Oath of office
   
31.119   Residency requirement
   
31.120   Duties of Police Chief
   
31.121   Duties of citizens to aid
   
31.122   Appointment of part-time officers
   
31.123   Appointment of auxiliary police officers
   
31.124   Mission statement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 31.001 EFFECT.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply alike to all officers of the
town, regardless of the time of the creation of the office or of the time of
the appointment of the officer.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.1)
Sec. 31.002 APPOINTMENT.
   The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall make appointments to fill all
appointive offices. Employees shall be selected by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.2)
Sec. 31.003 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Where the terms of office is not otherwise fixed, every appointive officer
or employee of the town shall hold office until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified. Employees selected shall serve so long as their
services are desired.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.3)
Sec. 31.004 ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall have the power to assign to any appointive officer any duty
which is not assigned by ordinance to some other specific officer, and shall
determine disputes or questions relating to the respective powers or duties of
officers.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.4)
Sec. 31.005 RECORDS.
   All records kept by any officer of the town shall be open to inspection by
the Mayor, or any member of the Board at all reasonable times, whether or not
such records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.5)
Sec. 31.006 MONEYS RECEIVED.
   Every officer and employee of the town shall, at least once each week, turn
over all moneys received by him or her in his official capacity to the
Treasurer with a statement showing the source from which the same was received.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.6) Penalty, see Sec.
10.99
Sec. 31.007 BOND.
   Every officer of the town shall, if required by the Board, before entering
upon the duties of his or her office, give a bond in such amount as may be
determined by the Board and with such sureties as it may approve, conditioned
upon the faithful performance of the duties of his or her office of position.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.7)
Sec. 31.008 SALARIES.
   (1)   All officers and employees of the town shall receive such salaries as
may be provided from time to time by the Town Board of Trustees.
   (2)   No officer or employee receiving a salary from the town shall be
entitled to retain any portion of any fees collected from him or her.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.8)
Sec. 31.009 TERMINATION OF OFFICE.
   Every officer of the town, upon the termination of his or her office, for
any cause whatsoever, shall deliver to the successor all books and records
which may be the property of the town, and if no successor has been appointed
within one week after the termination of office, such property shall be
delivered either to the Clerk or to the Treasurer.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.9) Penalty, see Sec.
10.99
Sec. 31.010 IMPERSONATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to impersonate, without lawful
authority, any town officer or employee.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.10) Penalty, see Sec.
10.99
Sec. 31.011 INTERFERING WITH OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful to interfere with or hinder any officer or employee of
the town while engaged in the duties of his or her office.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.11) Penalty, see Sec.
10.99
Sec. 31.012 INSPECTIONS BY TOWN OFFICERS.
   Any officer or employee of the town who is authorized to enforce ordinances
may make such inspections as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of such
ordinances.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.12)
Sec. 31.013 EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   Every current and future full- or part-time employee of the town shall
establish his or her residence to live in the town or within ten miles of the
town limits within one year of the date of being hired and shall maintain said
residency throughout the period of his or her employment by the town. If a
full- or part- time employee has not established residency as required within
one year of the date of being hired, he or she may request an extension of said
time limit from the Town Board for up to six months for good cause shown.
Failure to abide by the terms of this section shall be cause for termination of
employment.
(Ord. 486, passed 3-12-2020)
TOWN MAYOR
Sec. 31.020 ELECTIONS; TERM OF OFFICE.
   The Town Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years. He or she shall be
the Mayor of the Board of Trustees, as is provided by statute.
(Prior Code, Sec. 1.1)
Sec. 31.021 DUTIES.
   He or she shall be the chief executive officer of the town and he or she
shall perform all such duties as may be required of him or her by statute or
ordinance. He or she shall have supervision over all the executive officers of
the town, and over all the employees of the town. He or she shall have the
power and authority to inspect all books and records kept by town officer or
employee at any reasonable time.
(Prior Code, Sec. 1.2)
Sec. 31.022 DESIGNATION OF DUTIES.
   Whenever there is a question as to the respective powers or duties of any
appointed officer of the town, this shall be settled by the Mayor, and he or
she shall have the power to designate to any such officer any duty which is to
be determined when no specific officer has been directed to perform the duty.
(Prior Code, Sec. 1.3)
Sec. 31.023 BOND, OATH, SALARY.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Mayor shall give a
bond with sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees conditioned upon his
or her faithful performance of his or her duties, in the sum of $10,000. He or
she shall take the oath of office as prescribed by statute, and shall receive
such compensation as may be set from time to time by the Board.
(Prior Code, Sec. 1.4)
Sec. 31.024 PRESIDENT PRO TEM.
   During the absence or disability of the Town Mayor, the Board of Trustees
shall elect one of its number to act as Mayor pro tem, who, during the absence
or disability of the Mayor, shall perform the duties pertaining to the office.
(Prior Code, Sec. 1.5)
TOWN CLERK
Sec. 31.035 TOWN CLERK TO BE APPOINTED.
   The Town Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Board of
Trustees for a term to run concurrent with the term of the Mayor and until the
Clerk’s successor is duly appointed and qualified.
(Ord. 262, passed 12-14-1999)
Sec. 31.036 DUTIES.
   The Town Clerk shall perform the following duties:
   (1)   Seal and attest all contracts of the town, all licenses, permits, and
such other instruments and documents as are provided for by law or ordinance;
   (2)   Keep a register of all licenses and permits issued, a record showing
all of the officers and regular employees of the town, and such other records
as may be required by law or ordinance;
   (3)   Be the custodian of all papers, instruments, and documents belonging
to the town which are not assigned to another officer of the town or the Mayor
or Board of Trustees;
   (4)   Keep and maintain a proper index of all documents and records in the
Clerk’s possession;
   (5)   Be the custodian of the Town Seal and affix its impression upon all
papers, instruments, and documents as shall be required by law or ordinance;
and
   (6)   Attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees and accurately record the
minutes of all such proceedings of the Board of Trustees, and record and file
in separate files all motions, resolutions, ordinances, and other actions
passed and approved by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 262, passed 12-14-1999)
Sec. 31.037 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (1)   Receive all moneys paid into the town either directly or from other
town officers and deposits in such legal depository as designated by the Board
of Trustees at the start of the fiscal year;
   (2)   Pay out town funds from invoices and requests, initialed and coded
with account numbers by department heads. A Board report will be approved at
each meeting;
   (3)   Maintain accurate records of deposits and expenditures through cash
basis fund accounting on municipal software, provided by the town. The
financial statement will be approved monthly at the Board of Trustees meeting.
Records will show the financial condition of the town;
   (4)   Invest town funds, not immediately needed, in approved depositories or
move certificates of deposits between two depositories, in the best interest of
the town. A list of the certificates with due date, rate, and current balance
will be provided and approved in the monthly financial statements;
   (5)   Open checking/savings accounts when receiving money for grants, loans,
or bond issues per state or federal requirements. Do the financial work
involved with grants, revolving loans, loans, bonds, and motor fuel accounts;
   (6)   Prepare payroll and all reports. Act as representative for I.M.R.F.,
deferred compensation, health insurance, and commercial insurance;
   (7)   Compile annual report within six months of the close of the fiscal
year, in accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Compiled Statutes;
   (8)   Other areas of responsibility: help with budget, appropriation, and
levy;
   (9)   Keep the town funds separate and distinct from personal funds and all
others, and shall not intermingle personal funds or any others with the town
funds, and shall not make private or personal use of the town funds; and
   (10)   Perform such other duties as may be required by law or ordinance.
(Ord. 262, passed 12-14-1999)
Sec. 31.038 BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of office, the Town Clerk shall execute a
bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by law or by
ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the
office. The town shall pay the premium on such a bond.
(Ord. 262, passed 12-14-1999)
Sec. 31.039 VACANCIES.
   In case the office of Town Clerk shall become vacant for any reason, the
Mayor and Board of Trustees shall appoint a successor as provided by statute.
(Ord. 262, passed 12-14-1999)
Sec. 31.040 TERM.
   The term of first appointed Town Clerk shall commence at the first regular
or special meeting of the corporate authorities during the month of May
following the proclamation of the results of the regular municipal election
occurring in April of 2021.
(Ord. 262, passed 12-14-1999)
TOWN TREASURER
Sec. 31.055 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   The Town Treasurer shall be appointed by the President, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, and shall serve for a four-year term and
until his or her successor is qualified, as provided by statute.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.1)
Sec. 31.056 BOND.
   The Treasurer shall give bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of
his or her duties and to indemnify the town for any loss due to neglect of duty
of wrongful act on his or her part, and the amount of such bond shall be not
less than 10% of the highest amount of taxes and special assessments received
by the Treasurer during any fiscal year in the preceding five fiscal years nor
less than one and one-half times the largest amount which the Mayor and Board
of Trustees estimate will be in his or her custody at any one time. Such bond
shall be filed with the Clerk as required by statute.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.2)
Sec. 31.057 GENERAL DUTIES.
   (1)   The Treasurer shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by him or
her by statute or ordinance.
   (2)   He or she shall receive all money paid to the town, either directly
from the person paying it or from the hands of such other officer as may
receive it, and he or she shall pay out money only on vouchers or orders
properly signed by the Town Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.3)
Sec. 31.058 DEPOSIT OF FUNDS.
   He or she shall deposit the town funds in such depositories as may be
selected from time to time as provided by law, and he or she shall keep the
town money separate and distinct from his or her own and shall not intermingle
his or her own money with it or make private or personal use of the town funds.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.4) Penalty, see Sec.
10.99
Sec. 31.059 RECORDS.
   The Treasurer shall keep records showing all money received by him or her,
the source from which it was received, and the purposes for which it was paid
out, and he or she shall keep a record showing at all times the financial
status of the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.5)
Sec. 31.060 ACCOUNTS.
   The Treasurer shall keep such books and accounts as may be required by the
Mayor and Board of Trustees and shall keep them in the manner required by the
Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.6)
Sec. 31.061 REPORTS.
   The Treasurer shall make monthly reports to the Mayor and Board of Trustees
showing the date of finances of the town, and the amounts received and spent
during the month, which reports shall be filed. He or she shall also make an
annual report after the close of the fiscal year, as required by statute, with
the total amount of all receipts and expenditures of the town and his or her
transactions as Treasurer during the preceding year.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.7)
Sec. 31.062 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT FUNDS.
   All moneys are received on any special assessment shall be held by the
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied only to the payment of the
improvement, or bonds and vouchers issued therefor, together with interest
thereon, for which the assessment was made, and said money shall be used for no
other purposes, unless to reimburse the town for money expended for such
improvements. Payment on bonds or vouchers shall be made in accordance with the
statutes and the law, and the Treasurer shall keep his or her books and
accounts in such a manner so that proper transactions in payments of principal
and interest can be made and ascertained.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.8)
Sec. 31.063 WARRANTS; TRANSFER OF FUNDS.
   All warrants drawn on the Treasurer must be signed by the Mayor and
countersigned by the Clerk, stating the particular fund or appropriation to
which the same is chargeable, and the person to whom payable, and no money
shall be otherwise paid except as may be provided by statute. Money shall not
be transferred by the Treasurer from one fund to another, after it has been
received by him or her, nor appropriated to any other purposes than that for
which it has been collected or paid, except as may be ordered by the Mayor and
Board of Trustees, in manner and form prescribed by statute.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.2.9)
CORPORATE COUNSEL
Sec. 31.075 CREATION; APPOINTMENT.
   There is hereby created the officer of Corporation Counsel, an executive
office of the town. The Corporation Counsel shall be appointed by the Mayor and
the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.4.1)
Sec. 31.076 SPECIAL COUNSEL.
   The President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may, from time to
time, retain an attorney to represent or advise the town on legal matters, if
no Corporation Counsel has been appointed, and he or she may likewise retain
special counsel to advise or represent the town on special matters or to assist
the Corporation Counsel.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.4.2)
Sec. 31.077 DUTIES AND ACTIONS.
   The Corporation Counsel shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or
actions at law or equity to which the town may be a party, or in which it may
be interested, or which may be brought against, or by, any officer of the town
on behalf of the town or in the capacity of such persons as an office of the
town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.4.3)
Sec. 31.078 JUDGMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Corporation Counsel to see to the full
enforcement of all judgments or decrees entered or rendered in favor of the
town, and of all similar interlocutory orders.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.4.4)
Sec. 31.079 ADVICE.
   The Corporation Counsel shall be the legal advisor of the town and shall
render advice on all legal questions affecting it, whenever requested so to do
by any town official. Upon request by the Mayor of the Board, he or she shall
reduce such opinion to writing.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.4.5)
Sec. 31.080 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Corporation Counsel to see to the completion of
all special assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.4.6)
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
Sec. 31.095 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the position of Superintendent of Public Works. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees, and shall serve until his or her
successor is qualified, as provided by statute.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.1.1)
Sec. 31.096 STREETS.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have charge of the construction and
care of all public streets, alleys, and driveways in the town, and with keeping
of the same clean. He or she shall see to it that all gutters and rains therein
function properly and that the same are kept free from defects.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.1.2)
Sec. 31.097 WATERWORKS.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have charge of the operation and
maintenance of the municipal water distribution system and sewer treatment
system.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.1.3)
Sec. 31.098 BUILDINGS.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have charge of the maintenance and
repair of all town-owned buildings.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.1.4)
Sec. 31.099 EMPLOYEES.
   All officers or employees assigned to the Department of Public Works shall
perform their duties subject to the orders and under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.1.5)
Sec. 31.100 OTHER PHYSICAL PROPERTY.
   All physical property of the village which is not assigned by the Board to
some other officer or employee shall be in the care and custody of the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.1.6)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 31.115 CREATION.
   Pursuant to the pertinent sections of the municipal code authorizing the
town to exercise police authority, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25, the town shall
reestablish a Police Department to serve the interests of the public and
enforce the laws of the United States, the state, and the town. Officers of
this police agency shall be employees of the town and shall meet all
qualifications under the law.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.116 CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE; SERVICE OF WARRANTS.
   (1)   After receiving a certificate attesting to the successful completion
of a training course administered by the State Enforcement Training Standards
Board, the Mayor, President, Trustees, Marshal, Deputy Marshals, and police
officers in municipalities shall be conservators of the peace. Those persons
and others authorized by ordinance shall have power:
      (A)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace or are found violating any municipal ordinance or
any criminal law of the state;
      (B)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
      (C)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or
Sunday in any safe place or until they can be brought before the proper court;
and
      (D)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace
prescribed by the corporate authorities.
   (2)   All warrants for the violation of municipal ordinances or the state
criminal law, directed by any person, may be served and executed within the
limits of a municipality by any police officer or marshal of the municipality.
For that purpose, police officers and marshals have all the common law and
statutory powers of sheriffs.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.117 OPERATION AND MANAGEMENT; CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (1)   The Police Department shall be operated and managed in accordance with
departmental rules and regulations as adopted by the President and Board of
Trustees, and Public Safety Committee.
   (2)   The Chief of Police shall also be the Director of Public Safety.
   (3)   The Chief of Police shall not be elected at large but shall be
appointed by the Mayor upon approval by a majority vote of the Board of
Trustees.
   (4) (A)The term of office of the Chief of Police shall be concurrent with
that of the appointing Mayor.
      (B)   The Board of Trustees shall set the salary of the Chief of Police.
      (C)   The Mayor and Board of Trustees shall establish the duties and
responsibilities of the Chief of Police.
   (5)   The Chief of Police shall report directly to the Mayor.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.118 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering upon the duties of this office, police officers shall take
and subscribe to an oath that he or she will support the Constitution and laws
of the state, Constitution of the United States, and this code, and that he or
she will faithfully perform the duties of the office.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.119 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   The Chief of Police shall reside within the municipal limits of the town.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.120 DUTIES OF POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief shall:
   (1)   Perform all duties as required by law;
   (2)   Have general responsibility for law enforcement in the town and shall
be charged with the enforcement of all ordinances within the town and all
applicable state laws, and shall perform all other duties required of him or
her by ordinance;
   (3)   Maintain all records of the Department and shall submit all applicable
reports pertaining to law enforcement;
   (4)   Maintain all training as required by the State Law Enforcement
Training and Standards Board;
   (5)   Oversee the public safety program:
      (A)   Emergency Management Association;
      (B)   Community neighborhood watch;
      (C)   Operation Safe House; and
      (D)   Prescription drug disposal program.
   (6)   Be held accountable to the Mayor and Board of Trustees, and shall make
written and verbal reports to the Mayor and Board of Trustees at the regular
Board meetings of the town; and
   (7)   Maintain a working relationship with other law enforcement agencies of
the county and surrounding municipalities.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.121 DUTIES OF CITIZENS TO AID.
   It shall be the duty of all persons, when called upon by a police officer,
to promptly aid and assist such officer in the discharge of his or her duties.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.122 APPOINTMENT OF PART-TIME OFFICERS.
   The Mayor may appoint such other part-time town police officers at the
recommendation of the Board of Trustees. Part-time police officers shall be
guided by the standard operating procedures of the town. All part-time police
officers shall be certified by the State Law Enforcement Training Standards
Board.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.123 APPOINTMENT OF AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS.
   The Mayor may appoint such other auxiliary police officers at the
recommendation of the Board of Trustees. Auxiliary police officers will be
appointed from a group of retired police officers and off-duty regular police
officers. Auxiliary police officers shall not be considered employees of the
town.
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 31.124 MISSION STATEMENT.
“The Town Police Department, empowered by the community, is committed to
protect the lives, property, and rights of all people, to maintain order, and
to enforce the law impartially. We will provide quality police service in
partnership with other members of the community. We will strive to attain the
highest degree of ethical behavior and professional conduct at all times.”
(Ord. 470, passed 2-8-2018)
CHAPTER 32: TOWN POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Expense reimbursements for chairpersons of standing committees
   
32.02   Travel, meal, and lodging expenses
   
32.03   Employee clothing allowance
   
32.04   Sexual harassment policy
   
32.05   Injury to public property
   
32.06   General personnel policies
Ethics Policy
   
32.20   Definitions
   
32.21   Prohibited political activities
   
32.22   Gift ban
   
32.23   Ethics Advisor
   
32.24   Ethics Commission
Contracts
   
32.35   Equal employment opportunity
   
32.36   Enactment; publication of proceedings
   
32.37   Provisions included in contracts
   
32.38   Definitions
   
32.39   Contracts over $10,000
 
   
32.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 32.01 EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENTS FOR CHAIRPERSONS OF STANDING COMMITTEES.
   The following expense reimbursements be paid to chairpersons of standing
committees as follows:
   (1)   Public service. Civil defense, solid waste disposal, and lighting:
$300;
   (2)   Public safety. Law enforcement: $300;
   (3)   Public works. Streets and alleys, culverts, drainage, and sidewalks:
$300;
   (4)   Public property. Building and grounds, parks, and equipment: $300;
   (5)   Public utilities. Water, sewer, and underground drainage: $300; and
   (6)   Finance. Budget management, risk management, and TIF District
administration: $300.
(Ord. 422, passed 5-30-2013)
Sec. 32.02 TRAVEL, MEAL, AND LODGING EXPENSES.
   (1)   The recitals set forth in the ordinance from which this section is
derived shall be and are hereby incorporated as findings of fact as if said
recitals were fully set forth herein.
   (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PUBLIC BUSINESS. Expenses incurred in the performance of a public purpose
which is required or useful for the benefit of the town to carry out the
responsibilities of the town business.
      TRAVEL. Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the town involving reimbursement to travelers or direct payment
to agencies providing transportation or related services.
   (3)   The town shall only reimburse the following types of travel, meal, and
lodging expenses incurred by its employees and public officials up to the
following maximum allowable amounts:
      (A)   Travel expense: expenditures directly related to travel;
      (B)   Meal expense: $60 per day/meal;
      (C)   Lodging expense: $135 per day; and
      (D)   Alcohol is specifically excluded from reimbursement.
   (4)   No reimbursement of travel, meal, or lodging expenses incurred by an
employee or public official shall be authorized unless the travel, meal, and
lodging expense request form has been submitted and approved. All documents and
information submitted with the form shall be subject to disclosure under the
Freedom of Information Act.
   (5)   Expense for travel, meal, or lodging that exceed the maximum allowable
by this section shall only by approved by roll call vote in an open meeting by
the Board of Trustees in regular session.
   (6)   The town shall not reimburse an employee, elected official, or officer
for any activities which would be considered entertainment.
(Ord. 22-460, passed 4-12-2022)
Sec. 32.03 EMPLOYEE CLOTHING ALLOWANCE.
   It shall be the policy of the Board of Trustees that any uniforms or
clothing purchased for employees shall be made with Board approval.
(Res. 412, passed - -2012)
Sec. 32.04 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.
   (1)   The policy prohibiting sexual harassment, included as Attachment A to
the ordinance from which this section is derived, is hereby adopted.
   (2)   This section shall be in full force and effect on February 8, 2018.
(Ord. 471, passed 2-8-2018)
Sec. 32.05 INJURY TO PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface, or interfere with any
property belonging to the town without proper authority from the Mayor and
Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.6.6) Penalty, see Sec. 10.99
Sec. 32.06 GENERAL PERSONNEL POLICIES.
   The Board of Trustees of the town hereby sets forth the general personnel
policies for all full-time employees employed 32 hours or more per week.
   (1)   Vacation.
      (A)   Full-time employees are entitle to vacation benefits based on the
length of service with the town. Vacation is earned as follows:
 
Length of Service Vacation Time
1 year            1 week
2 years           2 weeks
 
      (B)   If the employee desires to take over two consecutive days’
vacation, the employee must obtain prior approval from the Town Board, his or
her respective committee chairperson, or the President of the Town Board. In
the event the employee chooses to be compensated for vacation pay instead of
taking time off from the employee’s duties, the employee must obtain prior
approval from the Town Board, his or her respective committee chairperson, or
the President of the Town Board. Vacation time must be used within the calendar
year next following the year when it is earned and is non- cumulative.
   (2)   Personal leave. Absence for good cause must be authorized by the Town
Board, his or her respective committee chairperson, or the President of the
Town Board.
   (3)   Death in family. Up to three days is allowed for a death in the
employee’s immediate family. For this purpose, IMMEDIATE FAMILY is defined as
spouse, children, mother, father, mother- and father-in-law, grandchildren,
brother, sister, brother- and sister-in-law, grandparents, and grandparents-in-
law.
   (4)   Sick days and personal time. Time off work for sickness is allowed to
full-time employees at the rate of days per employment year, non-cumulatively.
If the employee is sick two consecutive days, the employee must notify the
Board, committee chairperson, or President and advise them of the circumstances
regarding the illness. Injuries or accidents which occur while on the job, must
be reported at once to the Town Clerk so that a written report can be made.
Failure report injury may result in loss of benefits provided by the Workers’
Compensation Act.
   (5)   Holidays. The following holidays are observed for full-time employees:
New Year’s Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, July 4, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day,
Friday after Thanksgiving, and Christmas Day. In addition, each full-time
employee may choose two additional days off, which may be used by the employee
at any time or with any combination of other holidays.
   (6)   IRA. After one year of employment, the town will contribute $500 plus
the customary Social Security and Medicare payments to an IRA account for the
benefit of each full-time employee. For those employees that qualify, the
contribution to the IRA will be made on January 1 and each January 1
thereafter. Full-time employees that have qualified for the IRA benefit and
terminate their employment with the town during the calendar year will have
their IRA contribution prorated based upon the number of months of employment
during the calendar year.
   (7)   Probation period. All employees hired by the town after the passing of
the ordinance from which this section is derived shall be placed on a 90-day
probationary period. After the 90-day probationary period, his or her
employment status will be reviewed by the Town Board, his or her respective
committee chairperson, or the President of the Town Board.
   (8)   Personal business. No employee of the town shall conduct any personal
business, including personal telephone calls, while acting in the capacity of
an employee of the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.5.13)
ETHICS POLICY
Sec. 32.20 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of Presidential or
Vice-Presidential electors, but does not include activities:
   (A)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action;
   (B)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
   (C)   Are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in Sec. 1-3 of the Election Code.
(10 ILCS 5/1-3)
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in Sec. 3
of the State Public Labor Relations Act.
(5 ILCS 315/3)
COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this subchapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off, or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in Sec. 9-1.4 of the
Election Code.
(10 ILCS 5/9-1.4)
EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the town, whether on a full-time or part-time
basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and
control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is
to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER. The Town of Chatsworth.
GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value, including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
   (A)   Compensation for employment;
   (B)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and
   (C)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the office is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
   (A)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative,
or administrative action;
   (B)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
   (C)   Are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a County Clerk under Sec.
9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a County
Clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   (A)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event;
   (B)   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event;
   (C)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution;
   (D)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question;
   (E)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question;
   (F)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question;
   (G)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls;
   (H)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question;
   (I)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office;
   (J)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires;
   (K)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question;
   (L)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question;
   (M)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question;
   (N)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention; or
   (O)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
   (A)   Is seeking official action:
      (1)   By an officer; or
      (2)   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
   (B)   Does business or seeks to do business:
      (1)   With the officer; or
      (2)   With an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
   (C)   Conducts activities regulated:
      (1)   By the officer; or
      (2)   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
   (D)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
(Ord. 297, passed 6-15-2004)
Sec. 32.21 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (1)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined in Sec.
32.20. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources
of the town in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (2)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
      (A)   As part of that officer or employee’s duties;
      (B)   As a condition of employment; or
      (C)   During any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation, or
personal time off).
   (3)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment, or any
benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (4)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in, as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this subchapter.
   (5)   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal
Standards for Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-in-
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club.
(Ord. 297, passed 6-15-2004) Penalty, see Sec.
32.99
Sec. 32.22 GIFT BAN.
   (1)   Prohibition.
      (A)   Except as permitted by this subchapter, no officer or employee, and
no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee
(collectively referred to herein as “recipients”), shall intentionally solicit
or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined in Sec.
32.20, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance.
      (B)   No prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that
violates this section.
   (2)   Exceptions. Division (1) above is not applicable to the following, and
each of these exceptions listed is mutually exclusive and independent of every
other:
      (A)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public;
      (B)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value;
      (C)   Any:
         (1)   Contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code; or
         (2)   Activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a
political organization or candidate.
      (D)   Educational materials and missions;
      (E)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;
      (F)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter- in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancée;
      (G)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
         (1)   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
         (2)   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax
deduction or business reimbursement for the gift; and
         (3)   Whether, to the actual knowledge of the recipient, the
individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar
gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family
members.
      (H)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided, that the food or refreshments are consumed on
the premises from which they were purchased or prepared, or catered. For the
purposes of this section, CATERED means food or refreshments that are purchased
ready to consume which are delivered by any means;
      (I)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances;
      (J)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose of
this section, INTRA- GOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and INTER-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity;
      (K)   Requests, inheritances, and other transfers at death; and/or
      (L)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
   (3)   Reasonable action. An officer or employee, his or her spouse, or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this subchapter if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a
gift from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount
equal to its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income
taxation under I.R.C. Sec. 501(c)(3), as now or hereafter amended, renumbered,
or succeeded.
(Ord. 297, passed 6-15-2004) Penalty, see Sec. 32.99
Sec. 32.23 ETHICS ADVISOR.
   (1)   The President of the Board of Trustees of the town, with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the
town. The duties of the Ethics Advisor may be designated to an officer or
employee of the town unless the position has been created as an office by the
town.
   (2)   The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the town concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter and state ethics laws. The Ethics Advisor shall
perform such other duties as may be delegated by the town.
(Ord. 297, passed 6-15-2004)
Sec. 32.24 ETHICS COMMISSION.
   (1)   There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics
Commission of the town. The Commission shall be comprised of three members
appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees of the town, with the
advice and consent of the Town Board of Trustees. No person shall be appointed
as a member of the Commission who is related, either by blood or by marriage up
to the degree of first cousin, to any elected officer of the town.
   (2)   (A)   At the first meeting of the Commission, the initial appointees
shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two commissioners shall serve
two-year terms, and the third commissioner shall serve a one-year term.
Thereafter, all commissioners shall be appointed to two-year terms.
Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
      (B)   At the first meeting of the Commission, the commissioners shall
choose a chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of
the chairperson or any two commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two
commissioners, and official action by the Commission shall require the
affirmative vote of two members.
   (3)   The President of the Board of Trustees of the town, with the advice
and consent of the Town Board of Trustees, may remove a commissioner in case of
incompetency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office after service on the
commissioner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a copy of the
written charges against the commissioner and after providing an opportunity to
be heard in person or by counsel upon not less than ten days’ notice. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments.
   (4)   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      (A)   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers;
      (B)   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with Sec.
32.99(1)(A)(3) and refer violations of Sec.
32.21 or Sec.
32.22 to the appropriate attorney for prosecution. The Commission shall,
however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint alleging a violation
of this subchapter and not upon its own perogative;
      (C)   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this subchapter;
      (D)   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production
of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the town to cooperate with the Commission during the
course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by
the Commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge; and
      (E)   The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this subchapter.
   (5)   (A)   Complaints alleging a violation of this subchapter shall be
filed with the Ethics Commission.
      (B)   Within three business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three business days after receipt by the Commission. The notices to the
respondent and the complainant shall also advise him or her of the date, time,
and place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
      (C)   (1)   Upon not less than 48 hours’ public notice, the Commission
shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is
deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this subchapter, to determine
whether is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant,
to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by
the Open Meetings Act. the Commission shall issue notice to the complainant and
the respondent of the Commission’s ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint
and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed within seven business days
after receiving the complaint.
         (2)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of
Sec.
32.22 and there is a determination of probable cause, then the Commission’s
notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled within four weeks
after the complaint’s receipt. Alternatively, the Commission may elect to
notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate authorities to
prosecute such actions and request that the complaint be adjudicated
judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or
if there is no determination of probable cause, then the Commission shall send
by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the
decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
         (3)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of
Sec.
32.21, then the Commission shall notify in writing the attorney designated by
the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to the
attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the
Commission concerning the alleged violation.
      (D)   On the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours’ public notice of
the meeting, the Commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall
allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The
hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the Open Meetings
Act.
      (E)   Within 30 days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing
is concluded, the Commission shall either dismiss the complaint or issue a
recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the President of
the Board of Trustees of the town, or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
The particular findings in the case, any recommendation for discipline, and any
fine imposed shall be a matter of public information.
      (F)   If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file a
written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven business days
after the issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a
fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine. Within 14 days after receiving the demand, the
Commission shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least 48
hours’ notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present
testimony and evidence. Within seven days thereafter, the Commission shall
publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the
President of the Board of Trustees of the town, or impose a fine upon the
violator, or both.
      (G)   If a complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding the date of
any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the Commission shall
render its decision as required under division (5)(E) above within seven days
after the complaint is filed, and during the seven days preceding that
election, the Commission shall render such decision before the date of that
election, if possible.
      (H)   A complaint alleging the violation of this subchapter must be filed
within one year after the alleged violation.
(Ord. 297, passed 6-15-2004) Penalty, see Sec.
32.99
CONTRACTS
Sec. 32.35 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.
   As to all public contracts entered into between the town, a municipal
corporation, and a contract, the following provisions, which are herein
referred to as “equal employment opportunity clause,” shall be incorporated.
Equal Employment Opportunity
In the event of the contractor’s noncompliance with any provision of this equal
employment opportunity clause, the Illinois Fair Employment Practices Act, or the
Fair Employment Practices Commission’s Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts,
the contractor may be declared no responsible and therefore ineligible for future
contracts or subcontracts with the State of Illinois or any of its political
subdivisions or municipal corporations, and the contract may be cancelled or voided
in whole or in part, and such other sanctions or penalties may be imposed or remedies
invoked as provided by statute or regulations.
During the performance of this contract, the contractor agrees as follows:
   A.   That it will not discriminate against any employee or applicant for
employment because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or ancestry; and
further, that it will examine all job classifications to determine if minority
persons or women are underutilized and will take appropriate affirmative action to
rectify any such underutilization.
   B.   That, if it hires additional employees in order to perform this contract, or
any portion hereof, it will determine the availability (in accordance with the
Commission’s Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts) of minorities and women in
the area(s) from which it may reasonably recruit and it will hire for each job
classification for which employees are hired in such a way that minorities and women
are not underutilized.
   C.   That, in all solicitations or advertisements for employee placed by it or on
its behalf, it will state that all applicants will be afforded equal opportunity
without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or
ancestry.
   D.   That it will send to each labor organization or representative of workers
with which it has or is bound by a collective bargaining or other agreement or
understanding, a notice advising such labor organization or representative of the
contractor’s obligations under the Illinois Fair Employment Practices Act and the
Commission’s Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts. If any such labor
organization or representative fails or refuses to cooperate with the contract in its
efforts to comply with such Act and Rules and Regulations, the contract will promptly
so notify the Illinois Fair Employment Practices Commission and the contracting
agency and will recruit employees from other sources when necessary to fulfill its
obligations thereunder.
   E.   That it will submit reports as required by the Illinois Fair Employment
Practices Commission’s Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts, furnish all
relevant information as may from time to time be requested by the Commission or the
contracting agency, and in all respects comply with the Illinois Fair Employment
Practices Act and the Commission’s Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts.
   F.   That it will permit access to all relevant books, records, accounts, and work
sites by personnel of the contracting agency, and the Illinois Fair Employment
Practices Commission for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the
Illinois Fair Employment Practices Act and the Commission’s Rules and Regulations for
Public Contracts.
   G.   That it will include verbatim or by reference the provisions of paragraphs A.
through G. of this clause in every performance subcontract as defined in Sec. 2.10(b)
of the Commission’s Rules and Regulations for Public Contracts so that such
provisions will be binding upon every such subcontractor; and that it will also so
include the provisions of paragraphs A., E., F., and G. in every supply subcontract
as defined in Sec. 2.10(a) of the Commission’s Rules and Regulations for Public
Contracts so that such provisions will be binding upon every such subcontractor. In
the same manner as with other provisions of this contract, the contractor will be
liable for compliance with applicable provisions of this clause by all its
subcontractors; and further, it will promptly notify the contracting agency and the
Illinois Fair Employment Practices Commission in the event any subcontractor fails or
refuses to comply therewith. In addition, no contractor will utilize any
subcontractor declared by the Commission to be no responsible and therefore
ineligible for contracts or subcontracts with the State of Illinois or any of its
political subdivisions or municipal corporations.
 
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.1.1)
Sec. 32.36 ENACTMENT; PUBLICATION OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Should any public contract entered into between the town and a contractor
fail to have such provisions specifically incorporated into such contract
either by having them set forth in full or having them incorporated by
reference, such provisions shall nevertheless be deemed to be included within
said contract by this subchapter. Any person contracting with the town shall be
deemed to have notice of this subchapter and of its contents by virtue of the
enactment and publication of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.1.2)
Sec. 32.37 PROVISIONS INCLUDED IN CONTRACTS.
   Direction is given to all officers and persons authorized, or who may
hereafter be authorized, to enter into public contracts for the town to include
the provisions of Sec.
32.35 that have heretofore been designated as “equal employment opportunity
clause” in any public contract entered into by the town either verbatim or by
reference.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.1.3)
Sec. 32.38 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CONTRACT. As defined in Sec. 2.4 of the Rules and Regulations of the State Fair
Employment Practices Commission, any contract, purchase order, lease, or other
agreement or understanding, written or otherwise, between the state, any of its
political subdivisions or municipal corporations, or any agent thereof, or any
other person, for the procurement of anything or service of value, such as, for
example, any real or personal property, equipment, merchandise, goods,
materials, labor, or services for or by the state, such political subdivision
or municipal corporation, and further means any loan or grant by the state, any
of its political subdivisions or municipal corporations from which such a
contract, purchase order, lease, or other agreement or understanding may be
financed in whole or in part.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.1.4)
SUBCONTRACT. As defined in Sec. 2.10 of the Rules and Regulations of the State
Fair Employment Practices Commission, any agreement, arrangement, or
understanding, written or otherwise, between a contractor and any person (in
which the parties do not stand in the relationship of any employer and
employee):
   (A)   For the furnishing of supplies or services or for the use of real or
personal property, including the lease arrangements, which, in whole or in
part, is utilized in the performance of any one or more contract; or
   (B)   Under which any portion of the contractor’s obligation under any one
or more contracts is performed, undertaken, or assumed.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.1.5)
Sec. 32.39 CONTRACTS OVER $10,000.
   (1)   Except as otherwise provided, all contracts, of whatever character,
pertaining to public improvement, or the maintenance of the public property of
a municipality involving an outlay of $10,000 or more, shall be based upon
specifications to be approved by the Board of Trustees, and shall be
constructed as follows:
      (A)   By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after
advertising for bids, in the manner prescribed by ordinance, except that any
such contract may be entered into by the proper officers without advertising
for bids, if authorized by a vote of four of the six Trustees elected; or
      (B)   In the following manner, if authorized by a vote of four of the six
Trustees elected: the Superintendent of Public Works or other proper officers
to be designated by ordinance, shall superintend and cause to be carried out
the contraction of the work or other public improvement and shall employ
exclusively for the performance of all manual labor thereon, laborers and
artisans whom the town shall pay by the day or hour, but all material of the
value of $10,000 and upward used in the contraction of work or other public
improvement, shall be purchased by contract let to the lower responsible bidder
in the manner to be prescribed by ordinance.
   (2)   Nothing contained in this section shall apply to any contract by a
municipality with the United States of America or any agency thereof.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.2.1)
Sec. 32.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec. 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.
   (2) (A)A person who intentionally violates any provision of Sec.
32.21 may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other
than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in
an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (B)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of Sec.
32.22 is subject to a fine in an amount not less than $1,001 and not more than
$5,000.
      (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of Sec.
32.20 to
32.24 to the local enforcement authorities, the State’s Attorney, or any other
law enforcement official may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (D)   A violation of Sec.
32.21 shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney for the town by
filing in the Circuit Court an information, or sworn complaint, charging such
offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal
procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the
defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
      (E)   A violation of Sec.
32.22 may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the town
or, if an Ethics Commission has been created, by the Commission through the
designated administrative procedure.
      (F)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of Sec.
32.21 or
32.22 is subject to discipline or discharge.
      (G)   The Commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any
provision of Sec.
32.22 in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000. The
Commission may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous complaint
alleging a violation of Sec.
32.20 to
32.24 in an amount of not less than $1,001 and not more than $5,000. The
Commission may recommend any appropriate discipline up to and including
discharge.
CHAPTER 33: EMERGENCY MITIGATION
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Adoption of County Multi-Jurisdictional All Hazards Mitigation Plan
Local Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
   
33.15   Establishment
   
33.16   Coordinator
   
33.17   Functions
   
33.18   Service as mobile support team
   
33.19   Agreements with other political subdivisions
   
33.20   Emergency action
   
33.21   Compensation
   
33.22   Reimbursement by state
   
33.23   Purchases and expenditures
   
33.24   Oath
   
33.25   Office
   
33.26   Appropriation; levy of taxes
Civil Emergency
   
33.40   Definitions
   
33.41   Declaration
   
33.42   Curfew
   
33.43   Powers
   
33.44   Period
   
33.45   Notice
   
33.46   Construction
   
33.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 33.01 ADOPTION OF COUNTY MULTI-JURISDICTIONAL ALL HAZARDS MITIGATION PLAN.
   The town hereby:
   (1)   Adopts the County Multi-Jurisdictional All Hazards Mitigation Plan
Update as the official hazard mitigation plan of the town; and
   (2)   Agrees to participate in the annual and five-year updates to this
Plan.
(Res. 492, passed 12-10-2020)
LOCAL EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Sec. 33.15 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created the local ESDA to prevent, minimize, repair, and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage or other hostile action, or from nature or human-made disaster, in
accordance with the State Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975. This
ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may be
selected by the Coordinator.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.1)
Sec. 33.16 COORDINATOR.
   The Coordinator of the Municipal ESDA shall be appointed by the Town Mayor
and shall serve until removed by same. The Coordinator shall have direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training, and operation of
the ESDA, subject to the direction and control of the Mayor as provided by
statute. In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve
as the Coordinator, the Town Mayor or any person designated by him or her,
shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.2)
Sec. 33.17 FUNCTIONS.
   The Municipal ESDA shall perform such functions within the municipality as
shall be prescribed in and by the state ESDA plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and such orders, rules, and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided in the State ESDA Act of 1975.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.3)
Sec. 33.18 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   All or any members of the Municipal ESDA organization may be designated as
members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State ESDA as
provided by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by
the Coordinator of the Municipal ESDA organization. Any member of a mobile
support team who is a municipal employee or officer while serving on call to
duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive the compensation and
have the powers, duties, rights, and immunities incident to such employment or
office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the
municipality, while so service, shall receive from the state reasonable
compensation as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.4)
Sec. 33.19 AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Coordinator of the ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
municipal corporations or political subdivision of the state, but no such
agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the Town Mayor and
by the State Director of ESDA.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.5)
Sec. 33.20 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or
from human-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Municipal ESDA
to cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.6)
Sec. 33.21 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the municipality,
if called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the
time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held. Members who are not such municipality employees or officers shall receive
for such training time such compensation as may be established by the Town
Mayor.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.7)
Sec. 33.22 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
   The Town Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund an
reimbursement by the state to the municipality for expenses incident to
training members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA,
compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team
while serving outside the municipality in response to a call by the Governor or
State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by
the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.8)
Sec. 33.23 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (1)   The Mayor may, on recommendation of the Town Coordinator of ESDA,
authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to place the town in a position
to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear
or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of such
disaster, or from human-made or natural disaster.
   (2)   In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the Municipal
Coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the municipality, to procure
such services, supplies, equipment, or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or
obligations, as authorized by the State ESDA Act of 1975; provided that, if the
Town Board meets at such time, he or she shall act subject to the directions
and restrictions imposed by that body.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.9)
Sec. 33.24 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Municipal ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
 
I, ____________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend
and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and
the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take the obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purposes of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do
not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such times as I
am affiliated with the Town of Chatsworth ESDA organization, I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence.
 
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.10)
Sec. 32.25 OFFICE.
   The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a municipal building, or
elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Mayor for the Municipal ESDA as its
office.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.11)
Sec. 32.26 APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.
   The Mayor may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in a manner provided
by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed
$0.05 per $100 of the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all
other taxes, as provided by the State ESDA Act of 1975; provided however, that
the amount collectible under such levy shall in no event exceed $0.25 per
capita.
(Prior Code, Sec. 5.1.12)
CIVIL EMERGENCY
Sec. 33.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
CIVIL EMERGENCY.
   (A)   A riot of unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force
of violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law; or
   (B)   Any natural disaster or human-made calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion within the corporate
limits of the town, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property, or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the town, excepting
officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty
with reference to civil emergency.
(Prior Code, Sec. 20.1)
Sec. 33.41 DECLARATION.
   Whenever an emergency, as defined in Sec.
33.40, exists, the Town Mayor shall declare the existence of same by means of a
written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency.
(Prior Code, Sec. 20.2)
Sec. 33.42 CURFEW.
   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the Mayor, he or she may order a
general curfew applicable to such geographical areas of the town or the town as
a whole, as he or she deems advisable, and applicable during such hours of the
day or night as he or she deems necessary in the interest of the public safety
and welfare.
(Prior Code, Sec. 20.3)
Sec. 33.43 POWERS.
   After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the Mayor of the town may also,
in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or all of the following
orders:
   (1)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
   (2)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
   (3)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle;
   (4)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing, or
giving away any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; and
   (5)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
(Prior Code, Sec. 20.4)
Sec. 33.44 PERIOD.
   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of 48
hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor indicating that
the civil emergency no longer exists. The Mayor shall have the power to re-
proclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the end of each 48-hour period
during the time the said civil emergency exists.
(Prior Code, Sec. 20.5)
Sec. 33.45 NOTICE.
   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Town Police shall
notify the news media situated within the town, and shall cause three copies of
the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the town, the Town Hall, the fire station, and the post
office.
(Prior Code, Sec. 20.6)
Sec. 33.46 CONSTRUCTION.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to impair the powers
contained in the this code, giving powers to the Police and Fire Departments,
but shall be construed together with existing ordinances now in effect for the
safety and welfare of the citizens of the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 20.9)
Sec. 33.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec.
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (2)   Any person violating the provisions of Sec.
33.40 to
33.46 or executive order issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense
against the town, and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Prior Code, Sec. 20.7)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Fiscal year
   
34.02   Bills; payroll
   
34.03   Payment by Treasurer
   
34.04   Contracts signatory
   
34.05   Surety bonds
Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
34.20   Tax imposed
   
34.21   Enforcement
   
34.22   Report
   
34.23   Payment to state
Municipal Service Occupation Tax
   
34.35   Tax rate
   
34.36   Account
   
34.37   Payment
Municipal Use Tax
   
34.50   Tax rate
   
34.51   Enforcement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 34.01 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the town shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on
April 30 of the following year.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.6.2)
Sec. 34.02 BILLS; PAYROLL.
   All bills payable by the town, other than for the payment of salaries
established by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees, shall be submitted to the
Mayor and Board of Trustees for approval before payment.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.6.3)
Sec. 34.03 PAYMENT BY TREASURER.
   The Treasurer shall pay out money in payment of all bills, or for salaries,
or for any other purposes other than the retirement of principal or interest on
bonds or tax anticipation warrants only upon warrant signed by the Town Mayor
and the Town Clerk as provided by statute. Such warrants shall designate the
items to be paid and the funds from which they are to be paid.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.6.4)
Sec. 34.04 CONTRACTS SIGNATORY.
   The Town Mayor, or any other person designated by the Town Board, may sign
on behalf of the town any contract authorized by the Town Board. No contract
may be entered into without the authority of the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.6.5)
Sec. 34.05 SURETY BONDS.
   (1)   Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the town is required as a
prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or position, or to the
issuance of a license or permit or for the exercise of any special privilege,
the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and authorized to do
business in this state as a surety company, in the absence of specific
provision to the contrary by ordinance.
   (2)   Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an additional surety
may be needed on any bond to indemnify the town against loss or liability
because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties or for any other
reason, the Mayor and Board of Trustees may order a new surety or sureties to
be secured for such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured
within ten days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal of the
bond, or his or her assignee, the Mayor and Board of Trustees shall declare the
bond to be void, and thereupon, such principal or assignee shall be deemed to
have surrendered the privilege or position as condition of which the bond was
required.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.6.7)
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
Sec. 34.20 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the town at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect, in accordance with the provision of Chapter 24, Sec.
8-11.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.1.1)
Sec. 34.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   (1)   The tax imposed hereby, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the state, the Department shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   (2)   The Town Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department
of Revenue a certified copy of this subchapter not later than five days after
the effective date of the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.1.2)
Sec. 34.22 REPORT.
   Every such person engaged in such business in the town shall file on or
before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department
of Revenue required by the Illinois Revised Statutes, and shall file a
duplicate of such report with the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.1.3)
Sec. 34.23 PAYMENT TO STATE.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.1.4)
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
Sec. 34.35 TAX RATE.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the town in the business
of making sale of service at the rate of 1% of the cost price of all tangible
personal property transferred by said service officer either in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a
sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 24, Sec. 8-11.5
of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.2.1)
Sec. 34.36 ACCOUNT.
   Every supplier or service officer required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of the municipality shall file, on or before the
last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.2.2)
Sec. 34.37 PAYMENT.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.2.3)
MUNICIPAL USE TAX
Sec. 34.50 TAX RATE.
   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of Sec. 8-11-6 of
the Illinois Municipal Code upon the privilege of using in the municipality any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside the state at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of the
state government. The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of such
tangible property with selling price to have the meaning as defined in the Use
Tax Act, approved July 14, 1955, as amended. The tax shall be collected from
persons whose Illinois address for titling is given as being in the
municipality of the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.3.1)
Sec. 34.51 ENFORCEMENT.
   Such tax shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue for the town
and shall be paid before the title or certificate of registration for the
personal property is issued. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. The Town Clerk is
hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of Revenue a certified copy
of this subchapter not later than five days after its effective date.
(Prior Code, Sec. 15.3.2)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY REGULATIONS
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY REGULATIONS
Section
   
50.01   Definition
   
50.02   Application
   
50.03   Payment
   
50.04   Rates
Sec. 50.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition applies unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES. Water, wastewater (sewer), and garbage disposal.
(Ord. 2023-09-12, passed 9-12-2023)
Sec. 50.02 APPLICATION.
   Application for municipal utilities must be filed through the Town Clerk’s
office. An $80 nonrefundable activation fee must accompany each application
prior to the commencement of service. The changing of a name on the account is
deemed a new account and must complete a new application with fees required.
Transfer of utility services to another residence in which account is in good
standing will not require an additional activation fee. A final bill will be
produced and must be paid prior to setting up a new account.
(Ord. 2023-09-12, passed 9-12-2023)
Sec. 50.03 PAYMENT.
   (1)   The owner of premises and the occupant thereof and the users of the
municipal service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service
on said premises and the services furnished to the premises by the town only
upon the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, or user of the
service are jointly and severally liable therefor to the town.
   (2)   There shall be a minimum $5 fee for no water usage.
   (3)   The municipal utility bill shall be rendered monthly and shall be due
upon receipt of the bill. All utility bills are due by the twentieth of every
month.
   (4)   In the event the municipal utility bill is not paid by the twentieth
after the rendition of bill for such service the bill shall be deemed and
hereby declared delinquent or past due. A late fee shall be assessed at 10% of
the outstanding balance or a minimum fee of $5. An extension or grace period of
service will be given until the last day of the month. Municipal service shall
then be discontinued without any further notice. In the event that said service
is discontinued and/or delinquent, the service shall not be reinstated until
past due municipal utility bill is paid in full along with a nonrefundable fee
of $80 for said account.
   (5)   All past water deposits are no longer valid and are nonrefundable.
(Ord. 2023-09-12, passed 9-12-2023)
Sec. 50.04 RATES.
   Rates for municipal utilities shall be calculated as follows:
   (1)   Water:
      (A)   September 12, 2023: $9 per 1,000 gallons;
      (B)   January 1, 2024: $12 per 1,000 gallons; and
      (C)   January 1, 2025: re-evaluate.
   (2)   Sewer:
      (A)   January 1, 2023: $5.50 per 1,000 gallons;
      (B)   January 1, 2024: $6.50 per 1,000 gallons; and
      (C)   January 1, 2025: $7.50 per 1,000 gallons.
   (3)   Garbage:
      (A)   January 1, 2023: $18 per month;
      (B)   January 1, 2024: $19 per month; and
      (C)   January 1, 2025: $20 per month.
(Ord. 2023-09-12, passed 9-12-2023)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Collection requirements; residential
   
51.03   Collection requirements; commercial
   
51.04   Container requirements
   
51.05   Landscape waste collection
   
51.06   Demolition or construction
   
51.07   Excessive waste collection
   
51.08   Lumber
   
51.09   Recycling materials
   
51.10   Collection of solid waste
   
51.11   Non-collection items
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Sec. 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
DEMOLITION/CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Refuse which is incidental to construction,
renovation, or demolition of buildings or other structures on premises.
EXCESSIVE WASTE. An unreasonable amount of solid waste or refuse as deemed to
be in excess of average amount weekly household garbage.
GARBAGE. Animal or vegetable waste resulting from preparation, cooking
disposal, and/or consumption of food. Cans, bottles, paper or plastic, which
are soiled with animal or vegetable waste, are considered GARBAGE.
LANDSCAPE WASTE. Brush type material comprised of tree branches, hedge
clippings, and wood free of all other debris and/or refuse.
LICENSED COLLECTOR. Any person, firm, or corporation whom the town has licensed
or contracted with for the removal and disposal of garbage and rubbish.
PREMISES. A parcel of land within the city limits of the town, including the
adjoining street rights-of-way, or legal easement.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Newsprint, aluminum, glass, plastic, and the like.
REFUSE. The combination of garbage and or rubbish for disposal.
RUBBISH. Solid waste consisting of combustible and non-combustible items such
as paper, wrappings, cardboard, tin cans, bedding, clothing, and other similar
items.
SOLID WASTE. All waste, refuse, garbage, combustible and non-combustible items,
including, but not limited to, recyclable and yard waste.
STREET SIDE. A location on or near the public right-of-way in front of a
residence or premises. Said location is between sidewalk and street normally
near the edge of the street.
YARD WASTE. Lawn clippings, hedge clippings, garden waste, small tree branches,
twigs, and items which can safely be place in approved lawn waste bags.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024)
Sec. 51.02 COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS; RESIDENTIAL.
   (1)   (A)   Only refuse generated from building and/or premises qualifying
as residential shall be set at street side for collection.
      (B)   Such refuse shall be placed at street side in such a manner as not
to impair pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      (C)   All refuse shall be contained, prepared, or packaged according to
the requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   Placement of refuse at street side shall be begin at 6:00 p.m. on the
evening prior to pick up. Containers must be removed by 8:00 p.m. on collection
day. There shall be no limit on the number of containers needed to contain
common weekly household refuse.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
51.99
Sec. 51.03 COLLECTION REQUIREMENTS; COMMERCIAL.
   (1)   All commercial refuse shall be stored in closed dumpsters, closed
trash cans, or equivalent containers as approved by this chapter. Commercial
refuse may be held in a completely fenced and visually screened area of
sufficient height to preclude access by animals and or avoid wind dispersal of
such refuse.
   (2)   No commercial refuse shall be stored on public rights-of-way. When
buildings are built up to property lines, dumpsters and containers may be
stored at the edge of an alleyway as long as such containers do not obstruct
traffic flow.
   (3)   Small businesses generating minimal amounts of refuse may be
negotiated through the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
51.99
Sec. 51.04 CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.
   (1)   Acceptable containers shall be those containers commercially
manufactured for the expressed purpose of garbage, yard waste, rubbish, and
refuse containment.
   (2)   All containers shall be in reasonably good condition without holes,
cuts, or tears which could possibly be dangerous or could allow contents to
spill out of the container. All containers must have a minimum of two usable
handles.
   (3)   Containers shall have a capacity of no less than 20 gallons not more
than 35 gallons.
   (4)   All contents of containers shall be covered by a tight-fitting lid at
all times, unless all contents are enclosed by one or more plastic bags as
specified in the requirements of this chapter.
   (5)   Sealed plastic bags will qualify as suitable containers in which to
contain refuse or other garbage when placed at street side for collection.
   (6)   Plastic bags shall be watertight and shall have no holes or tears
present. Bags shall be fastened at the top so it can be grasped and supported
from the top of the bag. These bags shall not contain broken glass or sharp
objects that can puncture the bag and possibly result in injury to collection
workers.
   (7)   Oversize residential refuse which because of size of the item will not
fit in a qualifying container may be set at the street side provided items are
presented in a sound condition.
   (8)   Cardboard boxes which will not fit in a container shall be broken down
and presented in a manageable bundle. At no time shall cardboard boxes be
acceptable containers for garbage or refuse.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
51.99
Sec. 51.05 LANDSCAPE WASTE COLLECTION.
   (1)   The town will provide street side landscape waste collection service
to all qualified residences using the following procedures.
   (2)   All landscape waste shall be set at street side for collection on the
second and the last Thursday of the month.
   (3)   All landscape waste shall be set at curb side in parallel piles no
larger than eight feet long by three feet wide. The brush shall not be placed
next to utility poles, hydrants, sign posts, or any other obstruction. Leaves
will be accepted in approved lawn bags only.
   (4)   Residents wishing to have landscape materials removed shall notify the
Municipal Clerk’s office as soon as materials are ready for removal.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
51.99
Sec. 51.06 DEMOLITION OR CONSTRUCTION.
   Removal and disposal of construction/demolition and/or remodeling debris
shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024)
Sec. 51.07 EXCESSIVE WASTE COLLECTION.
   (1)   Excess amounts of refuse/garbage generated from a household cleaning
or moving shall be negotiated through the Board of Trustees.
   (2)   Any residence placing excessive garbage at curb side will result in
fees added to the municipal service bill.
   (3)   Failure to pay municipal service fees will result in discontinuance of
total municipal service.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024)
Sec. 51.08 LUMBER.
   Lumber/boards cut into five-foot lengths clear of any paint, nails, staples,
or other debris can be placed at street side with landscape waste on designated
days for collection.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024)
Sec. 51.09 RECYCLING MATERIALS.
   Whenever a recycling program is operated by the town, or an authorized
collector has been approved residents are encouraged to participate in a manner
that does not affect the health, safety, and welfare of the occupants or the
general public, but does, however, contribute to the protection of the
environment. Recycling programs shall be operated as a same day collection.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024)
Sec. 51.10 COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE.
   A contracted waste disposal company will collect oversize items such as
refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, dryers, dishwashing machines, and
properly bagged mattresses and other large items. This may not be curbside
pickup, and require drop off at an approved location. These items will be
collected on the last garbage day of each month.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
51.99
Sec. 51.11 NON-COLLECTION ITEMS.
   The following items shall not be collected by the town and should be taken
to a local recycling center for disposal: microwave ovens, televisions,
electronic equipment, computers, monitors, batteries, cement blocks, tires,
auto type batteries, and liquid paint.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
51.99
Sec. 51.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec.
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (2)   (A)   Failure to follow the rules in Sec.
51.02 may result in a $20 fine per offense that will be included on the
municipal service bill.
      (B)   Leaving the items listed in Sec.
51.11 outside will result in a fee of $50 per item.
(Ord. 440, passed 3-26-2024)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Adoption of State Vehicle Code
   
70.02   Citation
Sec. 70.01 ADOPTION OF STATE VEHICLE CODE.
   (1)   The town hereby adopts by reference the following provisions of the
State Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5, as existing on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived, as may be amended after the
effective date:
625 ILCS 5/2-101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/3-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/5-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/6-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/7-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/8-101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/9-101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/10-101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/11-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/12-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/13-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/13C-1 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/15-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/16-101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/17-101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/18A-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/18B-100 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/18C-1101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/18D-101 et seq.
625 ILCS 5/20-101 et seq.
 
   (2)   Said sections shall be cited as described in Sec. 10.1.1—10.8.3 of
this Act.
   (3)   No person shall violate any provision of the State Vehicle Code so
incorporated into this code by reference. Any reference in the incorporated
sections of the State Vehicle Code shall be construed to refer to the “Town of
Chatsworth Vehicle Code,” unless the context of the section clearly indicates
otherwise.
   (4)   Some title headings of the State Vehicle Code incorporated in the Town
Vehicle Code are set forth herein without the full text of the incorporated
statute. Said headings are set forth for convenience of the readers only, and
the failure to include the full text herein shall be construed as failure to
properly enact the ordinance or incorporate sections of the State Vehicle Code
into this chapter. The full text of the incorporated sections appear in full in
625 ILCS.
   (5)   For statutory provisions authorizing the adoption of the State Vehicle
Code, see 625 ILCS 5/20-204.
(Ord. -, passed 3-14-2019) Penalty, see Sec.
10.99
Sec. 70.02 CITATION.
   Any references to the State Vehicle Code incorporated into the Town Vehicle
Code shall be cited as follows: “10.1.1-______,” as the case may be, with the
blank portion referring to the Act and section number. For example, 625 ILCS 5/
201 shall be cited as 10.1.1 5/2-101.
(Ord. -, passed 3-14-2019)
CHAPTER 71: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Section
   
71.01   Golf carts on town streets
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Sec. 71.01 GOLF CARTS ON TOWN STREETS.
   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GOLF CART. A vehicle designed and intended for the purpose of
transporting one or more persons and his, her, or their golf clubs or
maintenance equipment, or gator-type side-by-side seat vehicle with a steering
wheel, designed for utility use, capable of maximum speeds of 25 mph.
   (2)   A golf cart type vehicle is permitted to operate on city streets of
the town (except as otherwise limited in this section), provided that said
vehicle and operator meets the following requirements:
      (A)   Two operating headlights;
      (B)   Two operating taillights;
      (C)   Two operating brake lights;
      (D)   Directional turning lights;
      (E)   One steering wheel;
      (F)   Rearview mirror; and
      (G)   In the absence of turning lights, vehicle may be operated during
daylight hours with the use of hand signals.
   (3)   The owner of the vehicle must have proof of liability insurance
providing coverage while vehicle is operated on town streets, and which
liability insurance meets or exceeds the requirements of the State Safety and
Family Financial Responsibility Law, 625 ILCS 5/700 et seq.
   (4)   Said vehicle may only be operated on town streets by a person
possessing a valid driver’s license.
   (5)   Said vehicle is not allowed to be operated on sidewalks or in town
parks.
   (6)   No said vehicle shall be permitted to operate on First Street between
Walnut and Pine Streets, with the exception of crossing First Street at Cherry
Street to gain access to CAPS Park.
   (7)   All said vehicles must operate in accordance with all traffic laws of
the state and the town.
   (8)   No said vehicle with a motor in excess of 900 cc shall be permitted
within this section.
   (9)   No said vehicle shall be permitted to tow items, with the exception of
parades, festivals, and special events.
   (10)   (A)   All vehicles must be inspected annually by the public officials
assigned to inspect vehicles. Inspection tags will be issued, and it becomes
the responsibility of the permit holder to ensure all rules of the road are
followed.
      (B)   Registration requirements include owner’s name and address, model
and color of vehicle, and certificate of insurance.
      (C)   Registration permits shall begin on January 1 and expire on
December 31.
      (D)   Registration fee of $10 shall be paid.
      (E)   New permits are obtained annually.
      (F)   Permits will be placed on rear of vehicle. Placement will be
determined by the public official inspecting vehicle.
(Ord. 433, passed 10-10-2019) Penalty, see Sec.
71.99
Sec. 71.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec.
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (2)   (A)   Any person violating the registration requirements shall be
subject to court costs, town attorney fees, and a fine of:
         (1)   First offense: $25;
         (2)   Second offense: $50; and
         (3)   Third offense: $100.
      (B)   Any and all moving violations will be subject to penalty of the
State Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 433, passed 10-10-2019)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES
      
92.   PARKS AND RECREATION
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Cruelty
   
90.02   Dangerous animals
   
90.03   Noises
   
90.04   Strays
   
90.05   Killing dangerous animals
   
90.06   Diseased animals
   
90.07   Housing
Domestic Pets
   
90.20   Intent and purposes
   
90.21   Definitions
   
90.22   Animal control centers
   
90.23   Vaccination against rabies
   
90.24   Registration of dogs
   
90.25   Possession of stray animals
   
90.26   Running at large
   
90.27   Surrender of animals
   
90.28   Apprehension of dogs
   
90.29   Impoundment of animals
   
90.30   Notice of impoundment
   
90.31   Redemption of animals
   
90.32   Disposal of animals
   
90.33   Adoption of animals
   
90.34   Maintenance of records
   
90.35   Entry upon private property
   
90.36   Education
   
90.37   Enforcement
   
90.38   Service
   
90.39   Disposition of fees and fines
   
90.40   Keeping of dogs within the town limits
   
90.41   Keeping of vicious dogs
   
90.42   Keeping of livestock within the town limits
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 90.01 CRUELTY.
   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in the town in any way. Any person
who inhumanely beats, overloads, underfeeds, or abandons any animal shall be
guilty of a violation of this section.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.02 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind
to run at large in the town. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae
natured (wild natured) in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon
securing a permit from the Town Clerk.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.03 NOISES.
   It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace
by loud noises at any time of the day or night.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.04 STRAYS.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horses, swine, sheep, goats, or
poultry to run at large in the town. Any such animal running at large in any
public place in the town shall be impounded in the manner provided in Sec.
90.20 to
90.42. It shall be further unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in the
streets of the town for the purpose of grazing or feeding.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.05 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   The members of the Sheriff’s office or any other person in the town are
authorized to kill any dangerous animal when it is necessary for the protection
of any person or property.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.06 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious disease or an infectious
disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place
whereby the health of human or beast may be affected, nor shall such diseased
animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except
under the supervision of the Town Police or County Veterinarian. It is hereby
made the duty of the Town Police to secure such disposition of any diseased
animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication
or spread of contagion or infection, except in cases where the State
Veterinarian is empowered to act.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.07 HOUSING.
   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or
may be kept to become unclean, or unwholesome, and it shall be unlawful to keep
any live swine or pigs anywhere in the town.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
DOMESTIC PETS
Sec. 90.20 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
   It is the intent and purpose of this subchapter to promote responsible pet
ownership, to protect animals from neglect and abuse, to protect residents from
annoyance, injury, and property damage from animals, and to provide for
education in the responsible ownership of pets.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.21 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADMINISTRATOR. A veterinarian licensed by the state and appointed pursuant to
the provisions of this subchapter, or his or her duly authorized
representative.
ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom, excluding humans.
ANIMAL CONTROL CENTER. Any pound, lot, premises, and/or building maintained by
or under contract with the county for the care and custody of animals.
BOARD. The Town Board.
OWNER. Any person having a right of property in a dog or other animal, or who
keeps or harbors a dog or other animal, or who has it in his or her care, or
acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or other domestic animal
to remain on or about any premises occupied by him or her.
RESTRAINT. Under the control of the owner or his or her agent by leash, or
within a vehicle being driven or parked.
RUNNING AT LARGE. To be free of restraint beyond the boundaries of the premises
of the owner.
STRAY. Any animal found running at large which is not secured by a leash, or
not confined within the real property limits of its owner.
VACCINATION. Protection provided against rabies by inoculation with anti-rabies
vaccine as approved by the Department of Agriculture of the state.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.22 ANIMAL CONTROL CENTERS.
   There are hereby created animal control centers, which shall be established
in such number and at such locations as may be designated by the Board.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.23 VACCINATION AGAINST RABIES.
   Every owner of a dog four months or more of age, not confined at all times
to an enclosed area, shall cause such dog to be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian at such intervals as may be established by regulations
pursuant to the State Animal Control Act. Evidence of such rabies vaccination
shall be entered on a certificated, the form of which shall be approved by the
Board and which shall be signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the
vaccine.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.24 REGISTRATION OF DOGS.
   Every owner of a dog four months of age or more shall cause such dog to be
registered and shall pay an annual fee for such dog to the office of the Animal
Control Administrator of the county. The annual registration fee shall be set
by the County Animal Control. Each registered dog will be issued a registration
certificate and a registration tag. The tag shall be attached to a collar or
harness worn at all times by the dog for which the registration certificate and
tags have been issued, except when such dog is confined. When an owner fails to
register, his or her dog shall be subject to fines as set by Sec.
90.99.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.25 POSSESSION OF STRAY ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the knowledge and consent of
the owner, to retain possession of any stray animal for more than 48 hours
without first reporting such possession to the County Animal Control
Administrator and providing his or her name, address, a description of the
animal, the location of the animal, and a statement of the circumstances under
which possession of the animal was obtained.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see, Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.26 RUNNING AT LARGE.
   (1)   All dogs, regardless of the breed or size of the animal, shall be on a
leash at all times when outside of their containment or home.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by
permitting any dog to be outside when not under control by leash.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.27 SURRENDER OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains possession of a stray animal
to refuse to surrender such animal to a County Animal Control Warden upon
demand.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.28 APPREHENSION OF DOGS.
   It shall be the duty of the County Animal Control Officer to apprehend any
dog found running at large.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.29 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
   It shall be the duty of the County Animal Control Officer to impound in an
animal control center in the county any animal over which possession is
obtained under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.30 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
   When any animal has been impounded in a county animal control center, the
Animal Control Officer shall give written notice to the owner, if known, at
such owner’s last known address.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.31 REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS.
   The owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this subchapter
may redeem such animal upon complying with the following conditions:
   (1)   Presenting proof of current registration and vaccination of the
animal;
   (2)   Obtaining and paying for the registration and vaccination of the
animal, if required; and
   (3)   Paying for the boarding and care of the animal.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.32 DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS.
   The County Animal Control Officer may dispose of an impounded animal not
redeemed, no sooner than seven days after mailing notice to the owner or after
determining that the owner cannot be identified, by either:
   (1)   Placing the animal in an adoptive home;
   (2)   Selling the animal; or
   (3)   Destroying the animal in a humane manner.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.33 ADOPTION OF ANIMALS.
   Any person desiring to adopt an animal offered for adoption by the County
Animal Control Officer may do so upon such conditions and after the payment of
such expenses as the Animal Control Officer’s rules and regulations require.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.34 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   (1)   The County Animal Control Officer shall maintain records of all
animals apprehended and/or impounded.
   (2)   Such records shall be maintained for at least one year following
disposal of each animal and shall contain at least the following information:
      (A)   A complex description of the animal, including at least color,
size, sex, and a description of any tags;
      (B)   The manner and date of acquisition of the animal;
      (C)   The manner and date of disposal of the animal;
      (D)   The name and address of the person adopting or purchasing the
animal;
      (E)   A record of all fees and/or fines received in relation to the
animal; and
      (F)   The reason for disposal of the animal and the manner used.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.35 ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The County Animal Control Officer shall have the authority to enter upon
private property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose
of carrying out the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.36 EDUCATION.
   The County Animal Control Officer shall promote and assist in programs for
education in responsible pet ownership in cooperation with civic groups,
professional organizations, and schools in the county.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.37 ENFORCEMENT.
   Actions to recover penalties for violations may be instituted by serving a
notice of violation upon the owner by the County Animal Control Officer or
Sheriff.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.38 SERVICE.
   Service of a notice of violation may be made by the Animal Control Officer
or the Sheriff by leaving a copy of the notice with the owner of the animal, or
by notice in a sealed envelope with postage fully prepaid and addressed to the
owner at his or her usual place of abode.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.39 DISPOSITION OF FEES AND FINES.
   Any fees and fines received under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
paid over to the Town Clerk.
(Ord. passed - -)
Sec. 90.40 KEEPING OF DOGS WITHIN THE TOWN LIMITS.
   All dogs, regardless of the breed or size of the animal, shall be ruled
under the conditions of this subchapter.
   (1)   There shall be a limit on the number of dogs per household. This limit
shall be set at two dogs per household.
   (2)   No dog runs or kennels shall be allowed to be in front of any
property.
   (3)   No dogs shall be leashed or tied in a manner that will allow the
animal to come within 15 feet of the public right-of-way, sidewalk, or
alleyway.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.41 KEEPING OF VICIOUS DOGS.
   (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
applies unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   Any dog that, when unprovoked, bites or attacks a human being or
other animal on either public or private property shall be deemed VICIOUS.
      (2)   Any dog with a known, documented propensity, tendency, or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury, or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals.
      (3)   Any dog which has been found to be a dangerous dog on two separate
occasions in this or any other jurisdiction, provided that such finding was not
based solely upon the breed of the dog.
      (4)   Any dog that has been found to be a VICIOUS DOG in any other
jurisdiction.
      (5)   No dog shall be deemed a VICIOUS DOG if it bites, attacks, or
menaces a trespasser on the property of its owner, or harms or menaces anyone
who has tormented or abused it, or is performing in the line of duty as a
professionally trained dog for law enforcement.
   (2)   Requirements for keeping dogs declared vicious.
      (A)   Any person owning or keeping a dog declared vicious must be in
compliance with the requirements of this section within 14 days of receipt of
notification of the declaration or within 14 days of the receipt of a decision
of an appeal upholding the vicious dog declaration. Any failure to comply with
the requirements of this section pertaining to the keeping of dog declared
vicious shall result in the impoundment of the dog and the dog being subject to
euthanasia. Failure to comply with this section may also result in fines, fees,
and court costs being assessed against the owner. Each failure to comply with a
provision of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Each day an
owner fails to comply with a provision of this section shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (B)   It shall be illegal for an owner or keeper of a vicious dog to
sell, foster, or give away the dog.
      (C)   The owner of a dog declared vicious shall contact the town law
enforcement chairperson within 14 days of receipt of the declaration, or within
14 days of the receipt of a decision of an appeal upholding the vicious dog
declaration, and arrange for an inspection of the premises where the dog
subject to said declaration is kept. It shall be illegal for any person to keep
or maintain any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is
at all times kept in an enclosure, as defined in this section.
      (D)   (1)   The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of an
enclosure are if it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary
care for the vicious dog or to comply with the order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. When taken out of the enclosure, said vicious dog must be
securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of at
least 300 pounds and not exceeding three feet in length, and shall be under the
direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the vicious dog.
         (2)   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is
not confined in an enclosure shall be impounded and may be subject to
euthanasia.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Liability of owner of vicious dog for civil damages, see 510 ILCS 5/16-16
Sec. 90.42 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK WITHIN THE TOWN LIMITS.
   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      LIVESTOCK. Swine, bovine, equine, goat, llamas, ostrich, and other
herding type animals.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for the keeping of livestock within the town
limits, with the following exceptions: Any one residence will be allowed to
keep poultry with the limit of only six hens. No roosters will be allowed
within the town limits.
   (3)   (A)   Any persons keeping poultry must obtain a permit from the town.
Animals must be provided with adequate housing, houses, hutched pans, or other
enclosures wherein animals are kept shall have solid flooring for cleaning
purposes.
      (B)   Coops must be a minimum of 50 feet from any dwelling on adjacent
lots.
      (C)   Birds must be kept securely in an enclosed yard or pen at all
times.
      (D)   Poultry are permitted as pets for eggs. Animals cannot be kept for
the use of slaughter.
   (4)   Generally, it shall be unlawful for any person having authority to
control the use of any pen, shed, or stall for the keeping of poultry to become
unsanitary or inhumane for animals to be kept.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see Sec.
90.99
Sec. 90.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of Sec.
90.01 to
90.07 shall be fined in accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (2)   Any person violating any provision of Sec.
90.20 to
90.42 shall be fined $100 for a first or second offense. Said fine may be paid
to the Town Clerk. For a third or subsequent offense, payment may not be made
to the Town Clerk, but must instead be determined by the Circuit Court, and
that fine shall not be less than $150 nor more than $200 for each offense.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES
Section
Nuisances Generally
   
91.01   Policy
   
91.02   Nuisances declared
   
91.03   Other nuisances
   
91.04   Abatement of public nuisances
   
91.05   Abandoned motor vehicles
   
91.06   Destruction of weeds
   
91.07   Burning of yard waste
   
91.08   Buildings and structures
   
91.09   Barking dogs; animal noise
   
91.10   Unwholesome food
   
91.11   Sanitary regulations
   
91.12   Watercourses
   
91.13   Spitting
   
91.14   Dense smoke
Plants and Weeds
   
91.25   Weeds declared a nuisance
   
91.26   Height
   
91.27   Barberry bushes
   
91.28   Removal, notice
   
91.29   Abatement
   
91.30   Lien
   
91.31   Foreclosure of lien
Graffiti
   
91.45   Intent and purpose
   
91.46   Definition; prohibition
   
91.47   Abatement procedure
   
91.48   Right of entry
Dangerous Buildings
   
91.60   Definition
   
91.61   Prohibition
   
91.62   Abatement
   
91.63   Fire limits
   
91.99   Penalty
NUISANCES GENERALLY
Sec. 91.01 POLICY.
   (1)   Authority. Corporate authorities by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-5.
   (2)   Policy statement. It is the policy of the Board of Trustees to ensure
quality of life issues for the community.
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008)
Sec. 91.02 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE.
      (A)   Any business, establishment, building, or premises, or part
thereof, within the town limits which is detrimental or injurious to the public
health or comfort of persons in the vicinity thereof.
      (B)   Any stable or place in which swine, cattle, or other animals are
kept within the town limits which emits offensive odors or becomes dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health, safety, moral, comfort, and welfare, and all
such acts or omissions are hereby declared NUISANCES. The health officer of the
town, or county, or state, working in conjunction with the town, shall have the
power to abate the NUISANCES.
      (C)   Any building or part thereof within the town which is in danger of
falling or otherwise in such condition as to be unsafe for persons passing
under or near the same, or residing adjacent or near thereto, or which
endangers any property contiguous or near thereto.
      (D)   Any scaffolding or other structure used in the erection or repair
of any building which is not secure and sufficiently wide to ensure the safety
of persons working thereon or passing thereunder.
      (E)   Any privy, cesspool, or water closet kept or permitted to remain in
such a condition as to become offensive or dangerous to any person in the
vicinity thereof.
      (F)   The establishment or maintenance of any cemetery or burial lot
within the town limits; provided however, that this division (F) shall not
apply to any cemetery or burial lot heretofore established by any person or to
the establishment of any cemetery by the town.
      (G)   The deposit of any rubbish, ashes, garbage, dead animals, or other
filth, refuse, or offensive matter upon any street, sidewalk, alley, public
ground, watercourse, railway right-of-way, or upon private property of any
person within the town.
      (H)   Permitting dense smoke or dust or soot to issue or emit from any
machine or building within the town limits.
      (I)   Any obstructions or encroachment upon public highways, private
ways, or streets and alleys.
      (J)   Any weeds, such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur,
sweet clover, or other weeds or tall grasses, growing on any lot, block, or
parcel of land situated along any street in the town or in the space between
the curb line and the sidewalk line of any street or alley.
      (K)   Maintaining, storing, or otherwise keeping property of any kind or
nature in such physical condition as to be considered within the commonly
accepted term JUNK upon public or private property in such a manner as to be
exposed to the view of any neighbor or other person within the immediate
vicinity of the place where said JUNK is stored or maintained. The term JUNK
shall include, but not exclusively, motor or other vehicles from which parts
have been removed, or motor or other vehicles brought upon such property with
the intent to remove parts for the repair of other vehicles, whether motorized
or not, which are in such a state of disrepair as to be unfit for the purposes
for which they were originally intended.
      (L)   Parking or storing junk vehicles or disabled vehicles, including
trailers and parts for vehicles or trailers unless so licensed to do same.
Accumulations of inoperative junked or abandoned vehicles or machinery or any
other material which may create an UNATTRACTIVE NUISANCE or danger to children,
or to the public at large, whether on public or private property, unless same
is kept within a building or garage or completely fenced away from public view,
and protected from the possibility of access by children.
      (M)   Parking, maintaining, or storing commercial type vehicle, which may
create an unattractive nuisance or danger to children, or to the public at
large on public or private property in areas zoned as residential shall be
illegal. COMMERCIAL TYPE VEHICLE shall be defined as any oversized vehicle such
as semi-tractor trailer, charter/school bus, tractor backhoe/end loader, or
vehicle used in a commercial setting as to haul, load, or transport goods.
      (N)   The maintenance, storing, or otherwise keeping of rubber tires in
such a manner as the said tires will retain or allow for the pooling of water,
shall be deemed a PUBLIC NUISANCE and considered unlawful.
      (O)   The maintaining, storing, or keeping of firewood in a manner, which
will allow the nesting or shelter of rodents or other undesirable animals,
shall be deemed a NUISANCE, and considered unlawful.
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.03 OTHER NUISANCES.
   All nuisances not defined by or provided for in this subchapter, but which
are declared to be nuisances by the statutes of the state, are hereby declared
to be nuisances and may be proceeded against under the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008)
Sec. 91.04 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   Whenever a complaint is made to the President of the Board of Trustees that
a public nuisance exists or has existed within the town limits, the President
or official designee shall promptly inspect or cause to be inspected the
premises and shall make a written report of the findings to the Board of
Trustees. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer may, but need not, cause
photographs to be made of the premises and may file the same in the office of
the Town Clerk so as to evidence the nature and character of the nuisance.
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008)
Sec. 91.05 ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ABANDONED VEHICLE. Any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven its condition, or any vehicle that has not
been moved for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted. Any
vehicle that is not currently licensed or registered or which does not display
the same, or which is in a state of disrepair or is incapable of being driven
in its condition, is an ABANDONED VEHICLE. A NUISANCE VEHICLE is defined below
as an ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      ANTIQUE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle or other vehicle 25 years or age or
older.
      HIGHWAY. Any street, alley, or public way within the limits of the town.
      NUISANCE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle which is otherwise or elsewhere
defined in this chapter as a public nuisance affecting health, a public
nuisance offending morals and decency, a public nuisance affecting peace and
safety, or otherwise in this chapter defined as a public nuisance.
   (2)   Abandoning vehicle; maintaining nuisance vehicle. The abandonment of a
motor vehicle or other vehicle, or keeping or possessing of a nuisance vehicle,
is unlawful and subject to penalties as set forth herein.
      (A)   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or the keeping or possessing of
a nuisance vehicle, or any part thereof, on any highway in the town limits is
unlawful and is subject to the penalties set forth herein.
      (B)   The maintenance, keeping, or possessing of a nuisance vehicle or
other vehicle, or any part thereof, on public or private property, other than a
highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in the corporate town limits
is unlawful. A motor vehicle or other vehicle, or any part thereof, which is
defined as a nuisance vehicle, and which is on private property, may be
authorized for removal by or upon the order of the President of the Board of
Trustees as set forth below.
      (C)   The maintenance, keeping, or possessing of an abandoned vehicle or
other vehicle, or any part thereof, on public or private property, other than a
highway, in view of the general public, anywhere within the town limits is
unlawful. A motor vehicle or other vehicle, or any part thereof, which is an
abandoned vehicle, and which is on private property, may be authorized for
removal by or upon the order of the President of the Board of Trustees as set
forth in division (4) below.
      (D)   The maintenance, keeping, or possessing of a commercial type
vehicle on public or private property in areas zoned as residential shall be
unlawful.
   (3)   Notice to town. It shall be the duty of any person or company which
comes into the possession, temporary or otherwise, of any abandoned, lost,
stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or a nuisance vehicle within the corporate
limits of the town, to immediately notify the President of the Board of
Trustees. Upon receipt of such notification, the Board President shall
authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of the abandoned,
lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor vehicle or nuisance vehicle. The towing
service shall safely keep the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record
of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the owner, or any other person
legally entitled to possession thereof, or until it is otherwise disposed of as
provided in this section.
   (4)   Removal of vehicles.
      (A)   Abandoned on highway ten hours or more. When a motor vehicle or
other vehicle is abandoned on a highway in the corporate limits of the town ten
hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by order of
the President of the Board of Trustees.
      (B)   Vehicle creating traffic hazard. When abandoned, unattended,
wrecked, burned, or partially dismantled motor vehicle is creating a traffic
hazard because of its position in relation to a highway or its physical
appearance is causing the impeding of traffic, its removal from the highway by
a towing service may be authorized by order of the President of the Board of
Trustees.
      (C)   Vehicle on private property.
   (1)   When a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle or a nuisance vehicle on
private property within the town limits, the President of the Board of
Trustees, or authorized Town Board of Trustees members or authorized employee
of the town, shall notify the owners or possessors of the said vehicles by
mailing, general delivery, to the address at which the vehicle is located, a
notice advising that the vehicle is considered an abandoned vehicle or a
nuisance vehicle as the case may be, and that the same should be removed within
a seven-day period of time and that if same is not done, that vehicle will be
towed, held for seven days, then sold as abandoned property with the proceeds
going to pay the towing, storage, and the balance to the Town Treasury. In
addition, the said town designee may cause a sticker to be affixed to the
windshield or window or other part of the vehicle, which sticker shall give
similar notice and shall bear the date upon which same is posted. If said
vehicle has not been, within the seven- day period, removed, placed in a
building, or fenced as to remove same from public view and possible access, or
otherwise cease being an abandoned vehicle or nuisance vehicle, then in such
event, the town or its designees or agents or towing services designated by the
town may come upon that private or public property for purposes of towing
vehicle, and may seek aid of law enforcement personnel if same should be
necessary or convenient, and may tow and remove said vehicle and give
possession of same to a towing service or junk or scrap dealer. The towing
service or junk or scrap dealer shall have a lien for the cost of his or her
towing and for the cost of storing the vehicle. If, at the end of seven days
after towing, the lawful owner has not claimed possession of the vehicle and
paid all towing and storage charges therefor, the said vehicle may be sold as
junk or scrap, as abandoned property, and the failure to claim ownership of
said vehicle within the period of time set forth in this division (4)(C) shall
be deemed conclusive evidence that the vehicle has been abandoned.
   (2)   Neither the town, any towing service, nor junk dealer shall have any
obligation or duty to make a search for the registered owner or other legally
entitled owner of said vehicle unless the same shall have an apparent value in
excess of $1,000, in which event the President of the Board of Trustees shall
request the County Sheriff’s Department to make a search through the Secretary
of State and the State Police records to determine whether the owner of the
vehicle can be readily ascertained. In the event such search reveals the owner,
a notice shall be mailed to the said owner by general delivery mail to the
address revealed, notifying the owner that the vehicle has been determined to
be an abandoned or nuisance vehicle, that said vehicle has been towed, and that
same will be sold for scrap on a date certain, not less than seven days from
the said letter, and said notice shall further notify the owner that he or she
may claim said vehicle by tendering all costs of storage and towing, provided
proof of ownership is established.
   (5)   Disposition of sale proceeds. Any sale proceeds of vehicles in excess
of the towing and storage charges therefor shall be deposited in the Town
Treasury.
   (6)   Liability of officers. Any town officer, towing service owner,
operator, or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in
any action brought by the registered owner, former registered owner, or his or
her legal representative, or any other person legally entitled to the
possession of a motor vehicle or the vehicle when the vehicle was processed and
sold or disposed of, as provided by this section.
   (7)   Variance. Variances for professional/commercial equipment used on a
daily basis and not held with the intent to store said equipment in a
residential area may be obtained through the Municipal Clerk’s office. This
variance will include all provisions for maintaining a commercial vehicle
within a residential area. The requestor of this variance shall agree to abide
by the provisions set forth by the Board of Trustees in order to maintain a
safe and healthy environment.
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.06 DESTRUCTION OF WEEDS.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass, or other
plants as defined in this code to grow to a height exceeding eight inches
anywhere in the town. Such a code violation shall be deemed a nuisance.
   (2)   The owner of any premises upon which weeds or tall grasses, as defined
in this code, may be found shall be required to destroy the weeds or pay for
their destruction. The Board of Trustees, or any law enforcement officer or
Health Officer, may give the owner or occupant of such premises a notice in
writing of the existence of such nuisance, and if the weeds on such premises
are not destroyed or tall grasses cut to reasonable length by the owner or
occupant within five days after the delivery of this notice, the weeds shall be
destroyed or grasses cut by the town at the expense of the owner, and expense
shall be paid to the town by the occupant or owner of the property. This
expense shall be considered a municipal service and included in the municipal
service fee. Any unpaid municipal service bills may cause the discontinuation
of the municipal service agreement.
   (3)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
WEEDS. Shall include, but not be limited to: burdock, rag weed, wild carrot,
poison ivy, wild mustard, rough pig weed, jimson, blue vervain, common milk
weed, thistle, cocklebur, lambsquarter, wild lettuce, curled dock, smartweeds
(all varieties), poison hemlock, wild hemp, and Johnson grass, including all
other NOXIOUS WEEDS as defined by the statutes of the state.
   (4)   If the owner or occupant does not abate the nuisance within five days,
the town shall proceed to abate the nuisance and bill the owner as a municipal
service charge at a rate set forth by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.07 BURNING OF YARD WASTE.
   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      YARD WASTE. Dry leaves, sticks, wood, and dry grass/weeds. No
construction materials will be considered as YARD WASTE or allowed.
   (2)   (A)   All fires must be contained within a three to four foot
diameter. No fires/burning will be allowed to emit dense smoke.
      (B)   The burning of landscape waste will be allowed only between sunrise
and sunset. Fires must be extinguished by dusk.
      (C)   Recreational fires will be allowed in safe areas and will be
extinguished by 1:00 a.m.
      (D)   Whenever burning, citizens are asked to take into consideration
their surroundings, and the wind conditions, be a good citizen and courteous to
their neighbor.
      (E)   All noncompliant fires/burning will be extinguished at the resident
or property owner’s expense.
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.08 BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (1)   Definition. All buildings or structures which have any or all of the
following defects shall be deemed DANGEROUS AND UNSAFE:
      (A)   Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members
list, lean, or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base;
      (B)   Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 31% or more of
damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50% of damage or
deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering;
      (C)   Those which have been damaged by fire, wind, or other causes so far
as to become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and
welfare of the occupants or the citizens of the community;
      (D)   Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the necessities essential to
decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or likely to cause
sickness or disease, so as to cause injury to health, morals, safety, or
general welfare of those living therein;
      (E)   Those having inadequate facilities for egress in the case of fire
or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or
other means of access;
      (F)   Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may
fall, injuring members of the public or the property;
      (G)   Those having light, air, and sanitation facilities which are
inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of human
beings who live or may live therein;
      (H)   Those buildings existing in violation of any provisions of the
building code of this community or any provision of the fire prevention code,
or any other ordinances of the town;
      (I)   Those vacant buildings with unguarded openings shall be deemed to
constitute a fire hazard and to be unsafe within the provisions of this code;
and/or
      (J)   Those buildings which are incomplete or abandoned.
   (2)   Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition.
      (A)   The following standards shall be followed in substance by an
approved building inspector in ordering repair, vacation, or demolition.
         (1)   If the dangerous and unsafe building is in such condition as to
make it dangerous to the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of its
occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
         (2)   If the dangerous and unsafe building can reasonably be repaired
so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this code, it
shall be ordered repaired.
         (3)   In any case where a dangerous and unsafe building is 50% damaged
or decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be
demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it
will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this code, it shall be
demolished. In all cases where a dangerous and unsafe building is a fire hazard
existing or erected in violation of the terms of this code, or any ordinance of
the community or statute of the state, it shall be demolished.
      (B)   All dangerous and unsafe buildings within the terms of this section
are hereby declared to be public nuisance and shall be repaired, vacated, or
demolished as provided in this division (2).
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.09 BARKING DOGS; ANIMAL NOISE.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a dog or other animals to
make loud or disturbing noises for extended periods of time. Any dog or animal
that barks or makes disturbing noises continuously or intermittently for more
than 30 minutes shall be deemed a nuisance.
   (2)   It shall also be unlawful to allow animals to defecate on public
properties within the town limits. Animal owners shall be responsible to
maintain animals on a leash at all times. Any animal waste shall not be left on
public property or citizen’s private property.
   (3)   Official complaints identifying the nuisance must be registered with
the Municipal Clerk and signed by the petitioner.
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.10 UNWHOLESOME FOOD.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome or polluted
food of any kind in the town.
(Ord. 17.3, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.11 SANITARY REGULATIONS.
   All premises used for the sale or storage of food or drink intended for
human consumption shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition under the
guidelines of the State Department of Public Health Safety and Sanitation Code.
(Ord. 17.3, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.12 WATERCOURSES.
   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person to obstruct or pollute
any watercourse or source of water supply in the town.
(Ord. 17.3, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.13 SPITTING.
   It shall be unlawful to spit or expectorate on any public sidewalk or other
public place, or on the floor or wall of any store, theater, hall, public
vehicle, or other place frequented by the public or to which the public is
invited.
(Ord. 17.3, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.14 DENSE SMOKE.
   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of dense smoke.
(Ord. 17.3, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
PLANTS AND WEEDS
Sec. 91.25 WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   Any weeds, such as jimson, burdock, giant ragweed, common ragweed,
cocklebur, blue vervain, common milkweed, wild carrots, poison ivy, wild
mustard, rust pigweed, lambsquarter, wild lettuce, curled dock, smart weed (all
varieties), poison hemlock, and wild hemp, or other weeds of a like kind, found
growing in any lot or tract of land in the town are hereby declared to be a
nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain
in any such place.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.4.1) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.26 HEIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass, or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches anywhere in the town. Any such plants or weeds exceeding
such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.4.2) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.27 BARBERRY BUSHES.
   It shall be a nuisance and unlawful to plant or permit the growth of the
bush of the species of tall, common, or European barberry, further known as
Barberis Vulgaris, or its horticultural varieties, within the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.4.3) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.28 REMOVAL, NOTICE.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Police to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are
permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this subchapter and to
demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten days.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.4.4) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.29 ABATEMENT.
   If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten days, the
town may proceed to abate such nuisance, keeping an account of the expense of
the abatement, and such expense shall be charged to and paid by such owner or
occupant.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.4.5)
Sec. 91.30 LIEN.
   Charges for such weed removal shall be a lien upon the premises. Whenever a
bill for such charges remains unpaid for 60 days after it has been rendered,
the Clerk may file with the Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This
statement shall contain a legal description of the premises, the expenses and
costs incurred and the date the weeds were cut, and a notice that the town
claims a lien for this amount. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises if his or her address is known. Provided, however, that
failure of the Clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect the right to
foreclose the line for such charges as provided in Sec.
91.31.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.4.6)
Sec. 91.31 FORECLOSURE OF LIEN.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid weed cutting charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay
the charges after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the name of the town.
The Town Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings, in the name of the town, in any court having jurisdiction over
such matter, against any property for which such bill has remained unpaid 60
days after it has been rendered.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.4.7)
GRAFFITI
Sec. 91.45 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   In order to reduce blight and deterioration, and to protect the public
health and safety, within the town, it is the purpose and intent of this
subchapter to provide a procedure for the removal of graffiti from surfaces on
any public or private property when such graffiti is visible from a public
street, public alley, or other public right-of-way of the town.
(Ord. 466, passed 9-14-2017)
Sec. 91.46 DEFINITION; PROHIBITION.
   (1)   Definition. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definition applies unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      GRAFFITI.
      (1)   Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, picture, or design that
is sprayed, marked, posted, pasted, or otherwise affixed, drawn, or painted on
any surface of public or private property.
      (2)   GRAFFITI shall not be defined as a sign or art work lawfully
erected and maintained as required by other ordinances.
   (2)   Prohibition.
      (A)   It is unlawful for any person to place graffiti upon any public or
private property within the town.
      (B)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain graffiti that has been
placed upon, or allow graffiti to remain upon, any surface within that person’s
control, possession, or ownership when the graffiti is visible from a public
street, public alley, other public right-of-way, and other public property.
      (C)   Graffiti prohibited under this subchapter is hereby declared a
public nuisance.
(Ord. 466, passed 9-14-2017) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.47 ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   Graffiti nuisances shall be proceeded against as follows.
   (1)   Upon finding a graffiti nuisance on private property, the Board of
Trustees shall give notice to the property owner as provided in this
subchapter. If the condition has not been abated within the time required, the
town is authorized to abate the nuisance.
   (2)   The property owner shall be responsible for the removal of graffiti.
   (3)   If the owner or person in control of such property is a nonresident of
the town and has no business address in the town, such notice shall be posted
and deemed served at the end of such.
   (4)   All graffiti nuisances shall be abated within 72 hours after
notification.
   (5)   All graffiti nuisances abated by the town shall be done at the expense
of the property owner. All expenses incurred shall be charged on the municipal
service bill to such property.
(Ord. 466, passed 9-14-2017) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.48 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Any person employed, or contracted with, for the abatement of a nuisance as
provided for in this subchapter, and any agent or employee of such person,
shall have the right of entry for the abatement purpose upon any premises. Any
interference with such entry shall be considered a violation of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 466, passed 9-14-2017) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Sec. 91.60 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
      (A)   Any building, shed, fence, or other human-made structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which may cause or
aid in the spread of disease, or injury to the health of the occupants of it or
neighboring structures.
      (B)   Any building, shed, fence, or other human-made structure which,
because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause,
is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
      (C)   Any building, shed, fence, or other human-made structure which, by
reason of faulty construction or other cause, is liable to cause injury or
damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such structure.
      (D)   Any building, shed, fence, or other human-made structure which,
because of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows, is available
to and frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful
occupants of such structure. Any such DANGEROUS BUILDING in the town is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.2.1)
Sec. 91.61 PROHIBITION.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the town, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a
dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit the same to be
occupied while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.2.2) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.62 ABATEMENT.
   (1)   Whenever the Town Police shall be of the opinion that any building or
structure in the town is a dangerous building, he or she shall file a written
statement to this effect with the Town Clerk. The Clerk shall thereupon cause
written notice to be served upon the owner thereof, and upon the occupant
thereof, if any, by registered mail or by personal service. Such notice shall
state that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition, and
that such dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or
altering the building or by demolishing it, and that the condition must be
remedied at once.
   (2)   Such notice may be in the following form:
 
To ___________ (owner-occupant of such premises) or the premises known and
described as ________________________________________,
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises above-mentioned
has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after inspection by the
Town Police’s causes for this decision are (here insert facts as to the dangerous
condition).
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the town
will proceed to do so.
 
   (3)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith or taken
an appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a
dangerous building exists, within ten days from the time when this notice is
served upon such person by personal service or registered mail, the Town Police
may, upon orders of the Mayor and Board of Trustees, proceed to remedy the
condition or demolish the dangerous building.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.2.3)
Sec. 91.63 FIRE LIMITS.
   (1) (A)Any frame building or structure within the fire limits of the town
are hereinbefore prescribed by ordinance, which has or may be damaged by fire,
decay, or other causes to the extent of 50% of its value, shall be torn down
and removed, or rebuilt with nonflammable walls.
      (B)   Upon written notice by the Town Police to the effect that such
building has been so damaged, filed with the Clerk, said Clerk shall notify the
Mayor and Board of Trustees of the receipt of such notice. The Mayor and Board
of Trustees shall then appoint three persons to determine whether or not such
building or structure has been damaged to the extent of 50% of its value.
      (C)   A copy of the notice of the appointment of this board of three
persons to determine the damage shall be served upon the owner of the premises
by personal service or by registered mail at his or her last known address.
   (2)   Such notice shall be substantially the following form:
 
To ___________, you are hereby notified that the Mayor and Board of Trustees
has determined that the building owned by you at _________ located within the
fire limits of the town has been damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise to the
extent of 50% of its value and that a board of three persons has been appointed
to verify this finding, which board will hold its first meeting in the Town
Hall on the ___ day of _____ at the hour of _____ o’clock, at which time it
will determine whether or not this finding is correct.
If this finding is verified by the board, you must tear down and remove the
said building, or rebuild it with nonflammable walls.
 
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.2.4) Penalty, see Sec.
91.99
Sec. 91.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec. 10.99 of this code of
ordinances.
   (2)   (A)   (1)   Owners of animals found to be in violation of Sec.
91.09 shall be given an oral warning on the first offense.
         (2)   Owners of animals found to be in violation of Sec.
91.09 shall be given a written warning on the second offense.
         (3)   Owners of animals found to be in violation of Sec.
91.09 shall be fined for the third offense or more.
         (4)   Fines shall be determined by division (2)(B) below.
      (B)   Violations or multiple violations of Sec.
91.01 to
91.09 may result in fines of not less than $50 and not more than $500.
   (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of Sec.
91.25 to
91.31 shall be fined in accordance with Sec.
10.99, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.4.8)
   (4)   (A)   Any person or persons found to be committing the act of causing
graffiti on municipal or private property in violation of Sec.
91.45 to
91.48 shall be prosecuted for a criminal offense.
      (B)   Violations of multiple violations of Sec.
91.45 to
91.48 may result in fines of not less than $50 and not more than $500.
   (5)   Any person violating any provisions of Sec.
91.60 to
91.63, or permitting any dangerous building, or any building or structure to
remain in a dangerous condition, or to remain in the fire limits, without
remodeling as provided for in Sec.
91.62, after it has been damaged to the extent of 50% of its value, shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.2.5)
(Ord. 17.2, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. 466, passed 9-14-2017)
CHAPTER 92: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
92.01   George Walters Memorial Park
   
92.02   Town Community Building
   
92.03   Parks rules and regulations
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Sec. 92.01 GEORGE WALTERS MEMORIAL PARK.
   The Mayor and Board of Trustees have created the George Walters Memorial
Park.
(Res. 474, passed 9-27-2018)
Sec. 92.02 TOWN COMMUNITY BUILDING.
   The town building at 326 East Locust Street be used as a community center
and be regulated by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 443, passed 3-24-2016)
Sec. 92.03 PARKS RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (1)   Park rules and regulations:
      (A)   No profanity or music containing profanity;
      (B)   No alcohol or controlled substance;
      (C)   No littering;
      (D)   No open fires;
      (E)   No loud music;
      (F)   No firearms;
      (G)   No bullying or fighting;
      (H)   No fireworks;
      (I)   No glass containers;
      (J)   No sitting on park tabletops;
      (K)   No bicycles on walks or courts;
      (L)   All pets must be on a leash;
      (M)   All pet owners must clean up after pets;
      (N)   Autos and golf carts in designated parking areas only;
      (O)   Children under eight years of age must be accompanied by an adult;
      (P)   No smoking or use of tobacco under pavilion or within 15 feet of
playground equipment;
      (Q)   Damaging public property will result in legal action;
      (R)   No swimming; and
      (S)   No boating.
   (2)   Park hours: 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
   (3)   Special events can be scheduled through the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 475, passed 9-27-2018) Penalty, see Sec.
92.99
Sec. 92.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec.
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (2)   Failure to comply with the park rules and regulations in Sec.
92.03 will result in penalty fines and no trespass warrants.
(Ord. 475, passed 9-27-2018)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL PERMIT AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
      
111.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS
      
113.   ALCOHOL
      
114.   LODGING
      
115.   CANNABIS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PERMIT AND LICENSING REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
110.01   Applications
   
110.02   Person subject to license
   
110.03   Forms
   
110.04   Signatures
   
110.05   License year
   
110.06   Building and premises
   
110.07   Change of location
   
110.08   Nuisances
   
110.09   Inspections
   
110.10   Revocation of license
   
110.11   Investigations
   
110.12   Fees
   
110.13   Posting license
 
   
110.99   Penalty
Sec. 110.01 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be
made in writing to the Town Clerk, in the absence of provision to the contrary.
Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license
desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered, and the fee to be
paid, and each application shall contain such additional information as may be
needed for the proper guidance of the town officials in the issuing of the
permit or license applied for.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.1)
Sec. 110.02 PERSON SUBJECT TO LICENSE.
   Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance, operation,
or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging
in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to
the requirement if, by himself or herself, or through an agent, employee, or
partner, he or she holds himself or herself forth as being engaged in the
business or occupation or solicits patronage therefor, actively or passively,
or performs or attempts to perform any part of any such business or occupation
in the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.2) Penalty, see Sec.
110.99
Sec. 110.03 FORMS.
   Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.3)
Sec. 110.04 SIGNATURES.
   Each license or permit shall bear the signatures of the Mayor and the Clerk,
in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.4)
Sec. 110.05 LICENSE YEAR.
   The license year for the town shall begin on May 1 and end on April 30 of
each year.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.5)
Sec. 110.06 BUILDING AND PREMISES.
   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business, and no permit
shall be issued for any thing or act, if the premises and building to be used
for the purpose do not fully comply with the ordinance requirements of the
town. No such license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business
or performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning
ordinance of the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.6)
Sec. 110.07 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted
act, may be changed; provided, that the building and zoning requirements of the
town are complied with.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.7)
Sec. 110.08 NUISANCES.
   No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount
to a nuisance in fact.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.8) Penalty, see Sec.
110.99
Sec. 110.09 INSPECTIONS.
   Whenever inspections of the premises which are used for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or
required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with
any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty
of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to
admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee
of the town who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any
reasonable time that admission is requested. Whenever an analysis of any
commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any
ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of
the licensee of the municipality whose business is governed by such provision
to give to any authorized officer or employee of the town requesting the same
sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon
request. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the Town Mayor
may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any licensed business in
the town who refused to permit any such officer or employee who is authorized
to make such inspection or take such samples to make the inspection, or take an
employee while in the performance of his or her duty in making such inspection.
Provided, that a license shall not be revoked for such cause unless written
demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the
name of the town, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at the time
it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.9) Penalty, see Sec.
110.99
Sec. 110.10 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license or permit for a limited time may be revoked by the Town Mayor at
any time during the life of such license or permit for any violation by the
licensee or permitted of the ordinance provisions relating to the license or
permit, the subject matter of the license or permit, or to the premises
occupied. Such revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.10)
Sec. 110.11 INVESTIGATIONS.
   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances
of the town necessitate inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the Town Clerk shall refer such application to the officer
for making such investigation within 48 hours of the time of such receipt. The
officer in charge of making the investigation or inspection shall make a report
thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten days after receiving the
application or a copy thereof.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.11)
Sec. 110.12 FEES.
   In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefore
is made to the Town Clerk. When an applicant has not engaged in the business
until after the expiration of a part of the current license year, the license
fee shall be prorated by quarters and the fees paid for each quarter or
fraction thereof during which the business has been or will be conducted.
Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall become a part of the
Corporate Fund.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.12)
Sec. 110.13 POSTING LICENSE.
   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
town to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business at all times.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.13) Penalty, see Sec.
110.99
Sec. 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with Sec. 10.99 for each offense, and separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 11.14)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Section
Peddlers
   
111.01   Definition
   
111.02   License required
   
111.03   License prerequisites
   
111.04   License transferability
   
111.05   License revocation
   
111.06   Marking of vehicles
   
111.07   Calling attention to sales by calling out, blowing horns
   
111.08   Exemptions
Solicitors
   
111.20   Requirements
   
111.21   Exemptions
   
111.22   Permits
Transient Merchants
   
111.35   Definition
   
111.36   Compliance
   
111.37   Exemptions
   
111.38   License required; application
   
111.39   License; issuance and fees
   
111.40   License revocation
 
   
111.99   Penalty
PEDDLERS
Sec. 111.01 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
PEDDLER. Every person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange, at
retail, any goods, wares, or merchandise, except milk or cream, traveling from
place to place in, along, and upon the streets, avenues, alleys, or public
places of the town, going from place to place in the town, whether to regular
customers or not.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.1)
Sec. 111.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in business as a peddler without first obtaining a
license so to do.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.2) Penalty, see Sec.
111.99
Sec. 111.03 LICENSE PREREQUISITES.
   The Mayor shall grant licenses required in Sec.
111.02 upon:
   (1)   Registration by the applicant with the Town Clerk;
   (2)   Certification by the Town Clerk to the Mayor that the applicant is of
good moral character; and
   (3)   Payment to the Town Clerk of an annual fee of $25.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.3)
Sec. 111.04 LICENSE TRANSFERABILITY.
   The license required by this subchapter shall not be transferable without
the consent of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.4) Penalty, see Sec.
111.99
Sec. 111.05 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   In addition to any fine, all licenses that may have been issued to any
person under this subchapter may be revoked by the Mayor upon conviction for a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.5)
Sec. 111.06 MARKING OF VEHICLES.
   Every wagon, cart, or other vehicle used by a person licensed under this
subchapter shall be conspicuously and permanently marked with the name of such
person and with the number of his or her license.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.6) Penalty, see Sec.
111.99
Sec. 111.07 CALLING ATTENTION TO SALES BY CALLING OUT, BLOWING HORNS.
   No person, whether he or she has a peddler’s license or not, in going along
the streets, alleys, highways, or public places of the town, shall call out,
cry, or by any device make any noise or blow any horn to call attention to the
sales of any goods, wares, merchandise, or any article or thing whatsoever.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.7) Penalty, see Sec.
111.99
Sec. 111.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not be so construed as to prevent any farmer, fruit or
vine grower and gardener from the right to sell the product of his or her farm,
orchard, vineyard, and garden with the town, in any quantity he or she may
think proper, without obtaining a license therefor; nor shall the same be so
construed as to make it a penal offense for children under the age of 12 years
to peddle apples or other fruit; provided, that they do not occupy a stand; nor
shall it be so construed as to apply to the peddling of newspapers.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.8)
SOLICITORS
Sec. 111.20 REQUIREMENTS.
   (1)   To protect and maintain the public health, safety, and general
welfare, door-to-door solicitation and canvassing is regulated by the town. The
town prohibits any person or organization from conducting solicitations and
canvassing of residences without a permit. Permits shall be obtained from the
Town Clerk during regular business hours. It shall be a violation of this
subchapter to engage in solicitation and canvassing without a permit.
   (2)   Parties engaging in door-to-door solicitation must carry their permit
while they solicit door-to- door. The solicitation permit shall be presented to
citizens upon request. Copies of valid permits will be maintained by the Town
Clerk.
   (3)   No solicitation or canvassing shall be allowed before 9:00 a.m. or
after 5:00 p.m. Violations of this subchapter should be reported as quickly as
possible to the Town Hall. No solicitations or canvassing shall be allowed
where no solicitation signs are posted.
(Ord. 457, passed 2-9-2017) Penalty, see Sec. 111.99
Sec. 111.21 EXEMPTIONS.
   These regulations do not apply to: recognized youth organization, including
school sponsored clubs; canvassing conducted by political candidates for public
office, their workers, or representatives from political parties; persons who
solicit for or on behalf of religious organizations, or in pursuit of religious
beliefs and activities. A permit is not required for any solicitation or
canvassing activity sponsored or conducted by the town or its departments and
committees, nor by any government agency in the town, such as the library or
Fire Department.
(Ord. 457, passed 2-9-2017)
Sec. 111.22 PERMITS.
   All permits issued by the town shall require a copy of a picture
identification of all solicitors, name, address, and current phone number of
company or organization. A $25 permit fee must be submitted at the time of
request. Permits shall include rules of this subchapter.
(Ord. 457, passed 2-9-2017)
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS
Sec. 111.35 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition applies unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person engaged temporarily in the retail sale of goods,
wares, or merchandise within the town, who for the purpose of conducting such
business, rents or leases any room, building, hotel, rooming house, structure,
or lot of any kind, regardless of whether such goods, wares, or merchandise are
peddled from house to house, place to place, or sold from the room, building,
hotel, rooming house, structure, or lot.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.3.1)
Sec. 111.36 COMPLIANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a transient
merchant, as defined by this subchapter, within the town until the provisions
of this subchapter have been complied with.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.3.2) Penalty, see Sec.
111.99
Sec. 111.37 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to sales made to dealers
by commercial travelers or selling agents in usual course of business.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.3.3)
Sec. 111.38 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring to engage in business as a transient merchant within the
town shall make a sworn application, in writing, at least seven days before
such applicant shall be authorized to begin such business. Such application
shall state the business, the name and address of the applicant, the place
where such business is to be conducted, the kind of goods to be sold, and the
length of time for which the license is desired.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.3.4) Penalty, see Sec.
111.99
Sec. 111.39 LICENSE; ISSUANCE AND FEES.
   (1)   Upon the filing of the application and the approval thereof, a license
shall be issued by the Mayor to such applicant upon payment of the following
fee: $10 for one year. All such license fees must be paid in advance.
   (2)   If any such licensee desires to continue in business after the
expiration of such license, a new license must be secured in the same manner
and upon the same terms as the original license.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.3.5)
Sec. 111.40 LICENSE REVOCATION.
   The Mayor shall have the right to revoke the license of a transient merchant
if he or she shall be satisfied that the licensee is not responsible, or has
made false representation or statements in the application for such license.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.3.6)
Sec. 111.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec.
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (2)   Any person violating any of the provisions of Sec.
111.01 to
111.08 shall be fined in accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense, and separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.1.9)
   (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of Sec.
111.35 to
111.40 shall be fined in accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 14.3.7)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
112.01   Application of chapter
   
112.02   Street shows
   
112.03   Order, crowding
   
112.04   Inspections
   
112.05   Exhibition of criminals
   
112.06   Riots
   
112.07   Exit lights
 
   
112.99   Penalty
Sec. 112.01 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public shows, theatricals,
circuses, and other amusements in the town, whether specifically licensed in
another article of this code or not.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12.1)
Sec. 112.02 STREET SHOWS.
   No permit for any circus, exhibition, show, or other amusement to be given
on any public street or sidewalk or in such a place that the only main
accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public place, shall
be issued except on order of the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12.2)
Sec. 112.03 ORDER, CROWDING.
   The audience of any amusement, show, or theatrical must be orderly and quiet
at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person attending any such
amusement, show, or theatrical to create a disturbance in the audience. It
shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any amusement or
show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other risks.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12.3) Penalty, see Sec.
112.99
Sec. 112.04 INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Mayor to see that every exhibition,
amusement, theatrical, or other public show is inspected to ensure conformity
with the provisions concerning such amusements.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12.4)
Sec. 112.05 EXHIBITION OF CRIMINALS.
   It shall be unlawful to exhibit any criminal or the body of any criminal or
to exhibit any person who shall be notorious because of the commission of a
crime, in any theatrical, exhibit, carnival, or other public show or place.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12.5) Penalty, see Sec.
112.99
Sec. 112.06 RIOTS.
   It shall be unlawful to present in any public amusement or show of any kind
anything which tends to, or is calculated to, cause or promote a riot or
disturbance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12.6) Penalty, see Sec.
112.99
Sec. 112.07 EXIT LIGHTS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge of any building or
hall used as an assembly hall in which theatricals, shows, amusements,
lectures, and other entertainments are offered, operated, or presented, to
provide and place a sign on which the word “exit” shall appear in letters at
least six inches high, over a door or other opening from such hall to every
means of egress therefrom, and a light shall be kept burning during the entire
period that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has left the
hall.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12.7) Penalty, see Sec.
112.99
Sec. 112.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 12.8)
CHAPTER 113: ALCOHOL
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
113.03   License required
   
113.04   Applications
   
113.05   Restriction on licenses
   
113.06   Term
   
113.07   Manner of payment
   
113.08   Examination of applicant for local license
   
113.09   Licenses fees; number of licenses
   
113.10   Disposition of fees
   
113.11   Renewal of license
   
113.12   Closing hours
   
113.13   Loitering
   
113.14   Entry powers
   
113.15   List
   
113.16   Transfer of license
   
113.17   Change of location
   
113.18   Sanitary conditions
   
113.19   Employees
   
113.20   Location restrictions
   
113.21   View from street
   
113.22   Sale to minors
   
113.23   Possession by underage persons
   
113.24   Possession to be in original packaging
   
113.25   Sale to intoxicated persons
   
113.26   Revocation, suspension
 
   
113.99   Penalty
Sec. 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer,
containing over 0.5% of alcohol by volume, and capable of being consumed as a
beverage by a human being.
CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of the state, and not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, which conforms to the definition of a
CLUB in 43 ILCS 95.24.
HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised,
and held out to the public to be a place where meals are actually and regularly
served and consumed and where sleeping accommodations are offered for pay to
travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which
five or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings, in connection therewith, and such building or buildings,
structure, or structures being provided with adequate and sanitary dining room
and kitchen equipment and capacity.
LICENSEE. Any person, firm, or corporation, or partnership or club holding a
license under the provision of this chapter.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead, or
other receptacle or container, whatsoever used, corked, or capped, sealed, and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out
to the public to be a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAIL SALE. The sale for use or consumption and not for resale.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.1)
Sec. 113.02 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   The Town Mayor is hereby authorized to be the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the Dram Shop Act,
43 ILCS, and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as
may be needed. The Town Mayor may appoint a person or persons to assist him or
her in the exercises of the powers and performance of the duties provided for
such Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.2)
Sec. 113.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the town any alcoholic
liquor without having a license, or in violation of the terms of such license.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.3) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.04 APPLICATIONS.
   (1)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner.
   (2)   Such applications shall be made in writing, and shall be signed by the
applicant, if any individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a club
or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following
information and statements:
      (A)   The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation for profit or a club, and
date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names and
addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority of the stock of such
corporation, in interest, is owned by one person or his or her nominees, the
name and address of such person;
      (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth, and if
a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
      (C)   The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed;
      (D)   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of the corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued;
      (E)   The amount of goods, wares, and merchandise on hand at the time
application is made;
      (F)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
      (G)   A statement as to whether the applicant has made similar
application for a similar license on premises other than described in this
application, and the disposition of such application;
      (H)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter, laws of the state, or ordinances of the town;
      (I)   Whether a previous license by state or subdivision thereof, or by
the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor; and
      (J)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of
the state or the United States in the conduct of his or her place of business.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.4)
Sec. 113.05 RESTRICTION ON LICENSES.
   No license shall be issued to:
   (1)   A person who is not a resident of the town;
   (2)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (3)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (4)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law;
   (5)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is the
keeper of a house of ill fame;
   (6)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (7)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (8)   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license under a first
application;
   (9)   A co-partnership, unless all the members of such co-partnership shall
be qualified to receive a license;
   (10)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the town;
   (11)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the required by the licensee;
   (12)   A person who does not own the premises for a full period for which
the license is to be issued;
   (13)   Any law enforcing public official, Town Mayor, any member of the
Board of Trustees, and no such official shall be interested in any way, either
directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic
liquor; and/or
   (14)   Any person, association, or corporation not eligible for a state
retail liquor dealer’s license.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.5)
Sec. 113.06 TERM.
   Each such license shall terminate on April 30 next following its issuance.
The fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the full calendar months
which have expired in the year prior to the issuance of the license.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.6)
Sec. 113.07 MANNER OF PAYMENT.
   Annual license fees shall be paid upon their issuance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.7)
Sec. 113.08 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT FOR LOCAL LICENSE.
   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the right to examine, or
cause to be examined, under oath, any application for a local license for a
renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of revocation or suspension
has been served as provided by statute, and to examine or cause to be examined
the books and records of any such applicant or licensee, to hear testimony and
take proofs for his or her information in the performance of his or her duties,
and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of
this state. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, he or she may authorize
his or her agent to act on his or her behalf, as provided by statute.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.8)
Sec. 113.09 LICENSES FEES; NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (1)   Class A. Licenses which shall authorize the retail sale on the
premises specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises as well
as other retail sale of liquor. The annual fee for such license shall be $500.
The number of Class A licenses which may be issued and be in force within the
town at any time is hereby limited to four. On Sunday, the sale of alcoholic
liquor shall be from the hour of 12:00 p.m. until 10:00 p.m. Any license which
authorizes the sale of alcoholic liquor on Sundays shall require an additional
annual fee in the amount of $150.
   (2)   Class B. Licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in the original package but not for consumption on the premises where
sold. The annual fee for such license shall be $300. The holder of a Class B
license may sell alcoholic liquor in the original package, but not for
consumption on the premises where sold, also on Sunday between the hours of 10:
00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m. The number of Class B licenses which may be issued and
be in force within the town at any time is hereby limited to four.
   (3)   Class C. Licenses which shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in the original package but not for consumption on the premises where
sold. The annual fee for such license shall be $650. The holder of a Class C
license may sell alcoholic liquor in the original package, not for consumption
on the premises where sold, also on Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m.
until 10:00 p.m. The number of Class C licenses which may be issued and be in
force within the town at any time is hereby limited to four.
   (4)   Class D. Licenses which shall authorize the retail sale on the
premises therein specified of alcoholic liquor for consumption on said premises
by clubs as the same are defined by the statutes of the state in “an Act
Relating to Alcoholic Liquors, approved January 31, 1934, as amended,” but no
license shall be issued to any such club within one year after its
incorporation nor until it has maintained an establishment as a club for a
period of one year. The annual fee for such license shall be $50. The number of
Class D licenses which may be issued and be in force within the town at any
time is hereby limited to one.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.9)
Sec. 113.10 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All such fees shall be paid to the Town Clerk at the time application is
made and shall be forthwith turned over to the Treasurer. In the event the
license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If
the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the General
Corporate Fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the Town
Mayor and the Board of Trustees for proper action.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.10)
Sec. 113.11 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Any licensee may renew his or her licensee at the expiration thereof;
provided, that he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for the
purposes; provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for
shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the
Town Mayor from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued with his or her
jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.11)
Sec. 113.12 CLOSING HOURS.
   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold, offered for sale, be given away, or be
consumed on any licensed premises on Sunday (except as hereafter set forth) or
during the period from 12:30 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday of each
week. Said sales and other activities may be made until 12:30 a.m., at which
time all activity will cease and the premises must be free of patrons by 1:00
a.m. On Friday and Saturday of each week, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold,
offered for sale, or be given away or be consumed on any licensed premises
during the period from 1:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., and all sales and other
activities shall cease, and the premises must be free of patrons by 1:30 a.m.
It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or admit the public to any
premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours
within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited; provided that, in the case
of restaurants and hotels, such establishments may be kept open during such
hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold or consumed or given away to the
public during such hours or to patrons of such establishments.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.12) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.13 LOITERING.
   It shall be unlawful to allow or permit persons to be within a place where
alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption other than any licensed premises which
derives its principal business from the sale and service of commodities other
than alcoholic liquor, when said establishment is required to be closed by this
chapter, except for the owner or operator thereof, his or her agents and
servants, his or her immediate family, and other persons performing services
necessary for the maintenance and operation of the establishment.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.13) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.14 ENTRY POWERS.
   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner hereby is given the power to enter or
to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any premises
licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provision of the Dram Shop
Act, 43 ILCS, or any rules or regulations adopted by him or her or by the State
Liquor Commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine
the premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.14)
Sec. 113.15 LIST.
   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a
complete record of all such licenses issued by him or her.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.15)
Sec. 113.16 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (1)   A license shall be purely nontransferable personal privilege, good for
not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as is in this
chapter provided, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
being encumbered or hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of
the testate or intestate or intestate devolution, it shall cease upon the death
of the licensee; provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of
any deceased licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor,
may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under
order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased
or insolvent or bankrupt until the expiration of such license, but not longer
than six months, after the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of such license. A
refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in
which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (2)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof,
provided he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for
which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose sale of
alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license.
   (3)   (A)   Such locations may be changed only upon written permit to make
such change issued by the Town Mayor.
      (B)   No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is a proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the
statutes of the state and the ordinances of the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.16) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.17 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   A liquor dealer’s license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in
the premises described in the application and license. Such locations may be
changed only upon written permit to make such change issued by the Town Mayor.
No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a
proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the statues of the
state and the ordinances of the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.17) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.18 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of
such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances
regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.18) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.19 EMPLOYEES.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to employ in any premises used for
the sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious, infectious, or venereal diseases.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any such disease to work in or about any such premises or to engage
in work in or about any such premises or to engage in any way in the handling,
preparation, or distribution of such liquor.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.19) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.20 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (1)   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school other than an
institution of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or
for veterans, their spouses or children, or any military or naval station;
provided, that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant
service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other
places where sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on,
if such place of business so exempted shall have been established for such
purposes prior to the taking effect this Act; nor to the renewal of a license
of any church or school where such church or school has been established within
such 100 feet since the issuance of the original license.
      (B)   In the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet (the sale at
retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet) shall be measured to
the nearest part of any building used for worship services or educational
programs and not to property boundaries.
   (2)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a
church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor if any such sales
are limited to periods when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the
promotion of some common object other than the sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquors.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.20) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.21 VIEW FROM STREET.
   (1)   In the premises in which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
on the premises is licensed, other than in restaurants, hotels, or clubs, or
any bowling alley other than one situated on the first or ground floor, no
screen, blind, curtain, partition, article, or thing shall be permitted in the
windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises,
which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises
from the street, road, or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen,
partition, or other obstruction nor any arrangements of lights or lighting
shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which shall
prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises, and the entire
space used by the public must be so located that there shall be a full view of
the same from the street, road, or sidewalk. All rooms where alcoholic liquor
is sold for consumption on the premises shall be continually lighted during
business hours by natural or artificial white lights so that all parts of the
interior of the premises shall be clearly visible.
   (2)   In case the foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the
licensee or by him or her willfully suffered to be obscured or obstructed, such
license may be revoked in the manner herein provided.
   (3)   In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner shall have the right to require the filing with him or her
of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the view as
required.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.21) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.22 SALE TO MINORS.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of such licensee to sell, give, or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years. No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give, or deliver
said alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in
the performance of a religious ceremony or services.
   (2)   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, or his or her agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve
alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written
evidence of identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of 21
years. Proof that the defendant-license, or his or her agent or employee,
demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon written evidence of age and
identity in any transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and
may be considered in any criminal prosecution or any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
   (3)   It shall be unlawful to sell, give, or furnish to any person under the
age of 21 years any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic
evidence of the age and identity of such person or to sell, give, or furnish to
any person under the age of 21 years evidence of age of 21 years to present or
offer to any licensee, his or her agent, or employee, any written, printed, or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, or not
actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to
purchase, or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure the serving of any
alcoholic beverage or to have in his or her possession any false or fraudulent
written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity. It shall be
unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to attend any bar, to draw, pour,
or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises. It shall be
unlawful to permit any female employee or entertainer in the premises to
solicit any patron or customer thereof to purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic
beverages for himself or herself, or any other person on or in such licensed
premises, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit any waiter who
shall be regularly employed therein from accepting and serving the order of a
patron or customer in the regular course of his or her employment as such
waiter.
   (4)   It shall be unlawful to allow or permit any female person to frequent
or loiter in any licensed premises with the purpose of soliciting men to
purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages.
   (5)   In addition to all other fines and penalties, the Town Mayor may
revoke or suspend the retail liquor dealer’s license for any violation of this
section.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.22) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.23 POSSESSION BY UNDERAGE PERSONS.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to have
any alcoholic beverage in his or her possession on any street or highway or in
any public place or in any place open to the public.
   (2)   This section does not apply to possession by a person under the age of
21 years making a delivery of an alcoholic beverage pursuant of the order of
his or her parents or in the pursuance of his or her employment.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.23) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.24 POSSESSION TO BE IN ORIGINAL PACKAGING.
   (1)   No person shall transport, carry, possess, or have on any public
street, alley, sidewalk, or public parks in the town any alcoholic liquor on or
about his or her person except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken.
   (2)   No person shall transport, carry, possess, or have on any school
property in the town any alcoholic liquor on or about his or her person except
in the original package with the seal unbroken.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.24) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.25 SALE TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, officer, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of such licensee to sell, give, or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any intoxicated person or to any person known by him or her
to be under legal disability or in the need of mental treatment.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.25) Penalty, see Sec.
113.99
Sec. 113.26 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION.
   The Town Mayor may suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for cause any
liquor dealer’s license for any violation of any provision pertaining to the
sale of alcoholic liquor, as provided and in the manner provided in 43 ILCS.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.26)
Sec. 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 13.27)
CHAPTER 114: LODGING
Section
Temporary Lodging
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Compliance with applicable standards
   
114.03   Insurance required
   
114.04   Central Business District
   
114.05   Cameras
   
114.06   License
Rental Housing
   
114.20   Purpose and intent
   
114.21   Scope
   
114.22   Definitions
   
114.23   Crime-free residential rental license
   
114.24   Rental managers
   
114.25   Tenants and lease agreements
   
114.26   Landlord duties and obligations
   
114.27   License proceedings
 
   
114.99   Penalty
TEMPORARY LODGING
Sec. 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT. An operator-occupied residence providing
public lodging accommodation for an individual, for a charge to said individual
with no more than five guest rooms for rent, in operation for no more than ten
consecutive nights in a 12-month period. Breakfast may be provided to the
guests of BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS only, and shall not include motels,
hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
BOARDING HOUSE. Any establishment with one or more rooms for rent on a nightly
basis for no more than 29 consecutive days. No meals shall be provided, and no
cooking or food storage appliance shall be allowed.
GUEST ROOM. A sleeping room intended to serve no more than two transient guests
per night.
OPERATOR. The owner of the bed and breakfast/Airbnb/boarding house
establishment, or the property owner.
(Ord. 2024-26-03, passed 3-26-2024)
Sec. 114.02 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE STANDARDS.
   (1)   Bed and breakfast establishments which serve breakfast shall comply
with the county food service standards.
   (2)   Each person who is provided accommodations shall be provided
individual soap and clean individual bath cloths and towels. Clean bed linen in
good repair shall be provided for each guest who is provided accommodations and
shall be changed between guests and as often as necessary. Clean linen shall be
stored and handled in a sanitary manner.
   (3)   Bed and breakfast establishments shall meet the State Fire Marshal’s
requirements for one- and two-family dwellings. In addition, the following
standards shall be required.
      (A)   Portable manual fire extinguishing equipment in accordance with
NFPA 10 Standards shall be provided on each floor.
      (B)   All trash containers shall be metal.
      (C)   No cooking facilities or food storage shall be permitted in guest
rooms.
      (D)   All hallways and stairways shall be adequately lighted.
      (E)   No portable heating devices shall be permitted in guest rooms.
      (F)   The operator shall submit a floor plan of the bed and breakfast
establishment to the local Fire Department.
      (G)   Smoke detectors shall be provided in each guest room.
(Ord. 2024-26-03, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
114.99
Sec. 114.03 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   The bed and breakfast establishment shall provide proof of adequate
liability insurance as required by the licensing agency.
(Ord. 2024-26-03, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
114.99
Sec. 114.04 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   No bed and breakfast/Airbnb/boarding houses shall be allowed on the ground
(first) floor of buildings in the Central Business District of the town.
(Ord. 2024-26-03, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
114.99
Sec. 114.05 CAMERAS.
   There shall be no cameras or video recording devices allowed inside of a bed
and breakfast/ Airbnb/boarding house/guest house.
(Ord. 2024-26-03, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
114.99
Sec. 114.06 LICENSE.
   All bed and breakfast/Airbnb/boarding houses/guest houses shall be licensed
by the town annually.
(Ord. 2024-26-03, passed 3-26-2024) Penalty, see Sec.
114.99
RENTAL HOUSING
Sec. 114.20 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to lay forth the policies of the town to
establish the rights and obligations of the landlords and tenants in the rental
units in the town and to establish a system of regulations designed to prevent,
deter, and sanction criminal and quasi-criminal activities occurring on or
within rental properties in the town. The provisions of this subchapter shall
not apply to housing for older persons as provided in 42 U.S.C. Sec. 3607,
group homes governed by the Specialized Living Centers Act, 405 ILCS 25/1 et
seq., or other similar uses governed by state or federal laws, rules, or
regulations.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023)
Sec. 114.21 SCOPE.
   (1)   This subchapter shall apply to regulate and determine the rights,
obligations, and remedies related to the operation and occupancy of residential
rental units located within the town.
   (2)   The following are exempt from application of this subchapter:
      (A)   Residence at an institution, public or private, if incidental to
detention or the provision of medical, geriatric, counseling, religious, or
similar service;
      (B)   Transient occupancy in a hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, tourist
home, or tourist court; and
      (C)   Residence at a party wholly owned by the state or federal
government.
   (3)   Rent to own agreements between tenants and landlords shall be included
in and guided by this subchapter.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023)
Sec. 114.22 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABSENTEE LANDLORD. A landlord who does not reside or maintain his or her
principal place of business of the county, or a landlord who does reside or has
his or her principal place of business in the county but is regularly absent
from the county for a period of 60 days or more in a calendar year.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER OF THE TOWN. The Board President/Mayor.
COMMON AREA. Any area on the property, including the yard, that is not within a
dwelling unit and is or may be used by a tenant or occupant of a dwelling unit
located at the property.
DWELLING UNIT. Any part of a building used as a residence or sleeping place by
one or more persons in consideration for the payment of rental income.
LANDLORD. Any owner (i.e., person, trustee, corporation, partnership,
association, membership, cooperative, or business entity) of a dwelling unit
possessed by a tenant in consideration for the payment of rental income.
LEASE AGREEMENT. Any lease or rental agreement containing the terms of
occupancy of a dwelling unit by a tenant.
OWNER. The person or entity that holds legal title to the real property,
except:
   (A)   If legal title is held by a land trust, OWNER shall mean the
beneficial owner or owners of the land trust; and/or
   (B)   If there is a purchaser or purchasers under a real estate installment
sales contract, OWNER shall mean the purchaser or purchasers.
PERMANENT OCCUPANCY. The occupancy of a dwelling unit for more than 30 days in
a calendar year.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. Any code in effect pursuant to the municipal code of
the town.
RENTAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, including a condominium unit, containing one
or more dwelling units occupied by a tenant for which rental income is paid.
RENTAL INCOME. Any monetary rent or other consideration exchanged for or in
connection with the use or occupancy of a dwelling unit.
RENTAL MANAGER. A person, who is not the owner of a property, who receives
compensation for managing rental housing.
TENANT. A person occupying a dwelling unit pursuant to a lease agreement.
TENANT LIST. A list of all dwelling units licensed or to be licensed, the name
of the tenant as it appears on the lease agreement, the number of occupants
residing in the dwelling unit, and the names and ages of the occupants of the
dwelling unit.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023)
Sec. 114.23 CRIME-FREE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE.
   (1)   Crime-free residential rental license.
      (A)   No landlord shall rent or lease a dwelling unit, or receive any
rental income, without a crime-free residential rental license.
      (B)   Crime-free residential rental licenses issued under this subchapter
shall be specific to the landlord and the dwelling units to be rented, as
identified on the landlord’s application.
   (2)   Total number of licenses. The number of licenses issued by the town
during the license term shall not exceed a number in excess of 10% of the total
habitable residential properties in the town.
      (A)   Any property actively occupied by a tenant at the time of the
enactment of this subchapter may be granted a license subject to this section
even if total number of licenses at the time enactment exceeds the 10%
designated in this division (2). This shall be known as a PRE-ORDINANCE
PROPERTY.
      (B)   A pre-ordinance property shall remain eligible for a license
subject to this section under this division (2) if the pre-ordinance property
maintains a continuous license. Any lapse, revocation, nonrenewal, denial, or
the like shall terminate a property’s designation as pre-ordinance property.
   (3)   License term. All crime-free residential rental licenses shall be
valid from January 1 of the calendar year through December 31 of the same
calendar year.
   (4)   Application for license; issuance of license; renewal.
      (A)   Landlords seeking to obtain a crime-free residential rental license
shall file an application with the Town Code Enforcement Officer/Mayor on the
form adopted by the town. The application must be completed and signed by the
landlord.
      (B)   Applications for the issuance of a crime-free residential rental
licenses shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the desired effective
date of the license.
      (C)   The Code Enforcement Officer/Mayor shall issue a crime-free
residential rental license if the following requirements are met.
         (1)   The landlord has filed a completed application that has been
signed.
         (2)   The landlord has paid the annual license fee and there are no
outstanding debts due and owing to the town from the landlord and/or rental
manager, including, but not limited to, outstanding fines imposed for violating
the terms of this subchapter.
         (3)   The landlord has supplied a current and complete tenant list.
         (4)   The landlord is a resident, or has a principal place of business
in the county, subject to the following exceptions:
            A.   An absentee landlord who has a rental manager that resides or
has its principal place of business in the county; and
            B.   Said rental manager is listed on the landlord’s application.
         (5)   The building and/or dwelling units subject to the license have
undergone and passed an inspection by the town.
         (6)   There is no reason to deny the issuance or renewal of a crime-
free residential rental license pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (5)   License fee.
      (A)   The annual fee for a crime-free residential rental license shall be
$100 per dwelling unit to be licensed.
      (B)   The fee for a license transfer shall be prorated to the date the
new landlord obtains legal title to the building.
   (6)   License transfer.
      (A)   No crime-free residential rental license shall be transferable
without the expressed written consent of the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/
Mayor.
      (B)   Every landlord holding a crime-free residential rental license
shall provide written notice to the Building Commissioner, within 24 hours
after having conveyed legal title to a dwelling unit covered by a license. Such
notice shall include the name and address of the successor owner.
      (C)   A new landlord desiring to operate under the previous landlord’s
crime-free residential rental license shall file an application for a transfer
with the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor no later than ten business days
after having been conveyed title to the dwelling unit. Issuance of the license
transfer shall be contingent upon the new owner’s compliance with the
requirements of division (D)(3) above. In the event the new owner fails to
apply for a transfer in the time period referenced above, the crime-free
residential rental license applicable to the dwelling unit shall be deemed
immediately revoked without further notice.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023) Penalty, see Sec.
114.99
Sec. 114.24 RENTAL MANAGERS.
   (1)   All rental managers shall be deemed authorized to accept notice and
process on behalf of the landlord.
   (2)   No landlord shall authorize or permit another person to act on his or
her behalf with respect to a dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, the
acceptance of rental income, unless that person is designated as a rental
manager on the application attaining the crime-free residential rental license.
   (3)   No person shall conduct business on behalf of a landlord unless
specifically listed as a rental manager on the application attending the
current crime-free residential rental license.
   (4)   Landlords shall be responsible for the conduct/actions of their rental
managers.
   (5)   (A)   Every landlord shall give notice to the Ordinance Enforcement
Officer/Mayor in the event its rental manager discontinues service in that
capacity. Said notice shall be provided to the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/
Mayor in writing, and no later than two business days after the landlord has
knowledge of such discontinuation.
      (B)   Landlords shall notify the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor of
replacement rental manager, in writing, no later than seven business days after
a replacement rental manager has been appointed for a dwelling unit. In the
event no replacement rental manager has been identified within seven business
days after the previously identified rental manager has discontinued services,
the landlord shall be assumed to be managing the dwelling governed by the
crime-free residential rental license.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023) Penalty, see Sec.
114.99
Sec. 114.25 TENANTS AND LEASE AGREEMENTS.
   (1)   Tenant list.
      (A)   All landlords and rental managers shall maintain an accurate and
complete tenant list for all dwelling units subject to a crime-free residential
rental license.
      (B)   Landlords shall file an accurate and complete tenant list with the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer each time they apply for the issuance or renewal
of the crime-free residential rental license.
      (C)   Landlords shall update the tenant list on file with the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer/Mayor no later than 14 calendar days after a new tenant or
occupant occupies a dwelling unit.
      (D)   No landlord shall allow the permanent occupancy of a dwelling unit
by any person not identified on the tenant list on file with the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer/Mayor.
      (E)   Said tenant list shall include the following tenant information:
         (1)   Full legal name;
         (2)   Date of birth;
         (3)   Driver’s license number and issuing state; and
         (4)   State identification with identification number.
   (2)   Lease requirements. All lease agreements shall be in writing and shall
be executed within 14 calendar days of the commencement of occupancy. Landlords
shall provide a fully executed copy of the lease agreement to the tenant within
14 calendar days after occupancy.
   (3)   Lease maintenance.
      (A)   A copy of all lease agreements for dwelling units licensed under
this subchapter shall be maintained by the landlord and rental manager.
      (B)   If a building contains multiple dwelling units licensed to a single
landlord, copies of all written leases for the dwelling units shall be
maintained within the building.
      (C)   Landlords and rental managers shall provide the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer/Mayor with a copy of any written lease for a dwelling unit
upon request.
   (4)   Prohibited lease agreements.
      (A)   Oral lease agreements and sub-leases are prohibited.
      (B)   No landlord shall enter into a lease agreement which will cause the
dwelling unit to be occupied by more persons than permitted under the
provisions of the town municipal code, or the building codes and regulations of
the state and the provisions of this subchapter.
      (C)   It shall be unlawful for any tenant to permit any dwelling unit to
be occupied in excess of the occupancy limits of the town municipal code or
building codes and regulations of the state.
      (D)   All leases must apply to the complete dwelling unit and not to
individual bedrooms, sleeping rooms, or portions of a dwelling unit. No
dwelling unit shall be operated similar to a boarding house, dormitory, or
other similar use.
   (5)   Crime-free lease addendum.
      (A)   No landlord or rental manager shall enter into a lease agreement or
an extension of a lease agreement without incorporating a crime-free lease
addendum.
      (B)   The provisions of the crime-free lease addendum, as provided in
this section, shall be read into and shall constitute an integral part of any
lease agreement or extension governing a dwelling unit in the town,
irrespective of whether it is attached or a part of the lease agreement, in
fact.
      (C)   The crime-free lease addendum shall be in the following form:
Crime-Free Lease Addendum
In addition to all other terms of the lease, landlord and tenant agree as follows:
1.   The tenant, any member of the tenant’s household, and any guest or any other
person associated with the tenant or under the tenant’s control, regardless of
whether the individual engaging in such activity is a member of the household:
 a.   Shall not engage in or facilitate any criminal or quasi-criminal activity as
 defined by local, state, or federal law while in the dwelling unit or in any
 common area a building containing the dwelling unit; and
 b.   Shall not permit or allow the dwelling unit or any common area of a property
 containing a dwelling unit to be used by any person to engage in or facilitate
 any criminal or quasi- criminal activity as defined by local, state, or federal
 law.
2.   All tenants are required to notify the Town Police Department of criminal or
quasi-criminal conduct occurring or believed to be occurring in any dwelling unit
or in any common area of a building containing a dwelling unit. Each tenant shall
have the duty to notify the landlord or rental manager of any criminal or quasi-
criminal activities witnessed or believed or alleged to be occurring or to have
occurred in any dwelling unit or common area of a building in which a dwelling
unit is leased no later than 48 hours of having knowledge of the same. Any such
notice may be made anonymously.
3.   Any violation of this addendum shall constitute a substantial violation of
the lease, material noncompliance with the lease, and grounds for termination of
tenancy and eviction.
4.   In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any other
provision of the lease agreement, the provisions of the addendum shall govern.
 
   (6)   Criminal or quasi-criminal activities.
      (A)   Each time the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor is notified of a
criminal or quasi- criminal act occurring in a dwelling unit or common area of
a building containing a dwelling unit, he or she shall send notice of such
activity to the landlord in writing no later than five business days after he
or she has knowledge of the same. No written notice need be provided by the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor if a ticket is issued to the landlord or
rental manager for a violation of this subchapter as a result of the same
criminal or quasi-criminal activity.
      (B)   Every landlord and rental manager shall notify the Police
Department or the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor, as circumstances may
dictate, whenever he or she witnesses, or is advised of any allegation of,
criminal or quasi-criminal activity occurring in a dwelling unit or common area
of a building containing a dwelling unit which is subject to a crime-free
residential rental license. In the event the circumstances do not dictate the
immediate notification to the Police Department, notice to the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer/Mayor shall be provided no later than two business days
after the landlord or rental manager has knowledge of the activity to be
reported.
      (C)   It shall be unlawful for any landlord or rental manager to punish
or retaliate against a tenant or occupant of a dwelling unit, including, but
not limited to, the termination of a lease agreement or the initiation of
eviction proceedings for:
         (1)   Providing notice to the town of violations of this subchapter or
of criminal or quasi-criminal activities taking place in dwelling unit or in a
common area of a building containing a dwelling unit; or
         (2)   For testifying in any criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding or
proceeding authorized under this subchapter.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023) Penalty, see Sec. 114.99
Sec. 114.26 LANDLORD DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS.
   (1)   Landlords shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of all
dwelling units, and shall be responsible for any violation of the town
municipal code, or building codes and regulations of the state.
   (2)   Landlords shall have the following duties.
      (A)   All rental properties shall be in good repair.
      (B)   All rental properties shall be properly equipped with smoke
detectors and carbon monoxide detectors as prescribed by the relevant
regulations, code, or laws. In the absence of any governing regulation, code,
or law, the property shall have at minimum a smoke detector on every floor of
the residence.
      (C)   All rental properties shall have a sound roof free from leaking.
      (D)   All rental properties shall have a well maintained exterior finish,
including, but not limited to, brick, siding, or paint.
      (E)   All rental outbuildings located on the property shall be in good
repair, structurally sound, and have a well-maintained exterior finish.
      (F)   All rental properties shall have windows in good repair. No windows
shall be allowed that are covered by plywood, or other means, nor shall broken
windows be allowed to remain in said property.
      (G)   All rental properties shall be void of inoperable vehicles, or junk
vehicles, nor shall vehicles be permitted to be parked or stored in the yard of
the property.
      (H)   All rental properties shall be void of junk, debris, trash, or
refuse in the yards.
      (I)   No rental properties shall be allowed outside animals or pets.
      (J)   All rental properties shall be limited to the possession of two
domestic pets that dwell inside said property.
      (K)   No rental property shall have a dog run, or similar animal area, in
the front of the rental property.
      (L)   Any violation of the town ordinances by the rental property shall
be deemed the responsibility of the landlord, and subject to this subchapter.
      (M)   All rental properties shall be void of dead trees.
      (N)   All rental properties shall have a yard that is well-maintained,
not allowing the grass to a height more than eight inches. In the event the
grass is measured to be greater than eight inches, the town, at its discretion,
will mow the property at the expense of the landlord. Failure to pay for said
mowing services shall result in the discontinuing of municipal services, and be
subject to penalties as described herein.
   (3)   A landlord’s failure to abide by the town municipal code, building
codes and regulations of the state, or the duties or obligations described in
division (2) above shall be grounds for the revocation or suspension of a
crime-free rental license under Sec.
114.27(3), or the refusal to issue or renew a crime- free license under Sec.
114.27(1).
   (4)   The landlord shall be responsible for all utilities associated with
the rental property, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, and garbage.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023) Penalty, see Sec. 114.99
Sec. 114.27 LICENSE PROCEEDINGS.
   (1)   Refusal to issue or renew a crime-free rental license.
      (A)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor may refuse to issue or
renew a crime-free residential rental license in whole or in part for past
violations of this subchapter, violations of the town code, refusal to take
steps to mitigate against or prevent future violations of this subchapter or
the municipal code, failure to complete any requirements of a conditional
license, threats to the health, safety, and welfare of the tenants, occupants,
or public, if the landlord has had his or her crime-free residential license
denied, suspended, or revoked in the past by the town or other municipality
operating under similar regulations and cannot show that the circumstances
attending such action has been remedied or that steps have been taken to
prevent future violations of a similar nature, falsification of information or
documents required to be submitted under this subchapter, or if the maximum
number of licenses under this subchapter has been issued.
      (B)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor shall make his or her
determination in writing which shall include the factual basis and legal
conclusion for his or her determination. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer/
Mayor’s determination shall be mailed to the landlord and rental manager, if
any, by certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, no later than 45 days
after the application for issuance or renewal is submitted or, within five
business days of a landlord or rental manager’s failure to timely complete any
requirements of a conditional license.
      (C)   The refusal to issue or renew a crime-free residential rental
license may be partial or in whole depending on the circumstances. A
determination not to issue or renew a crime-free residential rental license in
whole shall be supported by a finding that the prior violations were
systematic, the result of willful actions or omissions, ongoing despite
warnings or request for compliance by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor,
or otherwise constitute a universal threat to the health, safety, and welfare
of the tenants governed by the license.
      (D)   In lieu of refusing to issue or renew a crime-free residential
rental license, the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor may issue a
determination that a conditional crime-free residential rental license is
appropriate under the circumstances. A conditional crime-free residential
license shall be valid for a limited time period during which the landlord
shall be required to undertake and/or satisfy certain measures identified by
the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor before a crime-free residential rental
license is issued or renewed. The conditions imposed shall be directed towards
remedying past violations, the prevention of future violations under this
subchapter, or as a probationary technique to ensure the landlord or rental
manager understands has taken measures to ensure compliance with this
subchapter. A crime-free residential rental license shall not be issued if the
landlord fails to complete or violates the conditions listed in the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer/Mayor’s determination in the time period referenced.
      (E)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor’s decision shall be final
and take immediate effect 14 calendar days after it is issued, assuming no
appeal is taken.
   (2)   Appeals of determination to not issue or renew a crime-free
residential rental license.
      (A)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor’s decision to not issue or
review a crime-free residential rental license may be appealed by the landlord
to the Town Board. The landlord shall perfect the appeal by filing exceptions
with the Town Clerk no later than 14 calendar days after the date of the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer’s determination. The exceptions shall identify
any factual or legal errors with the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor’s
determination, a short argument in favor of reversal, and a copy of the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor’s determination. Any argument or basis for
reversal not raised in the exceptions shall be deemed waived on appeal.
      (B)   The timely filing of exceptions shall stay the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer/Mayor’s determination through the date on which the appeal
is decided.
      (C)   Within 72 hours of the filing of exceptions, the Town Clerk shall
send written notice of the appeal to the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor
and the landlord. The notice shall include a copy of exceptions as well as
notification as to the date, time, and location of the hearing on the appeal.
Notice shall be provided by certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, to
the home addresses listed for the landlord.
      (D)   Licensees shall be permitted but are not required to be represented
by an attorney. The Town Attorney shall sit as counsel for the Town Board.
      (E)   A de novo hearing shall take place no sooner than 25 days nor more
than 45 days after exceptions are filed with the Town Clerk. The Town Board
shall base its decision upon the evidence submitted. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply at the hearing. All witnesses proposed to testify shall
be presented live, sworn in, and subject to direct and cross-examination. The
landlord shall have the burden of proof and shall be required to prove its case
by a preponderance of evidence.
      (F)   No continuance will be granted except for the most extenuating
circumstances.
      (G)   A court reporter will be provided on the timely request (no later
than seven days before the scheduled hearing) of the town or licensee. The
party requesting the court reporter shall be responsible for the costs of his
or her attendance and the reproduction of the transcript to be made a part of
the record.
      (H)   No later than 30 days after the close of the hearing, the Town
Board shall issue its written decision either affirming or reversing the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor’s decision. The written decision shall be
mailed to all interested parties by certified U.S. Mail, return receipt
requested. The Town Board’s decision on appeal shall be final and take effect
immediately.
   (3)   Suspension or revocation of crime-free residential rental license.
      (A)   All crime-free residential rental licenses are subject to
suspension or revocation. The basis for suspension or revocation shall include,
but not be limited to:
         (1)   Violations of this subchapter or the town municipal code;
         (2)   The failure to take adequate steps to prevent future violations
of this subchapter or the property maintenance code;
         (3)   The failure or refusal to initiate and prosecute eviction
proceedings against tenants that violate the crime-free lease addendum;
         (4)   The failure to pay any fee or fine due and owing to the town in
a timely manner; and
         (5)   The falsification of information or documents required to be
submitted under this subchapter.
      (B)   Proceedings to suspend or revoke a crime-free residential license
shall be initiated by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor. The Ordinance
Enforcement Officer/Mayor shall send written notice of the charges to the
landlord no later than 48 hours after they are filed. The notice shall include
a copy of the charges as well as notification as to the date, time, and
location for the hearing on the charges. Notice shall be provided by certified
U.S. Mail, return receipt requested, to the home addresses listed for the
landlord.
      (C)   The hearing shall take place no sooner than 25 days nor more than
45 days after charges are filed by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor. The
Town Board shall preside over the hearing and base its decision upon the
evidence submitted. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing.
All witnesses proposed to testify shall be presented live, sworn in, and
subject to direct and cross-examination. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer/
Mayor shall have the burden of proof and shall be required to prove its case by
a preponderance of the evidence.
      (D)   A court reporter will be provided on the timely request (no later
than five business days before the scheduled hearing) of the licensee. The
party requesting the court reporter shall be responsible for the costs of his
or her attendance and the reproduction of the transcript to be made a part of
the record.
      (E)   Licenses shall be permitted but are not required to be represented
by an attorney.
      (F)   No continuance will be granted except fro the most extenuating
circumstances.
      (G)   No later than 30 days after the close of the hearing, the Town
Board shall issue its decision, in writing, setting forth its findings of fact
and legal conclusions. The written decision shall be mailed to all interested
parties by certified U.S. Mail, return receipt requested.
      (H)   The Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor’s decision shall be final
and take immediate effect 14 days after it is issued, assuming no appeal is
taken.
      (I)   Nothing herein shall prevent the immediate suspension/revocation of
a crime-free residential rental license by the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/
Mayor as circumstances dictate. Under such circumstances, post-deprivation
proceedings shall be afforded to the landlord and shall be initiated by the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor. The Town Board shall automatically preside
over a post- suspension/revocation hearing concerning the propriety of the
immediate suspension/revocation of a crime-free residential rental license by
the Ordinance Enforcement Officer/Mayor. All other procedural requirements of
this section shall apply.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023) Penalty, see Sec.
114.99
Sec. 114.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec.
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (2)   (A)   Any landlord or rental manager that collects rental income from
a tenant of a dwelling unit without a crime-free residential rental license
shall be fined in an amount equivalent to the renal income collected. Each time
rental income is collected shall constitute a new and separate violation.
      (B)   Any person found in violation of any other provision of Sec.
114.20 to
114.27 shall be fined no less than $50 nor more than $250. Each day a violation
occurs or is permitted to continue shall constitute a new and separate
violation. Violations of Sec.
114.20 to
114.27 that concern multiple dwelling units shall constitute separate offenses
as to those dwelling units and shall not be considered a single violation
simply because the dwelling units are located in the same building or subject
to the same crime-free residential rental license.
      (C)   Violations of Sec.
114.20 to
114.27 may be administered through Sec.
10.99, or by any other means permitted by law. Nothing in Sec.
114.20 to
114.27 shall be interpreted to limit the remedies or penalties available to the
town.
(Ord. 2023-02-14, passed 2-14-2023)
CHAPTER 115: CANNABIS
Section
   
115.01   Recitals
   
115.02   Definitions
   
115.03   Prohibition
   
115.04   Public nuisance declared
   
115.05   Violations
Sec. 115.01 RECITALS.
   The facts and statements contained in the preamble to the ordinance from
which this chapter is derived are found to be true and are hereby adopted as
part of this chapter.
(Ord. 488, passed 8-13-2020)
Sec. 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization, or
transporting organization.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to cultivate,
dry, cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport, and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of Financial
and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business
establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-
infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia, or related supplies to
purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers,
per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended
from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the State Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time to time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization or
business that is licensed by the State Department of Agriculture to transport
cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a community college
licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be
amended from time to time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society, or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer, or
agent.
(Ord. 488, passed 8-13-2020)
Sec. 115.03 PROHIBITION.
   The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in
the town, and no person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be
operated, or aid, abet, or assist in the operation within the town of any of
the following:
   (1)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
   (2)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
   (3)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization;
   (4)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   (5)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; and
   (6)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
(Ord. 488, passed 8-13-2020) Penalty, see Sec.
10.99
Sec. 115.04 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the town
in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies.
(Ord. 488, passed 8-13-2020)
Sec. 115.05 VIOLATIONS.
   Violations of this chapter may be enforced in accordance with the provisions
of this code.
(Ord. 488, passed 8-13-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   MISDEMEANORS AND OTHER OFFENSES
      
131.   CURFEW
      
132.   FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
CHAPTER 130: MISDEMEANORS AND OTHER OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Disorderly conduct
   
130.02   Profanity
   
130.03   Public indecency
   
130.04   Fighting
   
130.05   Disturbing assemblages
   
130.06   Missiles
   
130.07   Unlawful assemblages
   
130.08   Fires
   
130.09   Discharge of firearms
   
130.10   Posting bills
   
130.11   Prostitution
   
130.12   Soliciting
   
130.13   Weapons
   
130.14   Obscenity
   
130.15   Scaffolds
   
130.16   Articles on windows
   
130.17   Obstructing exits or stairways
   
130.18   Noises
   
130.19   Fuel tanks
   
130.20   Unused or abandoned refrigerators
   
130.21   Cannabis
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Sec. 130.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of
any conduct tending toward a breach of the peace. The causing or making of any
unnecessary loud noise and shouting or yelling shall be considered DISORDERLY
CONDUCT.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.1) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.02 PROFANITY.
   It shall be unlawful to use profanity in any street, alley, or other public
place in the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.2) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.03 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (1)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (A)   An act of sexual intercourse;
      (B)   An act of deviant sexual conduct;
      (C)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person; or
      (D)   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either
sex.
   (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where the conduct may reasonably be expected to
be viewed by others.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.3) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.04 FIGHTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any assault or battery or to
fight in the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.4) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.05 DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any lawful assemblage or
gathering in the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.5) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.06 MISSILES.
   It shall be unlawful to cast, throw, or propel any missile on any street,
alley, or public place. It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any glass,
nails, tacks, or other similar articles on any street, sidewalk, or alley in
the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.6) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.07 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLAGES.
   It shall be unlawful to collect, gather, or to be a member of any disorderly
crowd, or any crowd gathered together for any unlawful purpose.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.7) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.08 FIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close to any building
or other structure or on any street or sidewalk pavement as to endanger it.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.8) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.09 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms or air gun in the town;
provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of
the law to discharge a firearm in the performance of his or her duty; nor to
any citizen to discharge a firearm when lawfully defending his or her person or
property.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.9) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.10 POSTING BILLS.
   It shall be unlawful to post any bills or advertisements on any public
property without the authority of the Mayor and Board of Trustees. It shall be
unlawful to post any bill of advertisement on any property without the written
consent of the owner thereof.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.10) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.11 PROSTITUTION.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to practice prostitution in the
town.
   (2)   Any person who performs, offers, or agrees to perform any of the
following acts for money commits an act of prostitution:
      (A)   Any act of sexual intercourse; or
      (B)   Any act of deviant sexual conduct.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.11) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.12 SOLICITING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit on any street, alley, or
public place in the town for the purpose of inducing any person to engage in
prostitution or any unlawful sexual intercourse of any kind.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.12) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.13 WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful to carry on the person any concealed weapons in the
town without first having secured a license to carry such concealed weapons
issued under the laws of the state.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.13) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.14 OBSCENITY.
   (1)   A person commits obscenity when, with knowledge of the nature of
content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which
would have disclosed the nature or content thereof, he or she:
      (A)   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver,
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (B)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance, or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (C)   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (D)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (E)   Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (F)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition applies
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      OBSCENE. A thing which, if considered as a whole, its predominant appeal
is to prurient interest, that is a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex,
or excretion, and if it goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in
description or representation of such matters. A thing is OBSCENE even though
the obscenity is latent, as in the case of undeveloped photographs.
   (3)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults, except
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience. Where circumstances or production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is utterly without redeeming social importance. In
any prosecution for any offense under this section, evidence shall be
admissible to show:
      (A)   The character of the audience for which the material was designed
or to which it was directed;
      (B)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have
on the behavior of such people;
      (C)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits of
the material, or absence thereof;
      (D)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state;
      (E)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or
other promotion of the material; and/or
      (F)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or disseminator.
   (4)   The creation, purchase, procurement, or possession of a mold, engraved
plate, or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for reproducing
multiple copies, or the possession of more than three copies of obscene
materials shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to disseminate.
   (5)   It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity that the
dissemination:
      (A)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age; and/or
      (B)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.14) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.15 SCAFFOLDS.
   Any scaffolds or ladders placed in such position that they overhang or can
fall onto any public street, alley, or other public place in the town shall be
firmly and properly constructed and safeguarded, and it shall be unlawful to
place or leave any tools or articles on any such place in such a manner that
the same can be or is in danger of falling onto such street, alley, sidewalk,
or other public place.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.15) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.16 ARTICLES ON WINDOWS.
   It shall be unlawful to place any moveable article on any window ledge, or
other place abutting on a public street, alley, or other place at a height
above four feet from the ground in such a manner that the same can be or is in
danger of falling onto such street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.16) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.17 OBSTRUCTING EXITS OR STAIRWAYS.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway,
aisle, corridor, or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school,
church, theater, assembly hall, lodge, or other public hall, or any building
used by two or more tenants or families in such a manner that it interferes
with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor, or exit.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.17) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.18 NOISES.
   It shall be unlawful to make or cause to be made any unnecessary noise or
sounds of volume of such a nature as to tend to cause annoyance to residences
of the town. It shall be unlawful to operate any pneumatic hammer, grinding or
crushing machine, mixing or leading machine, or any other machine, equipment,
or device in the town which makes or causes a noise in violation of any of the
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.18) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.19 FUEL TANKS.
   It shall be unlawful to install or maintain any fuel oil, gas, or liquid gas
tanks in the town unless such tank and all equipment connected therewith is
installed and maintained in accordance with the rules of the State Fire Marshal
or of any other state agency having jurisdiction thereof.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.19) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.20 UNUSED OR ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any unused or abandoned refrigerator, icebox,
or deepfreeze or other freezers to remain in any place accessible to any child,
without first removing the doors or breaking the hinges of the door or doors,
of any such icebox, refrigerator, or freezer.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.20) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.21 CANNABIS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess marijuana, hashish, and other
substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis
Sativa, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any
part of such plant; and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, including
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other cannabinol derivatives, whether
produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of such
plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of
germination.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.21) Penalty, see Sec.
130.99
Sec. 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 19.22)
CHAPTER 131: CURFEW
Section
   
131.01   Regulations
   
131.02   Permitting a person to violate curfew
   
131.03   Detaining child
 
   
131.99   Penalty
Sec. 131.01 REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person of less than 18 years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway in
the town at the following times unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian,
or other responsible companion at least 21 years of age unless engaged in a
business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than 18 years of age to perform:
   (1)   Between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sundays through Thursdays,
inclusive; and
   (2)   Between 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Fridays and Saturdays.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.1.1) Penalty, see Sec.
131.99
Sec. 131.02 PERMITTING A PERSON TO VIOLATE CURFEW.
   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate the
provisions of Sec.
131.01.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.1.2) Penalty, see Sec.
131.99
Sec. 131.03 DETAINING CHILD.
   Each member of the police force, while on duty, is hereby authorized to
detain any person willfully violating the provisions of Sec.
131.01 until the parent or legal guardian of the child shall take him or her
into custody, but such officer shall, immediately upon taking custody of the
child, communicate with the parent or legal guardian.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.1.3)
Sec. 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with Sec.
10.99, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.1.4)
CHAPTER 132: FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
132.01   Fireworks restrictions
   
132.02   Fireworks defined
   
132.03   Dynamite
   
132.04   Nitroglycerine; TNT
   
132.05   Gunpowder
   
132.06   Rules of State Fire Marshal
 
   
132.99   Penalty
Sec. 132.01 FIREWORKS RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to store, possess, or ignite any fireworks in the town,
excepting as may be necessary for the performance of a licensed public
exhibition of pyrotechnics, as hereinafter provided for. Any such storage,
possession, or ignition must be under the supervision of and subject to the
approval of the Fire Marshal. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale
any fireworks or pyrotechnics in the town; provided, that public exhibitions of
fireworks and pyrotechnics may be given if a permit therefor be granted by the
Mayor and Board of Trustees. Such exhibitions shall be given subject to the
supervision of the Fire Marshal or of some person designated by him or her.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.3.1) Penalty, see Sec.
132.99
Sec. 132.02 FIREWORKS DEFINED.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition applies unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
FIREWORKS. Any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion,
deflagration, or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons,
in which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire
underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman
candles, sparklers, bombs, or other FIREWORKS of like construction and any
FIREWORKS containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances
producing visual effects; provided, however, that the term FIREWORKS shall not
include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing 25 hundredths grain or less of explosive compound are
used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion, and toy pistol paper or plastic
caps which contain less than 20 hundredths grain of explosive mixture, the sale
and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.3.2)
Sec. 132.03 DYNAMITE.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or store any dynamite in the town in excess of
five pounds on any one premises or in any one building.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.3.3) Penalty, see Sec.
132.99
Sec. 132.04 NITROGLYCERINE; TNT.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the explosive
commonly known as TNT in the town in any quantities, excepting for medical or
laboratory purposes, and for such purposes no more than one-quarter ounce shall
be stored in any one building or premises.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.3.4) Penalty, see Sec.
132.99
Sec. 132.05 GUNPOWDER.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or store any black powder or gunpowder or
guncotton in excess of 15 pounds on any one premises in the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.3.5) Penalty, see Sec.
132.99
Sec. 132.06 RULES OF STATE FIRE MARSHAL.
   All explosives kept or stored in the town shall be kept and stored in
accordance with the rules enforced by the State Fire Marshal, with regard
thereto.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.3.6) Penalty, see Sec.
132.99
Sec. 132.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in
accordance with Sec. 10.99, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 18.3.7)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL LAND USAGE REGULATIONS
      
151.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC WAYS
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL LAND USAGE REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   Town Plan
   
150.02   Historic district
Sec. 150.01 TOWN PLAN.
   The official Town Plan shall consist of the following:
   (1)   The Town Plan heretofore approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees
shall consist of a map of the town, charts and diagrams showing proposed
additions to and improvements of the town streets, parks, public buildings,
sewage or disposal system, water system, and street lighting system;
   (2)   The specifications for street construction and paving hitherto
established by the Mayor and Board of Trustees;
   (3)   The zoning ordinance; and
   (4)   The subdivision control ordinance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.5.1)
Sec. 150.02 HISTORIC DISTRICT.
   Be it ordained by the President and Board of Trustees of the town that
property owners of historic structures be guided as follows.
   (1)   The historic district of the town shall be designated by the zoned
local business district in the blocks of 200, 300, 400, and 500 on Locust and
Walnut Streets. Any structure built prewar 1942 or older shall be considered an
HISTORIC STRUCTURE and shall be subject to this section.
      (A)   A property owner shall not permit a structure to deteriorate to the
point that it produces a detrimental effect on a structure or the historic
district or landmark.
      (B)   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound, and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare.
      (C)   All exterior surfaces, including, but not limited to, doors, door
and window frames, cornices, porches, and trim, shall be maintained in good
condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be
protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering
or treatment. Peeling, flaking, and chipped paint shall be eliminated and
surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the
building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights, shall be
maintained weather-resistant and watertight.
      (D)   All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration
and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. All
foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks
to maintain structural integrity and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents. All exterior walls shall be free from holes,
breaks, loose or rotting materials, and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface-coated where required to prevent deterioration.
      (E)   The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight, and not have defects
that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains,
gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from
obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.
      (F)   All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall
facings, and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair
with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
      (G)   All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes, exhaust ducts, and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained
in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition.
When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from
the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-
coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
      (H)   Every stair, ramp, balcony, porch, deck, or other walking surface
shall comply with the provisions of zoning ordinances.
      (I)   Every exterior stairway, deck, porch, and balcony, and all
appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good
repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
      (J)   All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar fixtures
shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.
      (K)   Every window, skylight, door, and frame shall be kept in sound
condition, good repair, and weathertight. All glazing materials shall be
maintained free from cracks and holes on open-able and fixed windows.
      (L)   All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every
structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
      (M)   Every owner and/or operator of any building who rents or leases an
historic building shall supply heat and are required to maintain a temperature
of not less than 55°F when the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
freezing temperature, 32°F.
   (2)   The historic building district is determined as according to the town
zoning map to be the central business district of the town, which is located on
Locust and Walnut Streets in the 200, 300, 400, and 500 blocks on the zoning
map. HISTORIC STRUCTURES shall be defined as all buildings erected prior to
1942 pre-war structures.
(Ord. passed 3-9-2017) Penalty, see Sec.
10.99
CHAPTER 151: STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Supervision
   
151.02   Construction
   
151.03   Bond
   
151.04   Specifications
   
151.05   Injury to pavements
   
151.06   Repairs
   
151.07   Defects
   
151.08   Obstructions
   
151.09   Barricades
   
151.10   Disturbing barricades
   
151.11   Private use
   
151.12   Encroachments
   
151.13   Drains
   
151.14   Poles and wires
   
151.15   Gas pumps
   
151.16   Openings
   
151.17   Barbed wire fences; electric current fences
   
151.18   Deposits on streets
   
151.19   Deposits on sidewalks
   
151.20   Excavations
   
151.21   View at corners
   
151.22   Driveways
   
151.23   Overhanging signs and awnings
Trees and Shrubs
   
151.35   Planting
   
151.36   Removals
   
151.37   Injury
   
151.38   Advertisements or notices
   
151.39   Dangerous trees
   
151.40   Dangerous limbs
   
151.41   Wires
   
151.42   Poles and utility wires
   
151.43   Gas pipes
   
151.44   Excavations
Driveway Culverts, Roadside Underdrains, and Curb Cuts
   
151.55   Driveway culverts
   
151.56   Roadside underdrain
   
151.57   Curb cuts
   
151.58   Permits
   
151.59   Variances
   
151.60   Notice of violation
   
151.61   Administration
 
   
151.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Superintendent of Public Works, see
Chapter 31
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 151.01 SUPERVISION.
   All public streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public ways shall be under
the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works. He or she shall have
supervision over all work therein, and the cleaning thereof, and shall be
charged with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such
public places (except traffic ordinances) and is hereby authorized to enforce
such ordinances.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.1)
Sec. 151.02 CONSTRUCTION.
   It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public way, or to repair the same without having
first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to
the Town Clerk, and shall state the location of the intended pavement or repair
and the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is to do the actual
construction work. No such permit shall be issued except on order of the Mayor
and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.2) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.03 BOND.
   Each applicant shall file a bond or policy, in the sum of $50,000 with
sureties to be approved by the Mayor and Board of Trustees, conditioned to
indemnify the town from any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken
or the manner of doing the same.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.3) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.04 SPECIFICATIONS.
   All street and sidewalk pavement shall be made in conformity with the
specifications approved from time to time by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.4) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.05 INJURY TO PAVEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or
injure any newly laid street or alley pavement while the same is guarded by a
warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any street, sidewalk, or
alley pavement.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.5) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.06 REPAIRS.
   All public streets, alleys, and sidewalk pavement shall be in good repair.
Such repair work, whether done by the town or the abutting owner, shall be
under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.6) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.07 DEFECTS.
   It shall be the duty of every town officer or employee becoming cognizant to
any defect in any street, alley, or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to
report the same to the Superintendent of Public Works as soon as possible.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.7)
Sec. 151.08 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create, or maintain any
obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, except as may
be specifically authorized by ordinance, or by the Superintendent of Public
Works.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.8) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.09 BARRICADES.
   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk, or other
public place, or making an excavation in the same, shall maintain suitable
barricades to prevent injury of any person or vehicle by reason of the work.
Such barricades shall be protected by suitable lights at nighttime. Any defect
in any such pavement shall be barricaded to prevent injury, and any person
properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place shall guard
such opening or excavation while the same remains open, by proper barricades
and lights.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.9) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.10 DISTURBING BARRICADES.
   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricades or lights
lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or opening in
any public street, alley, or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.10) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.11 PRIVATE USE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk, or other
public place, as space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale, or to
write or mark any signs or advertisements on any such pavements, unless
approval is first received from the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.11) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.12 ENCROACHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.12) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.13 DRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.13) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.14 POLES AND WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or to maintain any poles or
wires over any public place, street, alley, or other public way without first
having secured permission from the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.14) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.15 GAS PUMPS.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or erect any gasoline pump or tank in any
public street, alley, or sidewalk.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.15) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.16 OPENINGS.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway
in any public street, alley, or sidewalk, or other public place, without a
permit from the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
   (2)   All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable
strong cover or railing, to the approval of the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.16) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.17 BARBED WIRE FENCES; ELECTRIC CURRENT FENCES.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or construct any fence composed in whole or
part of barbed wire, or with any similar materials, designed to cause injury to
persons, or any wire charged with electrical current, anywhere within the town,
except to protect industrial property, in which case, barbed wire must be a
least six feet above the sidewalk and extend inward of property.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.17) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.18 DEPOSITS ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any waste material, or other
articles which may cause injury to any person, animal, property, or the
pavement thereof. Rock or other materials may be deposited in streets
preparatory to delivery for use; provided, that such deposit does not reduce
the usable width of the street or roadway at that point to less than 18 feet,
and provided that such material or rock, other than material used in actual
building construction, shall not be permitted to remain in such street for more
than three hours. Any such material or rock shall be guarded by lights if the
same remains upon any street during nighttime.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.18) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.19 DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any waste material,
or any glass or other article which might cause injury to persons, animals,
property, or the pavement thereof. Merchandise or other articles may be
deposited on sidewalks preparatory to delivery; provided, that the usable width
of the sidewalk is not thereby reduced to less than four feet; and provided,
that no such article shall remain on such walk for more than one-half hour.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.19) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.20 EXCAVATIONS.
   Any person making any excavation shall refill the same properly and shall
restore the surface to its condition before the excavation was made, as soon as
possible. All such excavations, refills, and resurfacing shall be made subject
to the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.20) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.21 VIEW AT CORNERS.
   It shall be unlawful to construct, or maintain or permit to remain, any
fence or other structure, or any bushes or other plant, on a corner lot within
50 feet of the street line, which obstructs the view, at a height of more than
five feet above the level of the adjacent street pavement.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.21) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.22 DRIVEWAYS.
   (1)   Permit required. No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or
animals across any sidewalk in the town without first having obtained a permit
therefor from the Mayor and Board of Trustees. No permit for construction of a
driveway for commercial use, or for the habitual use of other than the owner or
occupant of the premises served, shall be issued except upon the order of the
Mayor and the Board of Trustees. All permits shall be subject to approval of
the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.2.1)
   (2)   Grade surfaces. No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to
leave a step, sharp depression, or other obstruction on the sidewalk. The grade
shall be as nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It
shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway where the same
crosses the sidewalk constructed of such materials as to render it slippery or
hazardous to pedestrians or to have the grade of such portion vary from the
grade of the sidewalk, or be other than level.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.2.2)
   (3)   Specifications. Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in
compliance with specifications adopted by the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.2.3)
   (4)   Repair. It shall be the duty of the person maintaining the driveway to
keep the same in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk, and free from
obstruction and openings.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.2.4) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.23 OVERHANGING SIGNS AND AWNINGS.
   (1)   Permits. No person shall erect or maintain any sign, signboard, or
rigid canopy over any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way in the town
without having first obtained a permit therefor as herein provided. Permits for
signs, canopies, or signboards shall be issued by the Mayor and Board of
Trustees, and shall designate the location of the proposed structure.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.3.1)
   (2)   Construction. All signs and canopies extending over any public
sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place must be securely fastened and
constructed so that there will be no danger of the same being dislodged by
ordinary winds or falling from other cause.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.3.2)
   (3)   Height above sidewalk. The lowest part of any such canopy, sign, or of
any no rigid awning, or any support thereof, which extends over any public way
shall be at least ten feet above the level of the walk or public way over which
it extends; but no such sign shall be maintained over any public way used by
vehicles if any part of its support or of the sign is less than 15 feet above
the level of such public way.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.3.3)
   (4)   Inspections. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public
Works to inspect or cause to be inspected every sign, canopy, or awning which
extends over any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public way. If any such sign
or canopy is found to be insecurely fastened, he or she shall report this fact
to the owner of the sign or to the owner or occupant of the premises on which
it is fastened. If the sign or canopy is not made secure within ten days after
such notice, it may be torn down on order of the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.3.4) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
TREES AND SHRUBS
Sec. 151.35 PLANTING.
   It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or shrub in any public street or
parkway or other public place without having first secured a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Town Clerk, and shall be
referred by him or her to the Committee on Parks and Buildings.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.1) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.36 REMOVALS.
   It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any street,
parkway, or other public place without having first secured a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Town Clerk, and shall be
referred by him or her to the Committee on Parks and Buildings for approval
before permission shall be granted.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.2) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.37 INJURY.
   It shall be unlawful to injure any tree or shrub planted in any such public
place.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.3) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.38 ADVERTISEMENTS OR NOTICES.
   It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement, or notice to any
tree or shrub in any street, parkway, or other public place.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.4) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.39 DANGEROUS TREES.
   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street, or other public
place shall be trimmed by the owner of the abutting premises on which such
trees or shrubs grow so that the obstruction shall cease.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.5) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.40 DANGEROUS LIMBS.
   Any limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public
way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree
or shrub grows or stands.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.6) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.41 WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or other rope to any tree without
permission of the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.7) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.42 POLES AND UTILITY WIRES.
   Any person or company given the right to maintain poles and wires in the
streets, alleys, or other public places in the town shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be
possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed and subject
to the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works, so that no injury
shall be done to the poles or wires or shrubs and trees by contact.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.8) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.43 GAS PIPES.
   Any person maintaining any gas pipe in the town shall, in the absence of
provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such pipes free from
leaks.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.9) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.44 EXCAVATIONS.
   In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care shall
be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub, wherever possible.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.10) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
DRIVEWAY CULVERTS, ROADSIDE UNDERDRAINS, AND CURB CUTS
Sec. 151.55 DRIVEWAY CULVERTS.
   (1)   All driveways, except those leading onto streets improved with curb
and gutter, shall have culverts installed in accordance with the following
standards unless otherwise approved by the Administrator of the Town Zoning
Board of Appeals.
   (2)   Pipe material shall conform to State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction for pipe culverts type
IA. The culvert shall be sized adequately to handle the drainage area to be
served and shall be at least equal in diameter to the nearest crossroad culvert
serving this drainage area. In no case, however, shall a pipe culvert of less
than 12 inches in diameter be installed. The culvert shall be placed in line
with the existing road ditch horizontally and shall be placed at a vertical
depth to provide the necessary drainage of the existing waterway. Minimum depth
of cover over the top of the culvert pipe to the surface of the driveway shall
be six inches. If the existing ditch is not of sufficient depth to provide
these minimum standards, the builder shall regrade the existing ditch as
directed by the Zoning Board Administrator to provide the necessary drainage
way.
   (3)   All areas disturbed in the course of this construction shall be
repaired to their original condition, and all waterways shall be hand raked and
seeded as directed by the Zoning Board Administrator.
   (4)   Culvert pipe shall be of sufficient length to extend from toe of slope
to toe of slope of the driveway cross-section. In no case shall these slopes be
steeper than three feet horizontal per each vertical foot as measured from the
flow line or invert of the culvert to the edge of the driveway.
   (5)   The driveway surface shall be graded so that it meets the edge of the
existing street surface and drains toward the culvert at a minimum slope of
0.5%. The low point of the driveway shall not be closer to the street than the
existing ditch but in no case shall it be closer than four feet.
   (6)   All work and materials used on the town right-of-way shall be in
accordance with the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as
well as Exhibit “A” attached to the ordinance from which this section is
derived.
   (7)   No fences, posts, retaining walls, shrubs, or curbs shall be
constructed along driveways between the right-of-way line or property line and
the street pavement, except a curb which does not project more than six inches
of above the adjacent ground line may be constructed between the existing road
ditch and the property line when approved by the Zoning Board Administrator.
   (8)   Reflectors may be placed at the top of slope in line with the culvert.
Reflectors shall not exceed four inches in any dimension and shall not project
more than 24 inches above the low point of the driveway surface.
   (9)   All driveways shall cross the existing or proposed sidewalk at
sidewalk grade causing neither a depression nor a hump in the sidewalk without
the express permission of the Zoning Board Administrator.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.5.1) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.56 ROADSIDE UNDERDRAIN.
   (1)   Where authorized by the Zoning Board Administrator, an underdrain
system may be installed in lieu of the roadside ditch and shall be constructed
in accordance with the following standards unless otherwise approved by the
Zoning Board Administrator.
   (2)   Pipe material shall conform to State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction for pipe culverts type
IA. The underdrain shall be sized adequately to handle the drainage area to be
served and shall be at least equal in diameter to the nearest crossroad culvert
serving this drainage area. In no case, however, shall an underdrain of less
than 12 inches in diameter be installed. The minimum pipe slope shall be 0.2%.
   (3)   Each lot shall have, at minimum, an inlet structure on the downstream
end of the underdrain. Additional inlet structures shall be required, at the
direction of the Zoning Board Administrator, when necessary to prevent the
obstruction of other drainage ways or to prevent ponding. Each inlet structure
shall be constructed with an inside dimension of two feet by two feet square.
It shall be constructed on block or brick and mortar with a minimum wall
thickness of four inches where walls are 18 inches high or less. If greater
than 18 inches high, the wall thickness shall be eight inches. It shall be set
on a Portland cement concrete base slab with a minimum thickness of six inches.
The inlet shall be covered with a frame and grate suitable for use in streets
or traffic ways (similar to Neenah Foundries No. R3405 or approved equal). The
surface of the grate shall be laid flush with the flow line of the new surface
drainage swale so as to deposit all surface waters from the adjacent road and
lot area into the underdrain system.
   (4)   Culvert pipe on the upstream end of the underdrain shall be connected
to any existing inlet structure. If no inlet structure exists on the upstream
end, the ground at the upstream end shall be sloped from the new surface
drainage swale to the existing surface drainage swale with a slope not steeper
than three feet horizontal per each vertical foot. The ground on the downstream
side of a downstream inlet structure, if no adjoining underdrain exists, shall
be similarly sloped. If a downstream inlet structure exists between two
driveways, as shown on Exhibit “B” attached to the ordinance from which this
section is derived, and insufficient spare exists between the inlet structure
and the downstream driveway to accommodate the required slope, then the
underdrain leading from the inlet structure shall be connected to the existing
downstream driveway culvert, and the entire area between the driveways shall be
filled and graded so that the surface of the inlet structure grate is flush
with the new surface drainage swale.
   (5)   All areas disturbed in the course of this construction shall be
repaired to their original condition, and all waterways shall be hand raked and
seeded as directed by the Zoning Board Administrator.
   (6)   All work and materials used on the town right-of-way shall be in
accordance with the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction as
well as Exhibit “B” attached to the ordinance from which this section is
derived.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.5.2) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.57 CURB CUTS.
   (1)   Where authorized by the Zoning Board Administrator, curbs may be cut
to allow the construction of access ways onto property from the street, and all
curb cuts shall be performed and access ways constructed in accordance with the
following standards unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Board
Administrator.
   (2)   The following standards shall apply to curb cuts and access ways
affecting commercial property.
      (A)   No curb cut shall exceed 35 feet in width at the curb line.
      (B)   Where more than one curb cut on a single street serving a single
parcel of land is contemplated, there shall be no more than two cuts, each not
to exceed 35 feet in width, and there shall be not less than six feet of curb
between the two cuts.
      (C)   On all corner lots in commercial zoning districts, or used for
commercial purposes, access shall be from the lower classified street, unless
the lot has access frontage only on the major street.
      (D)   Commercial access ways shall meet or exceed the following minimum
standards. Portland cement concrete aprons shall have a minimum thickness of
six inches and shall be constructed with air entrainment cement, proportioned
for a compressive strength of 4,500 psi in 28 days. Bituminous concrete
surfacing may be substituted for concrete provided there is an aggregate base
course of eight inches minimum thickness, surfaced with one and one-half inches
of binder course and one and one-half inches of surface course for a total
thickness of three inches of bituminous concrete class I.
      (E)   Commercial access ways shall be constructed in accordance with the
details shown on Exhibits “C” and “E” attached to the ordinance from which this
section is derived.
   (3)   The following standards shall apply to curb cuts and access ways
affecting residential property.
      (A)   Where the proposed curb cut and access way is for residential use,
the curb cut shall not be less than ten feet in width nor greater than 26 feet
in width at the curb line. Where a circular access way is to be constructed,
the total of both curb cuts shall not exceed 26 feet. No curb cut shall exceed
the width of the driveway by more than eight feet.
      (B)   Residential access ways shall meet or exceed the following minimum
standards. Portland cement concrete aprons shall have a minimum thickness of
four inches and shall be constructed with air entertainment cement,
proportioned for a compressive strength of 4,500 psi in 28 days. Bituminous
concrete surfacing may be substituted for concrete, provided there is an
aggregate base course of seven inches minimum thickness and two and one-half
inches of bituminous concrete surface course type 5-5.
      (C)   Residential access ways shall be constructed in accordance with the
details shown on Exhibits “D” and “E” attached to the ordinance from which this
section is derived.
   (4)   On corner lots, a curb cut shall be permitted on a major or collector
street if it is a minimum of 40 feet, and on a minor street if it is a minimum
of 24 feet, from the corner of the front and side property lines nearest the
street intersection.
   (5)   All materials furnished for constructing access ways between the curb
and the property line shall conform to State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
   (6)   Any person, firm, or corporation receiving a curb cut permit must
agree in writing to reconstruct the curb and gutter to its original condition
in the event that the access way usage is abandoned due to abandonment of the
property or a change in use which excludes the need for the access way.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.5.3) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.58 PERMITS.
   (1)   No person shall begin construction of driveway culverts or roadside
underdrains, nor shall any person break or cut away any portion of any curb or
gutter now or hereafter laid or established on any street, alley, or public
way, without first having secured a permit from the Zoning Board Administrator.
The Zoning Board Administrator, however, shall not issue any permit under this
subchapter for any private access way or for the breaking or removing of any
curb where the proposed opening would create any undue hazard to pedestrians or
create a traffic hazard.
   (2)   Any person intending to begin such construction or curb cut shall so
notify the Zoning Board Administrator in writing, and shall submit plans or
drawings showing the nature and location of the proposed construction or curb
cut. Also, before a permit will be issued for a curb cut onto a State right-of-
way a copy of an approved permit from the State Department of Transportation
shall be submitted to the Zoning Board Administrator.
   (3)   Before issuance of the permit, the Zoning Board Administrator shall
inspect the site of the proposed construction and shall inform the applicant in
writing of any changes to the plans or drawings necessary to ensure compliance
with this subchapter. Also, any person installing an access way through a curb
break shall notify the Zoning Board Administrator not less than 24 hours prior
to the placing of concrete on improved streets, so that the forms may be
inspected prior to the pouring of the concrete.
   (4)   After completion of the construction, the applicant shall so notify
the Zoning Board Administrator who shall inspect the completed construction to
insure that it has been built in compliance with this subchapter and with any
requirements specified upon the issuance of the permit. If the completed
construction is satisfactory, the Zoning Board Administrator shall issue a
certificate of compliance so stating.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.5.4) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.59 VARIANCES.
   (1)   The Town Board of Trustees may approve variances to the standards
contained in this subchapter, provided that no variance shall be approved
unless the Town Board shall find that all of the following criteria have been
met:
      (A)   Because of special conditions or circumstances, a substantial
hardship to the owner of the property would result, as distinguished from
purely a financial hardship or a mere inconvenience, from strict compliance
with the standards contained in this subchapter;
      (B)   The conditions or circumstances upon which the request for a
variance is based are unique to the property affected and are not applicable
generally to other property;
      (C)   The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
safety, health, or welfare, or injurious to other property; and
      (D)   In approving variances, the Town Board may require such other
conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards contained in this subchapter.
   (2)   A petition for any variance shall be submitted in writing to the
Zoning Board Administrator, signed by the person intending to undertake any
activity governed by this subchapter. The petition shall state fully the
grounds for the application and all facts relied upon by the petitioner. The
Zoning Board Administrator shall promptly forward the petition and any
available plans or drawings to the Town Board, and notify the petitioner of the
date set for consideration of the petition.
   (3)   The Town Board shall, within a reasonable time after receiving the
petition, consider the matter at a general or special meeting, at which time
the petitioner and all interested parties shall have the right to appear and
present evidence or argument. The Town Board shall grant or deny the petition
within 35 days of the meeting and shall send written notice of its decision to
the petitioner. The decision of the Town Board is final.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.5.5)
Sec. 151.60 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this subchapter
shall be served by the Zoning Board Administrator with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, make the necessary corrections and permanently cease all
violations stated.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.5.6) Penalty, see Sec.
151.99
Sec. 151.61 ADMINISTRATION.
   In the absence of a Zoning Board Administrator, or in the event of his or
her refusal or inability to perform the administrative functions stated in this
subchapter, those functions shall be performed by any person designated by the
Town Board.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.5.8)
Sec. 151.99 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec.
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (2)   Any person violating any provision of Sec.
151.01 to
151.21 shall be fined in accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.1.22)
   (3)   Any person violating any provision of Sec.
151.22 shall be fined in accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.2.5)
   (4)   Any person violating any provision of Sec.
151.35 to
151.44 shall be fined in accordance with Sec.
10.99 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.4.11)
   (5)   Any person who shall continue any violation of Sec.
151.55 to
151.61, beyond the time limit provided for in Sec.
151.58, shall be fined in an amount not less than $10 nor more than $100 for
each violation. Each day in which a violation shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, Sec. 8.5.7)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
   
152.01   Compliance required
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Procedure
   
152.04   Agreements as to improvements
   
152.05   Design standards
   
152.06   Required improvements
   
152.07   Plats and data
 
   
152.99   Penalty
Sec. 152.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No plat of subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the town shall
be approved excepting in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.4.1) Penalty, see Sec.
152.99
Sec. 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ALLEY. A public way which affords a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line within a lot or other parcel of land, so
designated on the plat of the proposed subdivision, between which, and the
adjacent boundary of the street upon which the lot abuts, the erection of an
enclosed structure or portion thereof is prohibited.
COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the
major street system, including the principal entrance streets of residence
development and the primary circulating streets within such a development.
CROSSWALK. A public or private right-of-way across a block to be used by
pedestrians and/or for underground utilities.
CUL-DE-SAC. A minor street having one open end and being terminated at the
other by a vehicular turnaround.
EASEMENT. The quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege, or
advantage in land without profit, existing distinct from the ownership of the
land, is granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public.
FINAL PLAT. A map or chart of a subdivision which has been accurately surveyed,
and such survey marked on the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots, and
other divisions thereof can be identified.
MAJOR STREET. A public thoroughfare with a high degree of traffic continuity
established by the thoroughfare plan in the Office Plan of the town.
OWNER. Includes the plural as well as the singular, and may mean either a
natural person, firm, association, partnership, private corporation, public or
quasi-public corporation, or combination of any of them.
PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map or plan of a proposed land division or subdivision.
STREET. A public or private thoroughfare which affords primary access by
pedestrians and vehicles to abutting property.
SUBDIVIDER. An owner who presents a subdivision plat for approval hereunder.
SUBDIVISION. Any division of any lot, area, or tract of land into two or more
lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of conveyance, transfer,
improvement, or sale, with the appurtenant streets, alleys, and easements,
dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of the
purchasers or subdividers within the part, lot area, or tract divided, except
that divisions exempted from the provisions of an act of the state legislature
entitled, “An Act to Revise the Law in Relation of Plats, approved March 21,
1984, as amended,” as set forth in Sec. 1(b) thereof are not deemed
SUBDIVISIONS for purposes of this chapter.
TENTATIVE APPROVAL. An approval with or without recommended alterations given
to a preliminary plat by the Town Board, and provides the necessary authority
to proceed with the preparation and presentation of the final plat.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.4.2)
Sec. 152.03 PROCEDURE.
   Before dividing any tract of land into two or more lots of less than five
acres in size, a subdivider shall:
   (1)   Cause to be prepared a preliminary plat together with improvement
plans and other supplementary material as specified in division (7) below. Six
copies of the preliminary plat shall be filed with the Town Board;
   (2)   Following review of the preliminary plat and accompanying supplemental
material and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and
the kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider, the Town
Board shall express its conditional approval and state the conditions of such
approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its
reasons in writing and deliver a copy of such reasons to the subdivider;
   (3)   The action of the Town Board and Town Engineer shall be noted on two
copies of the preliminary plat, to which shall be attached any conditions
required. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained
by the Town Board;
   (4)   Conditional approval of the preliminary plat shall be construed to be
an expression of approval of the general layout submitted as a guide to the
preparation of the final plat and to be assurance to the subdivider that the
final plat will be approved if it conforms to the terms of the conditionally
approved preliminary plat;
   (5)   Not later than one year after conditional approval of the preliminary
plat, or such additional time as the Planning Committee may allow, the
subdivider may submit an intended final plat of the subdivision and two
reproductions thereof to the Town Board;
   (6)   The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved, and
it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that
such portion conforms to all requirements of this chapter;
   (7)   If conditional approval has not been obtained, a subdivider may file
five copies of an intended plat and all required supplementary material as
specified, with the Town Clerk, for distribution to the Town Board;
   (8)   Within 60 working days after receipt of plats and supplementary
material, the Town Engineer shall inform the subdivider that the plans and data
as submitted or as modified do or do not meet the requirements of this chapter.
When the plans and data do not meet such requirements, the Town Engineer shall
state the reasons in writing and deliver a copy to the subdivider;
   (9)   Final approval of the final plat shall be granted by the Town Board on
the basis of its conformity with a preliminary plat as approved, and with all
pertinent laws, rules, regulations, and particularly with the technical
requirements of Sec.
152.06 and
152.07 and with the plan, or conforms with the existing subdivision;
   (10)   In the event only a portion of an approved preliminary plat is
presented for final approval, the Town Board may notify the subdivider in
writing whether or not the preliminary approval of the unrecorded portion has
been renewed for one year. In the absence of such written notification, the
subdivider may, within one year after conditional approval of the preliminary
plat, apply to the Town Board for extension of the conditional approval of the
preliminary plat without being required to pay additional fees;
   (11)   Within 60 days after approval of the final plat by the Town Board,
said plat shall be filed by the subdivider with the County Recorder, and if not
so filed, shall have no validity and shall not be recorded without re-
certification by the Town Board. All plats (original tracings of said plats),
after being recorded, shall become the property of the county;
   (12)   At the time the first application for preliminary or final approval
is presented, the subdivider shall pay a plat review fee; and
   (13)   In order to conserve time, effort, and expense, the subdivider may
consult with the Town Board prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.4.3) Penalty, see Sec.
152.99
Sec. 152.04 AGREEMENTS AS TO IMPROVEMENTS.
   The final plat to be placed on record shall be accompanied by a statement
signed by the owner and subdivider, setting forth the following:
   (1)   Plans and specifications for such improvements previously approved by
the Town Engineer clearly describing the same;
   (2)   Agreement executed by the owner and subdivider wherein they agree to
make and install the improvements provided for in Sec.
152.06, in accordance with the plans and specifications accompanying the final
plat; and that all such improvements shall be inspected during the course of
construction by an inspector appointed by the Town Board, salaries and other
costs in connection with such inspections to be paid by the owner and
subdivider, such costs to be based on the reasonable customary charges for such
service; and
   (3)   In the event that the Town Board, by motion, approves the final plat,
it shall withhold its approval of the plat until an agreement signed by the
subdivider, as provided in division (B) above, shall be given, supported by a
bond executed by an acceptable surety company in an amount equal to the
estimated costs of construction of the required improvements (which estimated
costs shall be determined by the Town Engineer). The surety will be subject to
the condition that the improvements will be completed within two years after
approval of the final plat. As an alternative, the subdivider may deposit cash
with the town in place of said surety bond.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.4.4)
Sec. 152.05 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following standards and principles of design shall guide the laying out
of subdivisions.
   (1)   General. The design of the subdivision shall be in harmony with and
shall conform to the plan or existing subdivision and shall be in accordance
with good subdivision design principles not otherwise set forth herein. Natural
features, such as distinctive trees or vegetation, streams, ponds, hilltops,
bluffs, creek bottoms, and outlook views, shall be preserved and enhanced
wherever possible. In laying out a subdivision, due consideration shall be
given to such aesthetic features existing within the tract being subdivided and
which may add to the aesthetic quality of existing nearby subdivisions.
   (2)   Streets. The course, width, grade, and location of all streets shall
conform to the plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety,
and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the land to be
served by such streets and shall conform to the following design standards.
      (A)   Where not shown on the plan, the arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either:
         (1)   Provide for the continuation or projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding areas;
         (2)   Conform to the thoroughfare plan where applicable; or
         (3)   Conform to topographic or other conditions where continuance or
projection of existing streets is impracticable or undesirable from the
community viewpoint.
      (B)   Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through
traffic will be discouraged.
      (C)   Access to an existing or proposed major street or a railroad right-
of-way or rail crossing shall be limited to a minimum number of intersections,
and determined with due regard for sight distance, distance between
intersections, approach grades, and requirements for future grade separations.
      (D)   No street grade shall be less than 0.4% nor more than 7%.
      (E)   (1)   Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 85
degrees.
         (2)   Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than 125
feet are prohibited.
      (F)   (1)   Where connecting street lines deflect from each other more
than ten degrees, they shall be connected with a curve with a radius adequate
to assure sight distance.
         (2)   A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
curves on major and collector streets where the curve radius is less than 500
feet.
      (G)   Alleys shall not be permitted in residential districts.
      (H)   (1)   Street right-of-ways widths not shown in the plant shall not
be less than as follows:
            A.   Collector streets: 80 feet;
            B.   Minor (direct access streets): 60 feet;
            C.   Marginal access streets: 54 feet; and
            D.   Alleys: 25 feet.
         (2)   In a subdivision that adjoins or includes an existing street
that does not conform to the right-of-way width required in division (2)(H)(1)
above, one-half of the additional width shall be provided along each side of
such street for the entire frontage included within the land being subdivided,
or as the Town Board may determine is proper.
         (3)   Dead-end streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be
longer than 600 feet, unless limitation of the site by reason of topography or
existing development make impractical development except with a longer length.
They shall be provided with a circular turnaround having an outside surface
diameter of at least 80 feet and right-of-way line diameter of at least 100
feet. The center of the turnaround shall be located between the centerline of
the street and its left right-of-way, facing into the turnaround.
         (4)   All streets shall be public, unless the subdivider submits
sufficient evidence to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Town Board and
Town Engineer that there can be no public interest in a proposed street, which,
upon approval, shall be clearly marked “private road” on the plat.
         (5)   Reserved strips controlling access to street rights-of-way shall
not be permitted except upon approval of the Town Board.
      (I)   (1)   The continuation of an existing street shall have the same
name. The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing
street within the area served by the same post office or Fire Department.
         (2)   If a proposed subdivision is in close proximity to a
municipality which has adopted a street numbering system, the lots within the
subdivision shall be assigned street numbers in accordance with that municipal
street numbering system, where practicable.
         (3)   Easements. Easements across lots for utilities, watercourses,
drainage ways, channels, or streams shall not be less than ten feet wide and
shall be adjacent to or centered on lot lines.
         (4)   Blocks.
            (A)   The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined as
to:
               (1)   Provision of adequate building sites for the special type
of use contemplated;
               (2)   Requirements as to lot size and dimensions;
               (3)   Needs for convenient access circulation, control, and
safety of street traffic; and
               (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
            (B)   Block length shall not exceed 1,320 feet.
            (C)   In cases where the block length exceeds 600 feet and where
deemed essential by the Town Board to provide pedestrian circulation to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, and other community facilities, an
easement dedicated to the public for a crosswalk not less than ten feet wide
shall be provided.
         (5)   Lots.
            (A)   All provisions of the town zoning ordinance concerning lots
shall apply, including lot area, width, and depth. No parcel, remainder, gore,
outlet, or remnant of land which is part of the tract being subdivided shall be
created which, by reason of lot width, depth, area, frontage, topography, or
lack of access thereto, cannot be used as a zoning lot, or be subject to
further subdivision in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Any remaining
parcel or outlet which cannot be made to comply with the foregoing shall be
eliminated by combining the area thereof with one or more adjoining lots which
do comply, or by conveying the same for appropriate public use to a public
body, subject to its acceptance of same.
            (B)   The lots, shape, and orientation shall be appropriate for the
location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use
contemplated.
            (C)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided
except where essential to provide separation of residential development from
major streets or to overcome specific disadvantage of topography and
orientation.
            (D)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or
radial to street lines.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.4.5) Penalty, see Sec.
152.99
Sec. 152.06 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (1)   General.
      (A)   No grading, tree removal, site work, or installation of any
required improvements shall be commenced until the preliminary plat has been
approved.
      (B)   All grading, site work, or installation of any required
improvements shall be done in such manner as to prevent flooding, washing,
erosion, silting, or other impairment to adjacent properties, storm drainage
channels, bodies of water, or adjoining streets.
      (C)   No trees, tree stumps, brush, or similar material shall be buried
or used as fill in any area of a subdivision to be traversed by a road, or
which is likely to be in or adjacent to an individual sewage disposal system or
similar use.
   (2)   Monuments. Monuments shall be placed by a state registered land
surveyor at all block corners, angle points, points of tangency, or curves in
streets, and at such intermediate points as shall be required by the Town
Engineer. The monuments shall be of such material, size, and length as may be
approved by the Town Engineer.
   (3)   Streets.
      (A)   Streets (and alleys where provided) shall be completed to grades
shown on the plat, profiles, and cross-sections as needed and approved by the
Town Engineer.
      (B)   Streets and alleys shall be graded, surfaced, and improved to
dimensions and standards herein.
      (C)   Prior to placing the street surface, adequate subsurface drainage
for the streets, and all utilities under the streets shall be provided or
installed by the subdivide. Upon the completion of the street and alley
improvements, plats and profiles as built shall be filed with the Town
Engineer.
      (D)   (1)   Streets other than residential streets shall have such right-
of-way widths as are indicated on the thoroughfare plan, or as specified in
Sec. 152.05.
         (2)   The Town Engineer shall also make such requirements as to type
of pavement, and as to curbs, gutters, or sidewalks as he or she deems to be
necessary for such street. However, the subdivider shall be required to improve
the street only to the width required by the current and immediate needs of his
or her subdivision consistent with standards specified herein.
      (E)   (1)   Utility and street improvements shall be provided in each new
subdivision in accordance with standards and requirements described in the
following schedules.
         (2)   The standards and specifications may vary for each general type
of development, as follows:
            A.   For apartment, garden apartment, row house, multi-family
dwelling types, improvements to be in accord with Standard A in division (3)(E)
(3) below;
            B.   For single-family detached dwellings with lot widths of less
than 75 feet improvements to be in accord with Standard B in division (3)(E)(3)
below;
            C.   For single-family detached dwellings with a lot area of 7,500
square feet or greater and a lot width at the setback line of 75 feet or
greater, improvements to be in accord with Standard C in division (3)(E)(3)
below; and
            D.   For commercial or industrial subdivisions and/or other planned
developments, the standards shall be determined by and approved by the Town
Board.
         (3)   The schedules of minimum requirements for utilities are as
follows.
 
Standard Street Improvements
A B C
X X      Public water
X X      Public sanitary sewer public storm sewer
X X      Streets: standard
 
Standard Classification R.O.W. 11 in. Lanes Parking
A B C
X X X    (1)(2)         80 in. 2            16 in.
Notes to Table:
(1)   Engineering soil study required.
(2)   Portland cement concrete.
 
Width  Base (1) Surface (1)
(2)
38 in. 10 ft.   2 ft. binder*
                2 ft. surface**
Notes to Table:
*Bituminous concrete binder course.
**Bituminous concrete surface course.
(1)   Shall conform to State Department of Public Works and Buildings booklet
entitled “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction” dated
July 2, 1973, and all supplemental specifications.
(2)   Measured edge-to-edge.
 
         (4)   Grading and improving of streets will be per approved plans and
profiles.
         (5)   Storm sewer systems and other drainage improvements will be per
approved plans and profiles.
         (6)   Sidewalks will be four-inch Portland cement concrete, four feet
in width.
   (4)   Sanitary sewers.
      (A)   When a subdivision is reasonably accessible to a municipal sanitary
sewer system, the subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete
sanitary sewer system to be connected to the municipal sanitary sewer system
and shall conform to the Standard Specification for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, dated 1978, and subsequent editions or amendments
thereto.
      (B)   When no municipal sanitary sewer system is available or is not
reasonably accessible to the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide the
subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system, which shall connect with a
sanitary sewer outlet approved by the State Department of Public Health, except
that when such approved outlet is not available, one of the following methods
of sewage disposal shall be used:
         (1)   A complete sanitary sewer system to convey the sewage to a
treatment plant, to be provided by the subdivider in accordance with minimum
requirements of the State EPA and a permit to be issued to the subdivider. The
minimum branch sewer line shall be eight-inch diameter, with manhole at a
maximum of 400 feet. House service shall be six-inch diameter, approved
material. Whereupon the subdivider design has an interceptor sewer design for
the future use, the town shall compensate the subdivider for the cost
difference in pipe size greater than ten-inch diameter; or
         (2)   Upon completion of the sanitary sewer system installation, the
Town Engineer shall certify that the sanitary sewer system complies with all
the standards required by the Town and the State EPA, according to the standard
as built, and such verification shall be filed with the Town Board and Town
Engineer.
      (C)   Storm sewers shall not be connected to sanitary sewers. The
subdivider shall provide a complete storm water system to be designed by a
registered professional engineer. The design shall be approved by the Town
Engineer. Whereupon the subdivider’s design has an interceptor storm sewer,
designed for the future, the town shall compensate the subdivider for the cost
difference in pipe size greater than 18-inch diameter.
      (D)   For the purpose of this division (4) and division (5) below, THE
SUBDIVIDER SHALL PROVIDE shall be interpreted to mean that the subdivider shall
install the facility referred to, that the subdivider shall require, as a
condition of the sale of each lot in the subdivision, that the facilities
referred to in these divisions shall be installed by the owner of the lot
before occupation of the lot occurs.
   (5)   Water.
      (A)   The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water
main supply system which shall be connected to a municipal water supply, and
approved by the State EPA and a permit issued to the subdivider, with
satisfactory provision for the maintenance thereof. The subdivider shall
provide an individual water supply on each lot in the subdivision in accordance
with minimum standards as determined by the Town Engineer.
      (B)   The plans for the installation of a water main supply system shall
be prepared by a registered professional engineer for the subdivider with the
cooperation of the applicable water utility company. Upon completion of the
water supply installation, two copies of the plans for such system as built
shall be filed with the Town Engineer. Minimum size pipe shall be six-inch
diameter with fire hydrant to be installed every 500 feet. Prior to
construction, the subdivider shall secure a State EPA permit. The materials and
construction shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois, dated 1978, and subsequent editions or
amendments thereto. Whereupon the subdivider’s design has a main branch water
main, designed for the future, the town shall compensate the subdivider for the
cost difference in pipe size greater than eight-inch diameter.
   (6)   Storm drainage. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with an
adequate street storm water system approved by the Town Engineer, all
calculations shall be determined on a five-year storm. Where the evidence
available to the Town Board and Town Engineer indicates that the natural
surface drainage is inadequate, easements for such surface drainage shall be
provided.
   (7)   Street lighting. The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with
street lights, to be placed in each street intersection with a maximum of 500
feet between lights.
   (8)   Modification. Where the subdivider can show that the strict
application of a provision of this section would cause unnecessary hardship
because of unusual topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
site, the Town Board may authorize such minor modification in the application
of such provisions as, in its opinion and for reasons set forth in its minutes,
will not materially impair the intent thereof, subject, however, to approval by
the Town Board.
   (9)   Engineering and inspection.
      (A)   Plans and specifications for public sidewalk, sanitary sewer, water
main, storm sewer, streets, curb and gutter, and appurtenances thereto and any
other public improvement shall be submitted to the Town Engineer for review and
approval before final disposition has been made of the subdivision plan. The
subdivider shall be charged a fee of twice the actual cost of the Town
Engineer. Such fees shall be computed by multiplying the number of hours the
Town Engineer worked on the aforesaid plans and specifications times double the
hourly rate of pay the Town Engineer usually and customarily charges for his or
her services. In no event shall the fee to be paid by the subdivider for the
services of the Town Engineer exceed 2% of the actual construction cost for the
improvement aforesaid.
      (B)   Fees required for the inspection of any public improvement shall be
borne by the subdivider and shall be computed by multiplying double the hourly
rate of pay the Town Engineer usually and customarily charges for his or her
service time the number of hours that he or she expends on said inspections.
      (C)   All engineering plans, specifications, and construction contracts
shall be subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.4.6) Penalty, see Sec.
152.99
Sec. 152.07 PLATS AND DATA.
   (1)   Pre-application plans and data. Previous to the filing of an
application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider
shall submit to the Town Board the following plans and data:
      (A)   General information data and location map shall describe or outline
existing covenants, zoning, land characteristics, community facilities and
utilities, streets, schools, parks, playgrounds, and commercial and industrial
developments; and
      (B)   Sketch plan showing in simple sketch form the proposed layout of
streets, lots, and other features in relation to existing conditions and may be
freehand on a print of a topographic map.
   (2)   Plats and data for conditional approval of preliminary plat. A
preliminary plat of the subdivision shall be accurately drawn to a scale of 100
feet to one inch. The preliminary plat shall be 18 inches by 24 inches in size
or larger in six-inch multiples.
      (A)   Topographic data.
         (1)   Boundary lines and lot lines. By bearing and distances;
         (2)   Existing easements. Location, width, and purpose;
         (3)   Existing streets. On and adjacent to the tract by name, right-
of-way width, location, type, width, and elevation of surfacing; curbs,
gutters, culverts, and sidewalks;
         (4)   Existing utilities. On and adjacent to the tract, location and
size of water mains; location of gas lines; fire hydrant, electric, and
telephone poles and street lights. If any of the above are not available at
site, indicate direction and distance to the nearest ones and furnish statement
of availability;
         (5)   Other existing conditions. Watercourses, marshes, rock outcrop,
wooded areas, dwelling, buildings, and other significant features;
         (6)   Proposed public improvements. Streets and other improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract;
         (7)   Ground elevations. On tract based on U.S.G.S. datum, show
contours at vertical intervals as follows:
            A.   Slope of 3% or less: one-inch interval contour map;
            B.   Slope over 3% but less than 6%: two-inch interval contour map;
and
            C.   Slope over 6%: five-inch interval contour map.
         (8)   Title and certificates. Present tract designation; title under
which subdivision is to be recorded; names and addresses of owners; acreage,
scale, north point, datum, bench marks, certification of registered
professional engineer or surveyor and date of survey.
      (B)   Proposals. The preliminary plat shall show all existing conditions
required in division (2)(A) above in topographic data and show all proposals,
including, but not necessarily limited to, the following:
         (1)   Streets. Names, right-of-way widths, approximate grades, and
gradients;
         (2)   Easements. Location, width, and purpose;
         (3)   Utilities. Location, type, and approximate size. This
information may be shown on a separate exhibit;
         (4)   Lots. Lot lines, numbers, and block numbers;
         (5)   Sites (public). If any, to be dedicated or reserved for parks,
playgrounds, or other public uses;
         (6)   Sites (nonpublic). If any, for shopping centers, churches,
industry, multi-family dwellings, or any other nonpublic use, including
indication of proposed use;
         (7)   Setback lines. Given locations of minimum setback lines;
         (8)   Site data. Including number of residential lots, typical lot
size, and acres in other public and nonpublic land uses;
         (9)   Map data. Title, scale, north arrow, and plat date;
         (10)   Other preliminary plans. When required by the Town Board and
Town Engineer, the preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing
existing ground surface and proposed street grades; typical cross-sections of
the streets and sidewalks; a preliminary plan of proposed sanitary and storm
water sewers, and water mains with grades and size indicated, if available;
         (11)   Draft or protective covenants. Draft or protective covenants
whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and
otherwise protect the proposed development; and
         (12)   Zoning. Show zoning classification of the subdivision and
adjacent areas.
   (3)   Plats and data for final approval. The final plat shall meet the
following specifications.
      (A)   The final plat may include all or only a part of the area of the
preliminary plat as proposed in the application.
      (B)   The original drawing of the final plat of the subdivision shall be
18 inches by 24 inches or larger, in six-inch multiples. It shall be drawn to a
scale of 100 feet to one inch. Four black or blue line prints and one
reproducible print shall be submitted with the original final plat.
      (C)   The following information shall be shown:
         (1)   Primary control points, or descriptions and “ties” to such
control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on
the final plat shall be referred;
         (2)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements,
and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other
sites; with accurate dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles, and radii,
arc, and central angle of all curves;
         (3)   Name and right-of-way width of each street or other rights-of-
way;
         (4)   Location and right-of-way widths of existing and/or platted
streets adjacent to the tract;
         (5)   Location, dimensions, and purposes of all easements;
         (6)   Consecutive numbers for each lot or site within all subdivisions
having the same name;
         (7)   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are
dedicated or reserved;
         (8)   Minimum setback lines on all lots and other sites;
         (9)   Location and description of monuments;
         (10)   Names of record owners of adjoining unplanted land;
         (11)   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted
land by book and page;
         (12)   Certification by state registered land surveyor as to accuracy
of survey and plat;
         (13)   Statement of a lawyer certifying that the subdivider has title
to land being subdivided;
         (14)   Statement by subdivider dedicating streets, rights-of-way,
easements, and any sites for public use;
         (15)   Title, scale, north arrow, and date; and
         (16)   Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or
dedications as may be required by applicable codes, ordinances, and/or statutes
pertaining to zoning, dedicated streets, and drainage facilities.
   (4)   Certification. A certificate by the Town Clerk certifying that the
subdivider has posted a good and sufficient bond with the town.
      (A)   All required land improvements shall be installed and completed
within a period of two years after the recording of the final plat. Failure of
the subdivider to complete all the improvements within this two-year period
shall result in forfeiture of the guarantee collateral unless an extension of
time is requested by the subdivider and granted by the Town Board. In the event
of failure to complete the improvements in the required period, as stated
above, the Town Board may direct that no further building permits be issued for
property in such subdivision pending satisfaction of the Town Board in regard
to the status of the required land improvements.
      (B)   All required land improvements to be installed under the provisions
of this section shall be checked during the course of construction by, or at
the direction of, the Superintendent of Public Works. The cost of any
reinspection of any required land improvement found to be faulty or not in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications shall be paid by the
subdivider to the town. The testing of any concrete, asphalt, soil, or other
materials, and workmanship shall be done at the direction of the town, and at
the expense of the subdivider.
      (C)   The subdivider’s bond or guarantee collateral shall be released
only upon fulfillment of the following conditions:
         (1)   The completion of all required land improvements;
         (2)   The submission of four copies of acceptable “as-built” drawings
of all land improvements;
         (3)   An affidavit to the effect that:
            A.   All materials, labor, and other costs have been paid, or
arrangements have been made for payment so as to hold the town free from any
obligations for payment of any costs of the land improvements; and
            B.   The subdivider accepts responsibility for the maintenance and
repair of all land improvements for one year after the date of the acceptance
resolution by the Town Board.
         (4)   Final acceptance, by resolution, by the Town Board of all land
improvements.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.4.7) Penalty, see Sec.
152.99
Sec. 152.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any civil remedies available to the town, any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined in accordance
with Sec.
10.99.
(Prior Code, Sec. 7.4.8)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Zoning Enforcement Officer
   
153.002   Title
   
153.003   Intent and purpose
   
153.004   Definitions
   
153.005   Administrative officer
   
153.006   Duties
   
153.007   Zoning Board of Appeals
   
153.008   Meetings
   
153.009   Appeal and review
   
153.010   Variations
   
153.011   Special use permits
   
153.012   Public hearing procedures
   
153.013   Improvement location permits
   
153.014   Fees
Zoning Districts
   
153.025   Districts designated; boundaries
   
153.026   AG Agricultural
   
153.027   R-1 Single-Family Residential
   
153.028   R-2 Medium Density Residential
   
153.029   MH Mobile Home
   
153.030   C-1 Local Business
   
153.031   C-2 Central Business
   
153.032   I-1 Light Industry
   
153.033   I-2 General Industry
Signs and Outdoor Advertising Structures
   
153.045   General Provisions
   
153.046   Permitted signs; residential districts
   
153.047   Permitted signs; commercial and industrial districts
   
153.048   Outdoor advertising structures
Off-Street Parking
   
153.060   Purpose
   
153.061   Existing uses
   
153.062   Schedule of parking requirements
Accessory Buildings and Uses
   
153.075   Location
   
153.076   Height of accessory buildings
   
153.077   Construction of accessory buildings
   
153.078   Area of accessory buildings
   
153.079   Residential storage buildings
Amendments and Changes
   
153.090   Authority
   
153.091   Public hearing
   
153.092   Standards
   
153.093   Decision
Fences
   
153.105   General
   
153.106   Permit
   
153.107   Front yard
   
153.108   Privacy fence
   
153.109   Setbacks
   
153.110   Height
   
153.111   Anchoring
   
153.112   Materials
   
153.113   Maintenance
Additional Regulations
   
153.125   Property development standards
   
153.126   Nonconforming building and use specifications
   
153.127   Home occupations
   
153.128   Mobile homes
   
153.129   Swimming pools
 
   
153.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 153.001 ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (1)   Creation of office. There is hereby created the office of Zoning
Enforcement Officer, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, with advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.3.1)
   (2)   Duties. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Enforcement Officer to
enforce all the provisions of the zoning ordinance and amendments thereto. He
or she shall perform such additional duties as may be assigned to him or her by
the Mayor and Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.3.2)
   (3)   Powers. He or she shall have the powers and exercise the functions
necessary for such enforcement which are delegated to him or her by statute or
ordinance.
(Prior Code, Sec. 4.3.4)
Sec. 153.002 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited, and referred to as the “Chatsworth
Zoning Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.1.1)
Sec. 153.003 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following reasons:
   (1)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, and
general welfare of the people;
   (2)   To divide the town into zones or districts restricting and regulating
therein the location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, and
use of buildings, structures, and land for residence, business, manufacturing,
and other specified uses;
   (3)   To protect the character and stability of the residential, business,
and manufacturing areas within the town and to promote the orderly and
beneficial development of such areas;
   (4)   To provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to
property;
   (5)   To regulate the intensity of use of lot areas, and to determine the
area of open spaces surrounding buildings, necessary to provide adequate light
and area and to protect the public health; and
   (6)   To establish building lines and the location of buildings designed for
residential, business, and manufacturing or other uses within such areas.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.1.2)
Sec. 153.004 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
ABUTTING. Having one or more common boundary lines or district lines.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.
   (A)   One which:
      (1)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
      (2)   Is subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal
building or principal use served; and
      (3)   Is located in the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use.
   (B)   An ACCESSORY USE includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A children’s playhouse, garden house, and private greenhouse;
      (2)   A shed, garage, or building for domestic storage;
      (3)   Carports; and
      (4)   Satellite dishes, antennas, and other similar structures.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. Any notice or advertisement, pictorial or otherwise, and
all such structures used as an outdoor display, regardless of size and shape,
for the purpose of making anything known, the origin or place of sale of which
is not on the property where such ADVERTISING STRUCTURE is located.
AGRICULTURE. The growing, harvesting, and storing of crops, including legumes,
hay, grain, fruit, and truck or vegetable crops, floriculture, horticulture,
viticulture, mushroom growing, orchards, and forestry; farm buildings for
storing and protecting farm machinery and equipment from the elements; and farm
buildings occupied by farm owners, operators, tenants, or seasonal or year-
round hired farm workers. This definition of AGRICULTURE includes all types of
agricultural operations, but excludes therefrom animal husbandry and industrial
operations such as a grain elevator, canning, or slaughterhouse, wherein
agricultural products primarily by others are stored or processed.
AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for use in or
designed for navigation or flight in the air.
AIRPORT. Any area of land which issued or intended for use for the landing and
taking off of aircraft, and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended
for use for airport buildings or other airport facilities or right-of-way,
including all necessary taxiways, aircraft storage and tie-down areas, hangars,
and other necessary buildings and open spaces.
ALTERATION. Any change in size, shape, or character of a building or structure
in the use thereof.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease,
batteries, tires, and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at
retail.
AWNING. A roof-like cover which projects from the wall of a building and
overhangs into the yard or public or private street.
BASEMENT. The portion of a building which is partly below and partly above
grade and having at least one-half its height above grade.
BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by public streets, or by a combination of
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines, or
waterways, the corporate limits of the town.
BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind.
BUILDING HEIGHT. The measurement of vertical distance from the grade to the top
of the highest roof beams of a flat roof or to the mean level of the highest
gable or slope of a hip roof.
BULK. A term used to measure, assess, and regulate the impact of buildings,
structures, or land uses on other nearby buildings, structures, or land uses,
and includes the following factors:
   (A)   Size and height of buildings;
   (B)   Location of exterior walls and required onsite facilities at all
levels in relation to lot lines, public streets, or to other public buildings;
   (C)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio);
   (D)   All open spaces allocated to buildings;
   (E)   Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit; and
   (F)   Type, amount, and location of landscaping and site screening used to
shield or reduce the impact of land uses on surrounding property.
CARPORT. An automobile shelter, usually formed by extension of the roof from
the side of a building which may be open on the sides.
CAR WASH. A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
motor vehicles, using automatic production line methods with a chain conveyor,
blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices, or providing space,
water, and equipment for the hand washing of autos, whether by the customer or
the operator.
CELLAR. The portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade and
having at least one-half of its height below grade.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure which complies with
all of the regulations of this chapter or of any amendment hereto governing
bulk for the zoning district in which such building or structure is located.
CONFORMING USE. Any use which complies with all the regulations specified in
this chapter or any subsequent amendment hereto for the zoning district in
which such use is located.
CURB LEVEL. For a building, the level of the established curb in front of such
building measured at the center of such front. Where no curb has been
established, the CURB LEVEL is the elevation of the centerline of the street
adjacent to the lot on which the building is or is to be located, measured at
the center point of the lot frontage.
DAY CARE CENTER. A premises receiving more than eight children for care during
all or part of a day or night.
DAY CARE HOME. A dwelling unit in which one or more persons provides care
during the day to not more than eight children. The maximum of eight children
includes all natural, adopted, and foster minor children of the residents of
the dwelling unit, plus any other minors who are under full-time care or
supervision in the dwelling unit.
DORMITORY. A residential building where group sleeping accommodations are
provided for persons not members of the same family and where the number
accommodated exceeds that allowed in a dwelling unit in the district. The group
sleeping accommodations may be in one room or in a series of closely associated
rooms under occupancy and single management as in college dormitories,
fraternity houses, sorority houses, military barracks, and the like, regardless
of whether meals are provided.
DISTRICT. A portion of the territory of the town within which certain generally
uniform regulations and requirements unique thereto apply under the provisions
of this chapter.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT. A business or institution where the principal use is
either the offering of goods or services directly to customers waiting in
parked motor vehicles or carry-out food service.
DRIVEWAY. A private access way for motor vehicles between a public or private
street and one or more structures or off-street parking areas.
DWELLING. A building designed or used principally for residential occupancy
containing one or more dwelling units, including single-family, two-family, and
multiple-family dwellings.
DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED. One which is joined to another dwelling unit on one or
more sides by a vertical party wall or walls.
DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED. One which is entirely surrounded by open space.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building containing three or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building containing one dwelling unit only.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building containing two dwelling units only.
DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms arranged or designed for the use of one family
living together as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, living, sanitary,
and sleeping facilities in a self- contained unit.
EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room together with
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets, or dining area.
FAMILY. Either one or two or more persons each related to each other by blood,
marriage, or legal adoption, and an aggregate of not more than two roomers or
boarders not related to each other, whether or not gratuitous, maintaining a
common householder in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than four persons
not so related maintaining a common household in a dwelling unit.
FENCE. A structure other than a building or a portion thereof which is a
barrier and is used as a boundary, screen, separation, and means of privacy,
protection, or confinement and is constructed of wood, plastic, metal, wire
mesh, masonry, or comparable material.
FLOODPLAIN. Any area designated on the special flood hazard map of the Federal
Insurance Administrator designated as having special flood hazards.
FLOOD BASE ELEVATION. The elevation of the water level at the 100-year flood
level.
FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the floor area
of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such building(s) are
located.
FRONTAGE. The measure of lineal contiguity along a public right-of-way as
measured along that right-of-way between a lot or portion thereof and another
lot, public street, alley, or public way.
GRADE. A reference plane representing the average finished ground level
adjoining the building at all exterior walls.
GROUND FLOOR AREA. The area of a building in square feet as measured in a
horizontal plane at the ground floor level within its largest outside
dimensions, exclusive of open porches, breezeways, terraces, garages, and
exterior stairways, furnace, and laundry areas.
HELIPORT. An area of land, water, and/or a structure or building which is used
or intended for use for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any
appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for helicopter buildings
or HELIPORT facilities or rights-of-way, including all necessary pads,
helicopter storage and tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings
and open spaces.
HISTORIC AREA. An area containing buildings or places in which historic events
have occurred or which have special public value because of notable
architectural or other features relating to the cultural or artistic heritage
of the community which warrant conservation and preservation.
HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession practiced by a member of the
family residing in the dwelling unit, which is clearly an accessory use to the
principal residential use of the dwelling unit and which is listed in Sec.
153.127.
HOSPITAL. An institution where the sick or injured are given medical or
surgical care.
HOTEL, MOTEL, or INN. An establishment containing lodging accommodations
designed for use by transients, travelers, or temporary guests. Facilities
provided may include maid service, laundering of linen used on the premises,
telephone and secretarial or desk service, meetings rooms, and restaurants.
JUNK YARD. An open area where junk waste, scrap, used equipment and vehicle
parts, discarded or salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored,
baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap
iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A JUNK YARD
includes automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards,
and places or yards for storage of salvaged house wrecking and structural steel
materials and equipment, but does not include uses established entirely within
enclosed buildings.
KENNEL. Any premises where three or more dogs, cats, or other household
domestic animals over four months of age are owned, boarded, bred, or offered
for sale.
LOT. A parcel, tract, or area of land with access from an abutting street for
the full width of the LOT, and which is occupied by or intended for occupancy
by one principal building or principal use together with any accessory
buildings and such yard area as required by this chapter. It may be a single
surveyed parcel separately described in a deed or plat which is recorded in the
office of the County Recorder, or it may include parts of, or a combination of
such surveyed parcels when adjacent to one another and used as one. In
determining lot area and boundary lines, no part under water or within the
limits of a street shall be included.
LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes through
front, side, and rear lot lines.
LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the intersection of two streets.
LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or a reversed corner lot.
LOT LINE (PROPERTY LINE). A boundary line of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT. The boundary line of any lot which is along a dedicated public
street or the occupation line on a non-dedicated public street. On corner lots,
the FRONT LOT LINE shall be the boundary line along such street right-of-way
line that is established at the time of application of a building permit.
LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line most nearly parallel to and most remote from the
front lot line.
LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of
the County Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds,
the description of which has been so recorded on the date of the adoption of
this chapter.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two more or less
parallel public streets, and which is not a corner lot. On a THROUGH LOT, both
street lines shall be deemed FRONT LOT LINES.
LOT WIDTH. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot,
measured within the lot boundary. LOT WIDTH shall be measured at the front lot
line or at the required setback line or cul-de-sac within the lot boundary
behind the required front yard setback line.
MOBILE HOME. A dwelling unit of vehicular, portable design build on a chassis
and designed to be moved from one site to another and capable of being used
with or without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot or lands upon which two or more independent mobile
homes are located either free of charge or for a fee, and shall include any
buildings, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a
part of the equipment of such MOBILE HOME PARK.
MODULAR HOME. A dwelling unit intended to be used for residential occupancy and
designed to be located on a permanent foundation as identified by the state
modular seal affixed to the electrical panel box.
NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of
an occupant thereof and/or the occupation practiced therein.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure, or portion
thereof, lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or
amendment thereto, which does not comply with all the regulations of this
chapter or any amendment hereto governing bulk for the zoning district in which
such building or structure is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot of record which, when recorded, met the minimum lot
area and other dimension requirements of the town but which, through subsequent
amendments to such code or other acts of a public body has caused the lot of
record to be in conflict with the minimum lot area or other dimension
requirements of the codes.
NONCONFORMING USE. Any use of land, buildings, or structures which use is not
permitted in the zoning district in which such use is located, but which use
was permitted at the time such use was established.
NURSERY (GREENHOUSE). A space, building, or structure, or combination thereof,
for the storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered for wholesale or
retail sale on the premises, including product used for landscaping and
gardening.
NURSING HOME. A home for the aged, chronically ill, incurable persons, or a
place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders in which three or more
persons, not members of the immediate family residing on the premises, are
received, kept, or provided with food and shelter or care, but not including
hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis
and treatment of disease or injury.
OPEN SALES LOT. Any land used or occupied for the purpose of buying and selling
merchandise, motor vehicles, any form of trailers, mobile homes, motorized
homes, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats, aircraft, and monuments for the
storing of same prior to sale.
PARKING SPACE. A space within a public or private parking area which contains
minimum dimensions of nine feet by 20 feet, exclusive of access drives or
aisles, for the purpose of vehicular storage.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which
it is located and conducted, including a building that is attached to such a
building in a substantial way, such as by a roof.
PRINCIPAL USE. A primary use of land or buildings as distinguished from an
accessory use. A PRINCIPAL USE may be either permitted or special.
RIDING STABLE. The grounds and building where horses are bred, raised, trained,
boarded, or kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.
ROOMING HOUSE. Any residential building, or any part thereof, containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to more than
five persons who do not constitute a family.
ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
ROW HOUSE (TOWNHOUSE). A multiple-family dwelling containing three or more
attached dwelling units, each on its own plot of ground and joined to one (end
unit) or two (interior units) dwelling units by firewalls. Each dwelling unit
shall occupy the internal space from the ground to the roof.
SETBACK. The horizontal distance between the front lot line and any building or
structure located on such lot.
SIGN. Any identification, description, illustration, or device, illuminated or
non-illuminated, which is visible from any public place or is located on
private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, or
solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise; or
any emblem printing, banner, pennant, placard, or temporary sign designed to
advertise, identify, or convey information, with the exception of window
displays and national, state, county, municipal, and religious flags, including
goods and services, offered upon the property on which the SIGN is located.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A specific use of land or buildings, or both, described and
permitted herein, subject to special provisions and which, because of its
unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use, as
provided in Sec.
153.011.
STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor
and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. A basement shall be counted
as a STORY, and a cellar shall not be counted as a STORY.
STREET, PUBLIC. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way or other public
way used and maintained by the town which, in either case, affords the
principal means of access to adjacent lots or property.
STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on or in the
ground or attachment to something having a location on or in the ground.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as the addition,
removal, or alteration of a bearing wall, columns, beams, girders, or
foundations.
TOURIST CAMP. A residential facility designed, used, or intended to be used to
accommodate the overnight temporary location, hook-up, or use of its facilities
for travel trailers, camp trailers.
USE. The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is
designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and
shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the
performance standards of this chapter.
USE, PERMITTED. A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms to all requirements and regulations
of such district.
VARIATION. A deviation from the bulk requirements of the zoning ordinance as
provided in Sec.
153.010.
WAREHOUSE. A structure, part thereof, or area used principally for the storage
of goods and merchandise.
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT. A business establishment engaged in selling to
retailers or jobbers rather than consumers.
YARD. An open space, on the same lot with a building or structure, unoccupied
and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky.
YARD, FRONT. The yard, required or otherwise, extending along the full length
of the front lot line between the side lot lines from the front line of the
building or structure, including any overhang features, to the front lot lines.
YARD, REAR. The yard, required or otherwise, extending along the full length of
the rear lot line between the side lot lines from the rear line of the building
or structure, including any overhang features, to the rear property line.
YARD, SIDE. The yard, required or otherwise, extending along the side lot line
between the front yard and the rear yard from the side line of the building or
structure, including any overhang features, to the side property line.
YARD, CORNER SIDE. A side yard which faces a public street.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE. An INTERIOR SIDE YARD which is located immediately
adjacent to another lot or to any alley separating such side yard from another
lot.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The person authorized by the town to administer the town
zoning ordinance.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The body authorized to enforce the town zoning
ordinance according to the powers and duties listed herein.
ZONING DISTRICT. A section or sections or incorporated territory of the town
for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot, and bulk or
buildings and premises are uniform.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP. The portion of this chapter showing all of the zoning
district boundaries within the town.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP AMENDMENT. The procedure set forth to change the zoning
district boundaries of the zoning district map portion of this chapter.
ZONING TEXT AMENDMENT. The procedure set forth to change the text or written
portion of this chapter.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.2)
Sec. 153.005 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER.
   The Zoning Administrator shall be in charge of the administration and
enforcement of this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall be appointed by the
Town Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.19.1)
Sec. 153.006 DUTIES.
   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to receive, review, and issue
improvement location permits in accordance with the terms of this chapter. The
Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary site inspections to ensure
compliance with this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall act as secretary
to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.19.2)
Sec. 153.007 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   The Town Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established. The Zoning Board of
Appeals is responsible for a vacancy on the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
filled for the unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant, such
vacancy to be filled under the same procedure as in an original appointment.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.19.3)
Sec. 153.008 MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be called by the
Chairperson and held at the Town Hall or other locations as announced. All
meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be open to the public. The Board
of Zoning Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon every question, or if absent for each case reviewed by the
Zoning Board of Appeals. At all public hearings before the Board of Zoning
Appeals, said Board shall require that all testimony by witnesses be given
under oath.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.19.4)
Sec. 153.009 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals from and review
any order, requirement, and decision of determination made by the Zoning
Administrator, who is charged with the enforcement of this chapter. When an
appeal is taken from the Zoning Administrator by an aggrieved person or party,
the Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall place the appeal on the
meeting docket and shall prepare a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof and proceed under the public hearing section of this chapter. An appeal
stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from. The
concurring votes of five members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
required to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Zoning Administrator, enforcing the town zoning ordinance and to hold any
public hearings as required under the provisions herein. The members of the
Zoning Board of Appeals and the Chairperson shall be appointed by the Town
Board of Trustees. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of seven members
to serve respectively for the following terms: one for one year, one for two
years, one for three years, one for four years, and three for five years, the
successor to each member to initially appoint to serve for a term of five
years. All members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be residents of the
town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.19.5)
Sec. 153.010 VARIATIONS.
   (1)   Authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit variations in
specific cases where practical difficulties or particular hardships occur. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall do so only where the granting of such a variation
would be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter. The
Board of Zoning Appeals may grant variations in the following instances only,
and in no others:
      (A)   To permit any yard, court, setback, or line to be of less dimension
than required by the applicable regulations;
      (B)   To permit any structure to exceed the height limitations imposed by
the applicable regulations;
      (C)   To permit a reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces in
connection with a particular use; and/or
      (D)   To permit a reduction in the minimum ground floor area requirement
for single-family residences.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.20.1)
   (2)   Public hearings. No variation shall be granted by the Zoning Board of
Appeals except after a public hearing is conducted as provided in Sec.
153.012.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.20.2)
   (3)   Standards. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall prepare a record of the
findings of fact and decision in each case from the evidence presented at the
public hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall use the following standards
when considering the practical difficulties or particular hardships.
      (A)   The special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to
other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
      (B)   The land, structure, or building involved cannot reasonably be
developed or used in accordance with the requirements of the district in which
it is located.
      (C)   The literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the
same district under the terms of this chapter.
      (D)   The special condition and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the applicant.
      (E)   Granting the variation requested will not give the applicant of the
property in question privileges not generally held by other property owners or
occupants in the same vicinity and district.
      (F)   The granting of the variation will be in harmony with the purpose
and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or
otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.20.3)
Sec. 153.011 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (1)   Authority. Certain types of uses may be permitted in the particular
zoning districts when special consideration has been given to the site itself
and the characteristics of surrounding property. The purpose of this section is
to allow the Zoning Board of Appeals the authority to impose certain
conditional standards when taking into consideration the characteristics of the
surrounding property.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.21.1)
   (2)   Public hearing. No special use permits shall be granted by the Zoning
Board of Appeals except after a public hearing is conducted as provided in Sec.
153.012.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.21.2)
   (3)   Standards. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall prepare a record of the
findings of act and decision in each case from the evidence presented at the
public hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall use the following standards
when considering an application for a special use permit:
      (A)   The proposed use is consistent with the Town Land Use Plan;
      (B)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public
health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare;
      (C)   The proposed use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the uses already permitted, or
substantially reduce the value of neighboring property;
      (D)   The proposed use will not impede orderly growth, development, and
improvement of surrounding properties for those uses permitted in the zoning
district; and
      (E)   Is provided or will be provided with adequate utilities, access
roads, and drainage and necessary facilities.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.21.3)
Sec. 153.012 PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES.
   All applications for a variation, special use permit, and zoning text or
zoning district map amendment shall be filed with the Town Clerk. The Town
Clerk shall forward the applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
processing. No variation, special use permit, or zoning text or zoning district
map amendment shall be processed except after a public hearing before the
Zoning Board of Appeals. Public notice stating the time and place of the public
hearing shall be published at least once, not more than 30 or less than 15 days
before the public hearing in one or more newspapers published in the town, or
in one or more newspapers of general circulation if a newspaper is not
published in the town. The costs or charges of the publication notice shall be
paid by the applicant.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.23)
Sec. 153.013 IMPROVEMENT LOCATION PERMITS.
   (1)   Within the town, no structure or improvement, home occupation, or use
of land may be altered, changed, placed, erected, or located on platted or
unplanted land, unless the structure, improvement, or use, and its location,
conform with this chapter, and an improvement location permit for such
structure, improvement or use has been issued by the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator shall issue an improvement location permit upon written
application, when the proposed structure, improvement, or use and its location
conform in all respects with the requirements of this chapter.
   (2)   Any person, or corporation which makes application for an improvement
location permit, shall at the time of making such application, furnish the
Zoning Administrator with a plot plan, drawn to scale as required by the Zoning
Administrator, and show the following items:
      (A)   The location and size of all buildings or structures already on the
site and those to be erected;
      (B)   The width of all entrances to and exits from the site;
      (C)   All adjacent streets and roadways; and
      (D)   Any additional information requested by the Zoning Administrator.
When an application for an improvement location permit is filed with the Zoning
Administrator, it shall be accompanied with a fee set in accordance with the
schedule of fees adopted by the Town Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.24) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.014 FEES.
   The Town Board of Trustees shall establish by separate ordinance a schedule
of fees indicating the charges for an improvement location permit, variations,
special use permits, zoning text or zoning map amendments, and appeals. The
schedule of fees may be amended by the Town Board of Trustees.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.25)
ZONING DISTRICTS
Sec. 153.025 DISTRICTS DESIGNATED; BOUNDARIES.
   (1)   Designation.
      (A)   The town is hereby classified and divided into zoning districts
designated as follows:
District Designation Primarily For
District Designation Primarily For
AG                   Agriculture District
C-1                  Local Business District
C-2                  Central Business District
I-1                  Light Industry District
I-2                  General Industry District
MH                   Mobile Home District
R-1                  Single-Family Residence District
R-2                  Medium Density Residential District
 
      (B)   The zoning district map, which accompanies and is hereby declared
to be a part of this chapter, shows the boundaries of and the area covered by
the zoning districts.
   (2)   Boundaries.
      (A)   The boundaries of the districts established by this section are as
shown on the zoning map, which is a part of this chapter.
      (B)   When the exact boundaries of a district are uncertain, they shall
be determined by use of the scale of the zoning map.
      (C)   When a right-of-way is vacated, the districts adjoining each side
are respectively extended to the center of the area so vacated.
      (D)   In the case of further uncertainty, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall interpret the intent of the zoning map as to the location of the boundary
in question.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.3)
Sec. 153.026 AG AGRICULTURAL.
   The AG District is established to include lands for agricultural.
   (1)   Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in the AG
District, plus such other uses as the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem to be
similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development
standards in division (3) below and Sec.
153.125:
      (A)   Advertising structure;
      (B)   Commercial greenhouse;
      (C)   Dwelling, single-family;
      (D)   Farm, general;
      (E)   Farm equipment, sales, and service;
      (F)   Home occupation;
      (G)   Municipal or government building;
      (H)   Public park or recreational facilities;
      (I)   Railroad right-of-way and necessary uses;
      (J)   Roadside produce sales stand;
      (K)   School, public or private;
      (L)   Signs; and
      (M)   Warehouse and storage of grain, seed, and dry fertilizer, including
grain storage and drying facilities.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.4.1)
   (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit as provided for in Sec.
153.011:
      (A)   Airport;
      (B)   Anhydrous ammonia or similar liquefied fertilizer, and bulk
fertilizer storage and distribution (commercial);
      (C)   Asphalt or asphaltic concrete batching plant;
      (D)   Assembly halls for use by nonprofit organizations;
      (E)   Auction sales yard;
      (F)   Bottled gas, storage and distribution;
      (G)   Bulk storage of petroleum products;
      (H)   Camping facilities;
      (I)   Cemetery;
      (J)   Church;
      (K)   Contractor’s storage yard;
      (L)   Country club or golf course;
      (M)   Farm, confinement feeding;
      (N)   Kennel;
      (O)   Lodge or private club;
      (P)   Machine shop;
      (Q)   Mineral extraction;
      (R)   Private recreational development;
      (S)   Public or commercial sanitary landfill;
      (T)   Race tract (outdoor);
      (U)   Riding stable;
      (V)   Seasonal hunting or fishing lodge;
      (W)   Shooting range (outdoor);
      (X)   Slaughterhouse;
      (Y)   Theater (outdoor); and
      (Z)   Welding shop.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.4.2)
   (3)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and structures in the AG Agriculture
District.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. All lots hereafter created in this district shall
contain an area of not less than 30,000 square feet.
      (B)   Lot dimensions. All lots hereafter created shall have a minimum
width of 150 feet and a minimum depth of 200 feet. Curve and cul-de-sac lot
width shall be measured as chord distance at the building setback line.
      (C)   Building height. No building or structure, located in this
district, may be changed or erected so as to have a height greater than 35
feet.
      (D)   Yards. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yard setback requirements are provided:
   (1)   A front yard of not less than 40 feet;
   (2)   The minimum width of each side yard for the principal building shall
not be less than 25 feet; and
   (3)   The minimum depth of a rear yard for the principal building shall not
be less than 50 feet.
      (E)   Lot coverage. The buildings on a lot, including accessory
buildings, may not exceed in coverage 30% of the total lot area.
      (F)   Off-street parking. The provisions of Sec.
153.060 to
153.062 shall apply.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.4.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.027 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   The R-1 District is established to provide areas for single-family
residential development.
   (1)   Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in the R-
1 District plus such other uses as the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem to be
similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development
standards in division (3) below and Sec.
153.125:
      (A)   Dwelling, single-family;
      (B)   Home occupation;
      (C)   Municipal or government building; and
      (D)   Public park or recreational facilities.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.5.1)
   (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit as provided for in Sec.
153.011:
      (A)   Church;
      (B)   Country club or golf course; and
      (C)   Kindergarten or day nursery (other than as a part of a school,
providing other grades).
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.5.2)
   (3)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and structures in the R-1 Single-Family
Residential District.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. All lots hereafter created in this district shall
contain an area of not less than 7,200 square feet.
      (B)   Lot dimensions. All lots hereafter created shall have a minimum
width of 60 feet and a minimum depth of 120 feet. Curve and cul-de-sac lot
width shall be measured as chord distance at the building setback line.
      (C)   Building height. No building or structure, located in this
district, may be changed or erected so as to have a height greater than 30
feet.
      (D)   Minimum ground floor area. No single-family dwelling may be changed
or erected so that its ground floor area is less than 750 square feet.
      (E)   Yards. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yard setback requirements are provided:
   (1)   A front yard of not less than 20 feet;
   (2)   The minimum width of each side yard for the principal building shall
not be less than ten feet; and
   (3)   The minimum depth of a rear yard for the principal building shall not
be less than 20 feet.
      (F)   Lot coverage. The buildings on lot, including accessory buildings,
may not exceed in coverage 35% of the total lot area.
      (G)   Off-street parking. The provisions of Sec.
153.060 to
153.062 shall apply.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.5.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.028 R-2 MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL.
   (1)   Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in the R-
2 District, plus such other uses as the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem to be
similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development
standards in division (3) below and Sec.
153.125:
      (A)   Dwelling, one-family;
      (B)   Dwelling, two-family;
      (C)   Dwelling, multiple-family; and
      (D)   Municipal or government building.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.6.1)
   (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit as provided in Sec.
153.011:
      (A)   Boarding or lodging house;
      (B)   Church;
      (C)   Home for the aged; and
      (D)   Nursing home, orphanage.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.6.2)
   (3)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and structures in the R-2 Medium Density
Residential District.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. All lots hereafter created in this district shall
contain an area of not less than 8,000 square feet.
      (B)   Lot dimensions. All lots hereafter created shall have a minimum
width of 60 feet and a minimum depth of 100 feet. Curve and cul-de-sac lot
width shall be measured as chord distance at the building setback line.
      (C)   Building height. No building or structure, located in this
district, may be changed or erected so as to have a height greater than 40
feet.
      (D)   Minimum ground floor area. No single-family dwelling may be changed
or erected so that its ground floor area is less than 750 square feet.
      (E)   Yards. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yard setback requirements are provided:
         (1)   A front yard of not less than 20 feet;
         (2)   The minimum width of each side yard for the principal building
shall not be less than ten feet; and
         (3)   The minimum depth of a rear yard for the principal building
shall not be less than 20 feet.
      (F)   Lot coverage. The building on a lot, including accessory buildings,
may not exceed in coverage 35% of the total lot area.
      (G)   Off-street parking. The provisions of Sec.
153.060 to
153.062 shall apply.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.6.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.029 MH MOBILE HOME.
   (1)   Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in the MH
District, plus such other uses as the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem to be
similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development
standards in division (2) below and Sec.
153.125:
      (A)   Accessory uses and buildings;
      (B)   Home occupation;
      (C)   Mobile home; and
      (D)   Mobile home park.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.7.1)
   (2)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and structures in the MH District. However,
the standards of the State Mobile Home Park Act (Ill. Rev. Stat. 711—736, as
amended from time to time, hereafter) shall supersede these standards if the
standards included in the Act are more stringent.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. No minimum requirement.
      (B)   Yards. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yard setback requirements are provided:
   (1)   A front yard of not less than ten feet;
   (2)   The minimum width of each side yard for the principal building shall
not be less than ten feet; and
   (3)   The minimum depth of a rear yard for the principal building shall not
be less than ten feet.
      (C)   Off-street parking. There shall be two off-street parking spaces
provided for each mobile home stand.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.7.2) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.030 C-1 LOCAL BUSINESS.
   The C-1 District is established to provide areas for a general range of
retail and service shopping needs.
   (1)   Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-
1 District, plus such other uses as the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem to be
similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development
standards in division (3) below and Sec.
153.125:
      (A)   Apparel store;
      (B)   Automobile service station;
      (C)   Bakery, retail;
      (D)   Bank;
      (E)   Barber shop;
      (F)   Beauty shop;
      (G)   Business or professional office;
      (H)   Clinic;
      (I)   Dairy retail only (no processing);
      (J)   Delicatessen;
      (K)   Dressmaking shop;
      (L)   Drugstore;
      (M)   Dry-cleaning establishment;
      (N)   Electric appliance service and sales;
      (O)   Flower shop;
      (P)   Funeral home;
      (Q)   Garden shop;
      (R)   Gift shop;
      (S)   Greenhouse;
      (T)   Hardware store;
      (U)   Jewelry store;
      (V)   Laundry agency;
      (W)   Meat market;
      (X)   Millinery shop;
      (Y)   Motel;
      (Z)   Municipal or government building;
      (AA)   Pet shop;
      (BB)   Postal station;
      (CC)   Public library or museum;
      (DD)   Public park or recreational area;
      (EE)   Radio-T.V. service and sales;
      (FF)   Record shop;
      (GG)   Reducing salon;
      (HH)   Restaurant;
      (II)   Restaurant, drive-in;
      (JJ)   Self-service laundry and dry-cleaning;
      (KK)   Shoe repair shop;
      (LL)   Stationer;
      (MM)   Supermarket;
      (NN)   Tailor or pressing shop; and
      (OO)   Variety store.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.8.1)
   (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit as provided for in Sec.
153.011:
      (A)   Assembly halls for use by nonprofit organizations;
      (B)   Church; and
      (C)   Kindergarten or day nursery (other than part of a school providing
other grades).
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.8.2)
   (3)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and structures in the C-1 Local Business
District.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. No minimum requirement.
      (B)   Lot dimensions. All lots hereafter created shall have a minimum
width of 50 feet. Curve and cul-de-sac lot width shall be measured as chord
distance at the building setback line.
      (C)   Building height. No building or structure, located in this
district, may be changed or erected so as to have a height greater than 35
feet.
      (D)   Yards. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yard setback requirements are provided:
         (1)   A front yard of not less than ten feet;
         (2)   The minimum width of each side yard for the principal building
shall not be less than ten feet; and
         (3)   The minimum depth of a rear yard for the principal building
shall not be less than ten feet.
      (E)   Off-street parking. The provision of this chapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.8.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.031 C-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS.
   The C-2 District is established to provide areas of retail trade that are
associated with the Town Central Business District.
   (1)   Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in the C-
2 District, plus such other uses as the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem to be
similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development
standards in division (3) below and Sec.
153.125:
      (A)   All uses permitted in the C-1 District;
      (B)   Assembly halls for nonprofit organizations;
      (C)   Automobile sales;
      (D)   Billiard room;
      (E)   Boarding or lodging house;
      (F)   Charitable institutions;
      (G)   Department store;
      (H)   Dressmaking shop;
      (I)   Flower shop;
      (J)   Hotel or motel (excluding apartments);
      (K)   Municipal or government building;
      (L)   Newsdealer;
      (M)   Night club;
      (N)   Nursing home;
      (O)   Office supplies;
      (P)   Photograph studio;
      (Q)   Print shop and newspaper;
      (R)   Railway or motor bus station;
      (S)   Studio business (art, interior decorating, music, and the like);
      (T)   Tavern; and
      (U)   Theater, indoor.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.9.1)
   (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit as provided for in Sec.
153.011:
      (A)   Apartment (located on second story);
      (B)   Farm equipment sales and service; and
      (C)   Locker, cold storage for individual use.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.9.2)
   (3)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and structures in the C-2 Central Business
District.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. No minimum requirement.
      (B)   Lot dimensions. No minimum requirement.
      (C)   Building height. No building or structure, located in this
district, may be changed or erected so as to have a height greater than 40
feet.
      (D)   Yards. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yard setback requirements are provided.
   (1)   Front yard. No minimum requirement.
   (2)   Side yards. No minimum requirement.
   (3)   Rear yard. No minimum requirement.
      (E)   Off-street parking. The provision of this chapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.9.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.032 I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRY.
   The I-1 District is established to provide areas for light industrial and
restricted retail trades.
   (1)   Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in the I-
1 District, plus such other uses as the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem to be
similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development
standards in division (3) below and Sec.
153.125:
      (A)   Advertising structures;
      (B)   Automobile repair;
      (C)   Automobile service center;
      (D)   Bank;
      (E)   Boat sales, service, storage, and rental;
      (F)   Contractor’s storage yard;
      (G)   Industrial park;
      (H)   Industry, light;
      (I)   Kennel;
      (J)   Lumber yard;
      (K)   Mobile home or trailer sales area;
      (L)   Municipal or government building;
      (M)   Police or fire station;
      (N)   Restaurant;
      (O)   Truck freight;
      (P)   Terminal truck service center; and
      (Q)   Warehouse and storage of grain, seed, and dry fertilizer storage
facilities, including drain storage and drying.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.10.1)
   (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit as provided in Sec.
153.011:
      (A)   Anhydrous ammonia or similar liquid fertilizer, storage and
distribution (commercial);
      (B)   Auction sales yard (including livestock);
      (C)   Automobile laundry;
      (D)   Bottled gas, storage and distribution;
      (E)   Bulk storage of petroleum products;
      (F)   Mineral extraction; and
      (G)   Slaughterhouse.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.10.2)
   (3)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and structures in the I-1 Light Industrial
District.
      (A)   Minimum lot area. No minimum requirement.
      (B)   Lot dimensions. All lots hereafter created shall have a minimum
width of 50 feet. Curve and cul-de-sac lot width shall be measured as chord
distance at the building setback line.
      (C)   Building height. No building or structure, located in this
district, may be changed or erected so as to have a height greater than 40
feet.
      (D)   Yards. No building shall be erected or enlarged unless the
following yard setback requirements are provided.
         (1)   Front yard. No minimum requirement.
         (2)   Side yards. No minimum requirement.
         (3)   Rear yard. No minimum requirement.
      (E)   Off-street parking. The provision of this chapter shall apply.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.10.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.033 I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRY.
   The I-2 District is established to provide areas for a general range of
manufacturing service.
   (1)   Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted in the I-
2 District, plus such other uses as the Board of Zoning Appeals may deem to be
similar in nature. All uses shall be subject to the property development
standards in division (3) below and Sec.
153.125:
      (A)   All uses permitted in the I-1 District;
      (B)   Concrete, ready-mix plant;
      (C)   Contractor’s storage yard;
      (D)   Industry, general;
      (E)   Manufacturing; and
      (F)   Material storage, open.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.11.1)
   (2)   Special uses. The following uses may be permitted by special use
permit as provided for in Sec.
153.011:
      (A)   Anhydrous ammonia or similar liquidized fertilizers, storage and
distribution (commercial);
      (B)   Asphalt and asphalitic concrete batch plant;
      (C)   Bottled gas, storage and distribution;
      (D)   Bulk storage of petroleum products;
      (E)   Junk yard;
      (F)   Manufacturing, storage, or use of explosives;
      (G)   Mineral extraction;
      (H)   Petroleum tank farm, commercial;
      (I)   Public or commercial sanitary landfill; and
      (J)   Slaughterhouse.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.11.2)
   (3)   Property development standards. The following property development
standards shall apply to all land and structures in the I-2 General Industry
District: Minimum lot area: no minimum requirement.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.11.3)
   Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
SIGNS AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES
Sec. 153.045 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Signs and outdoor advertising structures may be erected in the zoning
districts where such use is permitted subject to the following provisions.
   (1)   No sign or outdoor advertising structure shall be located so as to
endanger the health and safety of operators or motor vehicles on the public
streets.
   (2)   Signs or advertising structures may be lighted in a reasonable manner
that make the structure visible, but does not create substantial glare. No sign
may be erected that flashes, uses sound or other mechanical devices, or that
uses unusual lighting or other means of illumination.
   (3)   No sign or advertising structure shall project into the public right-
of-way or other adjacent property.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.14.1) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.046 PERMITTED SIGNS; RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   In residential zoning districts, non-illuminated nameplates for home
occupations are permitted, provided the nameplate does not exceed one square
foot in area, and is used for indicating the name and address of the occupant
or home occupation.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.14.2) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.047 PERMITTED SIGNS; COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   In commercial and industrial zoning districts, signs are permitted for the
purpose of identifying or describing the nature or type of use located on the
premises, with the sign subject to the following.
   (1)   Signs may be free-standing, attached to the building, or painted on
the wall of a building.
   (2)   No sign shall be erected or located to have a total height greater
than 20 feet above the level of the street upon which the sign faces, nor shall
the signable area of any such sign exceed 100 feet.
   (3)   Free-standing signs may contain double frontage signable areas.
However, only one sign may be located or painted on a building or premises.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.14.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.048 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURES.
   Outdoor advertising structures are permitted in certain zoning districts for
the purpose of advertising businesses and uses not located on the premises with
the structure, subject to the following.
   (1)   Outdoor advertising structures shall be free-standing and not attached
to or painted on any part of a building or premises.
   (2)   No outdoor advertising structure shall be erected to have a total
height greater than 20 feet above the level of the structure upon which the
structure exceeds 150 square feet.
   (3)   Double frontage signable areas are permitted.
   (4)   Only one outdoor advertising structure shall be erected on any
individual lot or parcel.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.14.4) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
OFF-STREET PARKING
Sec. 153.060 PURPOSE.
   The following regulations are established to lessen congestion in the public
streets and to set standards for the off-street parking of vehicles, taking
into consideration the particular type of use.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.15.1)
Sec. 153.061 EXISTING USES.
   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure erected prior to the
effective date of this chapter is hereafter changed substantially to a new use,
the off-street parking requirements shall be met, or in the event the floor
area, seating capacity, number of dwelling units, or other factors affecting
the parking requirements is changed.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.15.2) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.062 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   For the following uses, accessory off-street parking spaces shall be
provided as required below.
   (1)   Residential uses.
      (A)   One-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. Two parking spaces
shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
      (B)   Multiple-family dwellings. Two parking spaces shall be provided for
each single dwelling unit.
      (C)   Motels, inns, and auto courts. One parking space shall be provided
for each guest or sleeping room of suite.
      (D)   Hotels. One parking space for each dwelling unit or lodging room.
      (E)   Lodging, rooming, and boarding houses. One parking space shall be
provided for each two lodging rooms.
   (2)   Retail and service uses.
      (A)   Retail stores and banks. One parking space shall be provided for
each 200 square feet of floor area.
      (B)   Automobile service stations. One parking space shall be provided
for each two employees.
      (C)   Establishments dispensing food or beverage for consumption on the
premises. One parking space shall be provided for each 300 square feet of floor
area.
      (D)   Furniture and appliance stores, household equipment or furniture
repair shops. One parking space shall be provided for each 600 square feet of
floor area.
      (E)   Motor vehicle sales and machinery sales. One parking space shall be
provided for each 300 square feet of floor area.
      (F)   Theaters (indoor). One parking space shall be provided for each
five seats.
   (3)   Offices; business, professional, and governmental. One parking space
shall be provided for each 200 square feet of floor area.
   (4)   Medical and dental clinics. Three parking spaces shall be provided for
each doctor.
   (5)   Wholesale establishments (not including warehouses and storage
buildings other than accessory). One parking space shall be provided for each
600 square feet of floor space.
   (6)   Manufacturing uses or any establishments engaged in production,
processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair of materials, goods, or
products. One parking space shall be provided for each two employees.
   (7)   Warehouses and storage buildings. One parking space shall be provided
for each two employees.
   (8)   Community service uses.
      (A)   Church, school, college, and other institutional auditoriums. One
parking space shall be provided for each three auditorium seats. Adequate space
shall also be provided for buses used in connection with the activities of the
institution, and all loading and unloading of passengers shall take place upon
the premises.
      (B)   Colleges, universities, and business, professional, and trade
schools. One parking space shall be provided for each three employees, and one
parking space shall be provided for each four students, based on the minimum
number of students attending classes on the premises at any one time during any
24-hour period.
      (C)   Hospitals. One parking space shall be provided for each two
hospital beds, plus one parking space for each two employees (other than staff
doctors), plus one parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
      (D)   Libraries, art galleries, and museums (public). One parking space
shall be provided for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
      (E)   Municipal or privately owned recreation buildings or community
centers. One parking space shall be provided for each two employees.
      (F)   Public utility and public service uses. One parking space shall be
provided for each three employees.
      (G)   Schools (nursery, elementary, and high). One parking space shall be
provided for each employee.
   (9)   Places of assembly; stadiums, arenas, auditoriums (other than church,
college, or institutional schools), convention halls, dance halls, exhibition
halls, skating rinks, and other similar places of assembly. Parking spaces
equal in number of 25% of the capacity in persons shall be provided.
   (10)   Miscellaneous uses.
      (A)   Fraternities, sororities, and dormitories. One parking space shall
be provided for each five active members.
      (B)   Private clubs and lodges (without sleeping facilities for guests).
Parking spaces equal in number to 10% of the capacity in persons shall be
provided.
      (C)   Rest homes and nursing homes. One parking space shall be provided
for each four beds, plus one parking space for each two employees (other than
staff doctors), plus one parking space for each doctor assigned to staff.
      (D)   Sanitariums, convalescent homes, or institutions for the aged or
for children. One parking space shall be provided for each four beds, plus one
parking space for each two employees (other than staff doctors), plus one
parking space for each doctor assigned to the staff.
      (E)   Theaters (automobile drive-in). Reservoir parking equal to 10% of
the vehicle capacity of such theaters shall be provided.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.15.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES
Sec. 153.075 LOCATION.
   (1)   Accessory uses and buildings may be permitted in all zoning districts.
   (2)   Accessory buildings shall be permitted only in side and rear yards,
and shall be located no closer than five feet to the side or rear lot lines.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.16.1) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.076 HEIGHT OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No accessory building shall exceed a total height of 14 feet.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.16.2) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.077 CONSTRUCTION OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   An accessory building shall not be constructed before the principal building
is constructed.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.16.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.078 AREA OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No accessory building shall exceed 1,200 square feet in area.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.16.4) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.079 RESIDENTIAL STORAGE BUILDINGS.
   (1)   Number of accessory buildings/storage buildings/detached garages shall
be a maximum of two per residence.
   (2)   Storage buildings cannot be used as dwelling units (no one may live in
the storage building).
   (3)   The building must be built of typical building materials. Unpainted
wood, plastic, plain concrete blocks, corrugated metal, plastics, canvas,
vinyl, or similar materials are not allowed.
   (4)   The roof of an accessory building cannot be corrugated metal, plastic,
or canvas. Roofs must be either composition shingles, rolled roofing, built-up
roof, metal panels type, or other material allowed by the Zoning Official.
   (5)   Accessory buildings on corner lots must meet the same setback
requirements as the main structure (house). In most cases, a minimum 20-foot
setback is required from the side property line.
   (6)   Accessory buildings that are located behind the house must be a
minimum three feet from side and rear yard property lines.
   (7)   Accessory buildings that are between the houses and the side property
line must meet the setback requirements as set forth in either the
comprehensive zoning or the planned development standards set forth for your
subdivision; however, in most cases, it will be five feet from the side
property line.
   (8)   Buildings larger than 144 square feet must be a minimum of six feet
from the house.
   (9)   Buildings cannot have a wall height taller than ten and one-half feet
and cannot have an average height taller than 15 feet.
   (10)   When the building is not attached to a normal foundation by its
plates, tie-downs shall be required in each corner.
   (11)   Accessory buildings that exceed 192 square feet in area require a
permit.
   (12)   No POD, truck boxes, or enclosed trailers shall be used as storage
buildings.
   (13)   Any violations of this section shall be governed by the nuisance
ordinance.
(Ord. -, passed 2-9-2017) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES
Sec. 153.090 AUTHORITY.
   (1)   The regulations set forth in the text of the zoning ordinance and the
zoning district map may be amended upon application by any person or party, or
by the Town Board of Trustees.
   (2)   The ordinance shall only be amended when the proposed change promotes
the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare of the residents
of the town.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.22.1)
Sec. 153.091 PUBLIC HEARING.
   No zoning text amendment or zoning district map amendment shall be
considered except after a public hearing has been conducted by the Zoning Board
of Appeals as provided in Sec.
153.012.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.22.2)
Sec. 153.092 STANDARDS.
   (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall prepare a record of the findings of
fact and decision in each case from the evidence presented at the public
hearing.
   (2)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall use the following standards when
considering amendments to the ordinance:
      (A)   The suitability of the subject property for uses authorized by the
existing zoning;
      (B)   The suitability of the subject property for uses authorized by the
proposed zoning;
      (C)   The existing land uses of nearby property;
      (D)   Existing zoning of nearby property; and
      (E)   Whether the petitioned zoning change is in the best interest of the
general public or is it solely for the benefit of the petitioner.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.22.3)
Sec. 153.093 DECISION.
   After the public hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make a
recommendation to the Town Board of Trustees to approve or deny the proposed
amendment. The Town Board of Trustees shall have the final authority to approve
any amendments to the zoning district map or the zoning ordinance text. All
decisions of the Town Board of Trustees on amendments shall be final and are
subject to review in the courts of the state.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.22.4)
FENCES
Sec. 153.105 GENERAL.
   No fence may be erected in a residential, commercial, or industrial district
which does not comply with the following.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.106 PERMIT.
A permit will be required for all fences erected in the town.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.107 FRONT YARD.
   Any fence erected in a required front yard shall be at least 60% open. No
fence erected in a required front yard may exceed four feet in height, measured
from ground level. No privacy fence may be erected in the front yard of any
residence.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.108 PRIVACY FENCE.
   Any privacy fence erected on the street side of a corner lot shall be
restricted to the required rear yard, subject to the provisions of Sec.
153.109. However, a chain link or ornamental fence which is no more than four
feet in height, measured from the ground level, and which is 60% open may
extend to the front property line. No fence may be built across or on a utility
easement.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.109 SETBACKS.
   Any fence placed on an interior side yard or rear yard may be placed one
foot from the property line. Fences shall also follow town ordinances.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.110 HEIGHT.
   No fence may be erected which exceeds six feet in height above ground level
in a residential area. In commercial and industrial areas, no fence may be
erected which exceeds eight feet in height. No fence shall be erected which
exceeds the total height of five feet within 50 feet of a street line on a
corner lot.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.111 ANCHORING.
   The fence posts or other anchoring devices must be a minimum of three feet
deep when constructing a fence.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.112 MATERIALS.
   No fence may be constructed with barbed wire, metal spikes, or any other
sharp pointed materials. All chain link fences shall be installed with the
knuckle portion of the fence up and with the barb portion of the fence at or
near the ground. No fence may be electrified. Fence may be constructed of wood,
chain link, PVC, rod iron, cast metal, bushes, or other plants, stone, or other
building material that the Zoning Administrator deems acceptable. All hardware
that is used to construct or hold fence together shall face the property owner,
and the finished side shall face outward from the property owner.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.113 MAINTENANCE.
   (1)   The finished side of all fences shall face outward from the property
owner. If the fence faces an alley, it is optional.
   (2)   All areas of a lot on the exterior side of the fence, including the
fence itself, shall be maintained by the property owner.
(Ord. 394, passed 8-10-2010) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
Sec. 153.125 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (1)   All lots hereafter created shall contain frontage along a public
street, and as further specified in the individual zoning districts.
   (2)   On corner lots, reversed corner lots, and double frontage lots, two
front yard setback distances shall be required as specified in the individual
zoning districts.
   (3)   No structure or use of land subject to the requirements of this
chapter shall violate any other law of the town, county, or state.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.17) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.126 NONCONFORMING BUILDING AND USE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (1)   Upon the effective date of this chapter, the lawful use of a building
or premises may be continued although such use does not conform to all the
provisions thereof, except as hereinafter provided. A nonconforming use may be
changed to another nonconforming use of the same or greater restrictions,
provided no structural changes are made in the building. Whenever a
nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter
be changed except in accordance with the requirements of the district.
   (2)   Any building, or building and land combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use of a building is existing shall not hereafter be expanded or
altered in any manner except in accordance with the requirements of the
district in which it is located. In the event that a nonconforming use of any
building or premises is discontinued for a period of one year, the use of the
same shall hereafter conform to the uses permitted in the district in which it
is located. When a building containing a nonconforming use is damaged by fire,
explosion, or other acts of God, to the extent of more than 50% of its assessed
value, it shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of
the district within which it is located. These provisions apply in the same
manner to a use which may become a nonconforming use due to a later amendment
to these regulations.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.18) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.127 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (1)   General. In all districts permitting residential dwellings, home
occupations shall be permitted, as long as the home occupation is incidental
and secondary to the permitted residential use of the lot.
   (2)   Permitted home occupations.
      (A)   Domestic crafts, such as a seamstress, sewing, tailoring, weaving,
washing, and ironing, carpentry work, barber shops (one chair operation only),
beauty shops (one chair operation only), repair of small household appliances,
and offices used predominantly for personal, as opposed to business use;
      (B)   Music and dance instruction, limited to one pupil at any one time;
      (C)   Private tutoring, limited to three pupils at any one time; and
      (D)   Use of premises by a medical or osteopathic physician, surgeon,
dentist, podiatrist, or chirpodist, for consultation or emergency treatment,
but not for general practice of such profession.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.12.1)
   (3)   Occupations not included. A home occupation shall not be interpreted
to include automobile repair and tune-up, offices, clinics, welding shops,
tourist homes, animal hospitals, kennels, and television repair shops.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.12.2)
   (4)   Home occupation requirements.
      (A)   Such one occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling
unit used as the residence.
      (B)   The operator conducting the home occupation shall be the sole
entrepreneur.
      (C)   The primary use of the dwelling unit shall remain for residential
purposes and the operator of the home occupation shall remain a resident in the
dwelling unit.
      (D)   The home occupation shall be incidental and secondary to the
permitted residential use of the lot.
      (E)   No structural additions, enlargements, or exterior alterations
changing the residential appearance to a business or commercial appearance
shall be permitted.
      (F)   No additional and separate entrance incongruent with the
residential structural design shall be constructed for the purpose of
conducting the home occupation.
      (G)   The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond
that normal to the district in which it is located.
      (H)   Not more than one room in the dwelling unit shall be employed for
the home occupation, at grade or above grade, or 300 square feet of basement
floor area below grade.
      (I)   No provision for off-street parking or loading facilities, other
than the requirements of the residential district in which the use is located,
shall be permitted, and no part of a minimum required yard shall be used for
such off-street parking or loading purposes. No additional driveways to serve
such home occupations shall be permitted.
      (J)   No display of goods or external evidence of the home occupation
shall be permitted other than one attached, non-illuminated sign, not exceeding
one square foot in area.
      (K)   No stock, in trade or commodities, other than those prepared,
produced, or created on the premises by the operator of the home occupation,
shall be kept or sold on the premises.
      (L)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
(visually or audibly), outside of the dwelling.
(Prior Code, 21.12.3) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.128 MOBILE HOMES.
   Mobile homes, trailers, or vans may be utilized in all districts as
contractor’s officers, watchperson’s shelters, or tool or equipment storage
only on the site and only during the period of construction of improvement
projects.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.13) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.129 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SWIMMING POOL. Any private recreational pool, pond, lake, or open tank
not located within a completely enclosed building and capable of containing
water to a depth at any point greater than 24 inches.
      SWIMMING POOL, ABOVE-GROUND. Any private recreational pool, pond, lake,
or open tank not located within a completely enclosed building and capable of
containing water to a depth at any point greater than 24 inches.
      SWIMMING POOL, IN-GROUND. A swimming pool whose sides are not exposed and
are below the natural ground located adjacent to said swimming pool.
      SWIMMING POOL, SURFACE. A swimming pool whose exposed sides have a height
of more than 24 inches, but less than four feet above the natural ground
located adjacent to said swimming pool.
   (2)   No swimming pool shall be allowed in any residential district unless
it complies with the following requirements.
      (A)   The pool is not operated as a business or private club.
      (B)   A pool shall not be located in any required front or required side
yard and shall not be closer than ten feet to any property line of the property
on which it is located. Pump and filter installations for pools shall not be
closer than 20 feet to any property line.
      (C)   For an in-ground or surface swimming pool, the pool or the property
upon which said pool is located shall be enclosed by a fence of a type which
effectively controls the entrance by children to the pool area. The fence must
be at least five feet in height. Wooden fences with boards placed vertically
shall not have any opening wider than four inches per opening and wooden fences
with boards placed horizontally shall not have any opening wider than one inch
per opening.
      (D)   Gates installed for access to the property or pool area shall be
equipped with a closing and latching device to protect against uncontrolled
access to the property.
      (E)   For an above-ground swimming pool, the pool shall be equipped with
an automatically retractable type ladder, a retractable ladder, a removable
ladder, or shall be fenced in. Said ladders must be removed when pool is not in
use.
      (F)   If access to the pool is via a deck or porch, then no access from
the ground is permitted to the deck area unless the property or the ground
access to the deck is fenced or gated.
      (G)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner where said
pool is located to maintain all pool covers, fences, gates, and closure devices
in good operating condition.
      (H)   Hot tubs and spas will be excluded, providing a secured hard cover
when not in use.
   (3)   Swimming pools or ponds shall be approved by the Zoning Officer.
Above-ground pools constructed of light materials shall not require a
construction permit. All in-ground pools shall require a construction permit.
(Ord. 467, passed 9-14-2017) Penalty, see Sec.
153.999
Sec. 153.999 PENALTY.
   (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to Sec.
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (2)   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500 for each
offense. Each day that a violation is allowed to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, Sec. 21.26)
   (3)   Fines for violations of Sec.
153.129 shall be regulated by the Board of Trustees. Fines shall be not less
than $50 and not more than $500 per occurrence.
(Ord. 467, passed 9-14-2017)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES AND SERVICE AGREEMENTS
      
II.   STREET NAMES
      
III.   VACATIONS
      
IV.   ANNEXATIONS
      
V.   ZONING CHANGES
      
VI.   TRANSFER, DEVELOPMENT OF PROPERTY
TABLE I: FRANCHISES AND SERVICE AGREEMENTS
 
Res./Ord. No. Date Passed Description
134           6-9-1981    Agreement with Central Illinois Public Service
                          Company for street lighting service.
-             2-9-2017    Addressing franchise fee payments from Mediacom
                          Illinois LLC.
456           2-9-2017    Addressing franchise fee payments from Mediacom
                          Illinois LLC.
                         
 
TABLE II: STREET NAMES
 
Res./Ord. No. Date Passed Description
R. 461        5-11-2017   Naming 21 streets in honor of town residents who have
                          lost their lives in wartime.
                         
 
TABLE III: VACATIONS
 
Res./Ord. No. Date Passed Description
137           4-13-1982   Vacating an alley in Block 15.
                          Vacating a portion of West Locust Street in Township
-             4-11-2019   26 North, Range 8 East of the Third Principal
                          Meridian.
-             - -2020     Vacating a portion of West Locust Street containing
                          6.87 acres, more or less.
                         
 
TABLE IV: ANNEXATIONS
 
Res./ Date
Ord.  Passed Description
No.
140   12-14- Annexing part of the TP&W Railroad’s right-of-way in Section 4, Township 26
      1982   North, Range 8 East and zoning it I-2 General Industry.
141   12-14- Annexing part of a subdivision in the southwest quarter of Section 4,
      1982   Township 26 North, Range 8 East and zoning it I-2 General Industry.
142   1-25-  Annexing two tracts in Lot 1 of the southwest quarter of Section 4, Township
      1983   26 North, Range 8 East and zoning it I-2 General Industry.
152   9-25-  Annexing a parcel of land and all of F.A. Route 9 lying south of said parcel.
      1984
            
 
TABLE V: ZONING CHANGES
 
Res./ Date
Ord.  Passed Description
No.
135   4-13-  Changing the zoning of Lots 5, 6, 7, and 8 in Block 2 of Megquire’s Second
      1982   Addition from AG to R-2.
136   4-13-  Changing the zoning of Lots 9 and 10 in Block 33 of the Original Town of
      1982   Chatsworth from R-2 to C-1.
            
 
TABLE VI: TRANSFER, DEVELOPMENT OF PROPERTY
 
Res./Ord. No. Date Passed Description
464           7-13-2017   Exchanging two parcels of land owned by the town for
                          one owned by Tracy Collins.
                          Granting a special use permit to RPIL Solar 8 for the
R. 2025-06-17 6-17-2025   development of a solar energy farm on Parcel #27-27-
                          04-477-008.
                         
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cite Code Section
ILCS Cite                   Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.08              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.10              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.20              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29              10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                 10.04
5 ILCS 315/3                32.20
10 ILCS 5/1-3               32.20
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4             32.20
10 ILCS 5/9-3               32.20
                            113.02;
43 ILCS                     113.14;
                            113.26
43 ILCS 95.24               113.01
65 ILCS 5                   10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2             10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-5             91.01
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25         31.115
405 ILCS 25/1 et seq.       114.20
510 ILCS 5/16-16            90.41
625 ILCS                    70.01
625 ILCS 5                  70.01
625 ILCS 5/1-188            10.02
625 ILCS 5/2-101 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/3-100 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/5-100 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/6-100 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/7-100 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/8-101 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/9-101 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/10-101 et seq.   70.01
625 ILCS 5/11-100 et seq.   70.01
625 ILCS 5/12-100 et seq.   70.01
625 ILCS 5/13-100 et seq.   70.01
625 ILCS 5/13C-1 et seq.    70.01
625 ILCS 5/15-100 et seq.   70.01
625 ILCS 5/16-101 et seq.   70.01
625 ILCS 5/17-101 et seq.   70.01
625 ILCS 5/18A-100 et seq.  70.01
625 ILCS 5/18B-100 et seq.  70.01
625 ILCS 5/18C-1101 et seq. 70.01
625 ILCS 5/18D-101 et seq.  70.01
625 ILCS 5/20-101 et seq.   70.01
625 ILCS 5/20-204           70.01
625 ILCS 5/201              70.02
625 ILCS 5/700 et seq.      71.01
                            
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2025 Code Section
1.1                31.020
1.2                31.021
1.3                31.022
1.4                31.023
1.5                31.024
2.1.1              30.01
2.1.2              30.02
2.1.4              30.04
2.1.5              30.05
2.1.6              30.06
2.1.7              30.07
2.2.1              30.20
2.2.2              30.21
2.2.3              30.22
2.2.4              30.23
2.2.5              30.24
2.2.6              30.25
2.2.7              30.26
2.2.8              30.27
2.2.9              30.28;
                   30.99
2.2.10             30.29
4.1.1              31.095
4.1.2              31.096
4.1.3              31.097
4.1.4              31.098
4.1.5              31.099
4.1.6              31.100
4.2.1              31.055
4.2.2              31.056
4.2.3              31.057
4.2.4              31.058
4.2.5              31.059
4.2.6              31.060
4.2.7              31.061
4.2.8              31.062
4.2.9              31.063
4.3.1              152.99
4.3.2              152.99
4.3.4              153.001
4.4.1              31.075
4.4.2              31.076
4.4.3              31.077
4.4.4              31.078
4.4.5              31.079
4.4.6              31.080
4.5.1              31.001
4.5.2              31.002
4.5.3              31.003
4.5.4              31.004
4.5.5              31.005
4.5.6              31.006
4.5.7              31.007
4.5.8              31.008
4.5.9              31.009
4.5.10             31.010
4.5.11             31.011
4.5.12             31.012
4.5.13             32.06
5.1.1              33.15
5.1.2              33.16
5.1.3              33.17
5.1.4              33.18
5.1.5              33.19
5.1.6              33.20
5.1.7              33.21
5.1.8              33.22
5.1.9              33.23
5.1.10             33.24
5.1.11             32.25
5.1.12             32.26
7.1.1              32.35
7.1.2              32.36
7.1.3              32.37
7.1.4              32.38
7.1.5              32.38
7.2.1              32.39
7.4.1              152.01
7.4.2              152.02
7.4.3              152.03
7.4.4              152.04
7.4.5              152.05
7.4.6              152.06
7.4.7              152.07
7.4.8              152.99
7.5.1              150.01
7.6.1              11.01
7.6.2              34.01
7.6.3              34.02
7.6.4              34.03
7.6.5              34.04
7.6.6              32.05
7.6.7              34.05
8.1.1              151.01
8.1.2              151.02
8.1.3              151.03
8.1.4              151.04
8.1.5              151.05
8.1.6              151.06
8.1.7              151.07
8.1.8              151.08
8.1.9              151.09
8.1.10             151.10
8.1.11             151.11
8.1.12             151.12
8.1.13             151.13
8.1.14             151.14
8.1.15             151.15
8.1.16             151.16
8.1.17             151.17
8.1.18             151.18
8.1.19             151.19
8.1.20             151.20
8.1.21             151.21
8.1.22             151.99
8.2.1              151.22
8.2.2              151.22
8.2.3              151.22
8.2.4              151.22
8.2.5              151.99
8.3.1              151.23
8.3.2              151.23
8.3.3              151.23
8.3.4              151.23
8.4.1              151.35
8.4.2              151.36
8.4.3              151.37
8.4.4              151.38
8.4.5              151.39
8.4.6              151.40
8.4.7              151.41
8.4.8              151.42
8.4.9              151.43
8.4.10             151.44
8.4.11             151.99
8.5.1              151.55
8.5.2              151.56
8.5.3              151.57
8.5.4              151.58
8.5.5              151.59
8.5.6              151.60
8.5.7              151.99
8.5.8              151.61
11.1               110.01
11.2               110.02
11.3               110.03
11.4               110.04
11.5               110.05
11.6               110.06
11.7               110.07
11.8               110.08
11.9               110.09
11.10              110.10
11.11              110.11
11.12              110.12
11.13              110.13
11.14              110.99
12.1               112.01
12.2               112.02
12.3               112.03
12.4               112.04
12.5               112.05
12.6               112.06
12.7               112.07
12.8               112.99
13.1               113.01
13.2               113.02
13.3               113.03
13.4               113.04
13.5               113.05
13.6               113.06
13.7               113.07
13.8               113.08
13.9               113.09
13.10              113.10
13.11              113.11
13.12              113.12
13.13              113.13
13.14              113.14
13.15              113.15
13.16              113.16
13.17              113.17
13.18              113.18
13.19              113.19
13.20              113.20
13.21              113.21
13.22              113.22
13.23              113.23
13.24              113.24
13.25              113.25
13.26              113.26
13.27              113.99
14.1.1             111.01
14.1.2             111.02
14.1.3             111.03
14.1.4             111.04
14.1.5             111.05
14.1.6             111.06
14.1.7             111.07
14.1.8             111.08
14.1.9             111.99
14.3.1             111.35
14.3.2             111.36
14.3.3             111.37
14.3.4             111.38
14.3.5             111.39
14.3.6             111.40
14.3.7             111.99
15.1.1             34.20
15.1.2             34.21
15.1.3             34.22
15.1.4             34.23
15.2.1             34.35
15.2.2             34.36
15.2.3             34.37
15.3.1             34.50
15.3.2             34.51
18.1.1             131.01
18.1.2             131.02
18.1.3             131.03
18.1.4             131.99
18.2.1             91.60
18.2.2             91.61
18.2.3             91.62
18.2.4             91.63
18.2.5             91.99
18.3.1             132.01
18.3.2             132.02
18.3.3             132.03
18.3.4             132.04
18.3.5             132.05
18.3.6             132.06
18.3.7             132.99
18.4.1             91.25
18.4.2             91.26
18.4.3             91.27
18.4.4             91.28
18.4.5             91.29
18.4.6             91.30
18.4.7             91.31
18.4.8             91.99
19.1               130.01
19.2               130.02
19.3               130.03
19.4               130.04
19.5               130.05
19.6               130.06
19.7               130.07
19.8               130.08
19.9               130.09
19.10              130.10
19.11              130.11
19.12              130.12
19.13              130.13
19.14              130.14
19.15              130.15
19.16              130.16
19.17              130.17
19.18              130.18
19.19              130.19
19.20              130.20
19.21              130.21
19.22              130.99
20.1               33.40
20.2               33.41
20.3               33.42
20.4               33.43
20.5               33.44
20.6               33.45
20.7               33.99
20.9               33.46
21.1.1             153.002
21.1.2             153.003
21.2               153.004
21.3               153.025
21.4.1             153.026
21.4.2             153.026
21.4.3             153.026
21.5.1             153.027
21.5.2             153.027
21.5.3             153.027
21.6.1             153.028
21.6.2             153.028
21.6.3             153.028
21.7.1             153.029
21.7.2             153.029
21.8.1             153.030
21.8.2             153.030
21.8.3             153.030
21.9.1             153.031
21.9.2             153.031
21.9.3             153.031
21.10.1            153.032
21.10.2            153.032
21.10.3            153.032
21.11.1            153.033
21.11.2            153.033
21.11.3            153.033
21.12.1            153.127
21.12.2            153.127
21.12.3            153.127
21.13              153.128
21.14.1            153.045
21.14.2            153.046
21.14.3            153.047
21.14.4            153.048
21.15.1            153.060
21.15.2            153.061
21.15.3            153.062
21.16.1            153.075
21.16.2            153.076
21.16.3            153.077
21.16.4            153.078
21.17              153.125
21.18              153.126
21.19.1            153.005
21.19.2            153.006
21.19.3            153.007
21.19.4            153.008
21.19.5            153.009
21.20.1            153.010
21.20.2            153.010
21.20.3            153.010
21.21.1            153.011
21.21.2            153.011
21.21.3            153.011
21.22.1            153.090
21.22.2            153.091
21.22.3            153.092
21.22.4            153.093
21.23              153.012
21.24              153.013
21.25              153.014
21.26              153.999
22.1               10.99
22.2               10.99
22.3               10.99
22.4               10.99
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No.   Date Passed Code Section
412        - -2012     32.03
461        5-11-2017   TSO Table II
462        5-11-2017   11.02
474        9-27-2018   92.01
492        12-10-2020  33.01
2025-06-17 6-17-2025   TSO Table VII
                      
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
                       90.01—
                       90.07;
-          - -         90.20—
                       90.42;
                       90.99
134        6-9-1981    TSO Table I
135        4-13-1982   TSO Table V
136        4-13-1982   TSO Table V
137        4-13-1982   TSO Table III
140        12-14-1982  TSO Table IV
141        12-14-1982  TSO Table IV
142        1-25-1983   TSO Table IV
152        9-25-1984   TSO Table IV
262        12-14-1999  31.035—
                       31.040
297        6-15-2004   32.20—
                       32.24
                       91.01—
17.2       2-19-2008   91.09;
                       91.99
17.3       2-19-2008   91.10—
                       91.14
394        8-10-2010   153.105—
                       153.113
414        4-24-2012   30.03
422        5-30-2013   32.01
443        3-24-2016   92.02
-          2-9-2017    TSO Table I
-          2-9-2017    153.079
456        2-9-2017    TSO Table I
457        2-9-2017    111.20—
                       111.22
-          3-9-2017    150.02
464        7-13-2017   TSO Table VI
                       91.45—
466        9-14-2017   91.48;
                       91.99
467        9-14-2017   153.129;
                       153.999
470        2-8-2018    31.115—
                       31.124
471        2-8-2018    32.04
475        9-27-2018   92.03;
                       92.99
-          3-14-2019   70.01;
                       70.02
-          4-11-2019   TSO Table III
433        10-10-2019  71.01;
                       71.99
-          - -2020     TSO Table III
486        3-12-2020   31.013
488        8-13-2020   115.01—
                       115.05
22-460     4-12-2022   32.02
                       114.20—
2023-02-14 2-14-2023   114.27;
                       114.99
2023-09-12 9-12-2023   50.01—
                       50.04
                       51.01—
440        3-26-2024   51.11;
                       51.99
2024-26-03 3-26-2024   114.01—
                       114.06
                      
 
 
