VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-29 Supplement contains
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. 24-26, passed 7-9-24
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
(2023)
Officials
Village President David C. Kimsey
Village Clerk     Dan Holden
Village Treasurer Kayla Dierkes
Village Manager   Patrick M. McCarthy
Village Attorney  Lisa Petrilli
Police Chief      Vernon Foli
                  
Village Trustees
Kristen Chiaro    Meredith Ferguson
Carl Try          John Fletcher
Brett Gerger      Tim Nice
                  
 
Chatham Village Hall
116 East Mulberry
Chatham, IL 62629
www.chathamil.net
Phone Number: (217) 483-2451
Fax Number: (217) 483-3422
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 98-01
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, ILLINOIS;
PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; AND
PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 1-2-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the
Village President may appoint persons to revise the Village's ordinances, and
the corporate authorities may enact an Ordinance adopting such revisions;
   WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 1-2-3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the
Village retained the services of American Legal Publishing to revise the
Village's Ordinances, and American Legal Publishing Corporation, after
consultation with the Village Board, has tendered to the Village a revised Code
of Ordinances for the Village's adoption; and said Code is current through June
24, 1997;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, SANGAMON COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
   SECTION 1: The book of revised ordinances entitled "Village of Chatham Code
of Ordinances" prepared by American Legal Publishing Corporation, is hereby
adopted and enacted, and shall be treated and considered as a new and original
comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent
ordinances passed by the President and Board of Trustees on or before June 24,
1997. Said book shall be known as the "Chatham Code of Ordinances".
   SECTION 2: All general ordinances of the Village of Chatham enacted prior to
June 24, 1997, are hereby repealed, except such as are included in the Chatham
Code of Ordinances or are by necessary implication reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances, which are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances;
ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public
places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to
elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by
or from the Village; and all special ordinances.
   SECTION 3: All general ordinances of the Village of Chatham passed after
June 24, 1997 and before January 1, 1998, shall be incorporated into the
Chatham Code of Ordinances, and the Clerk is authorized and directed to forward
such ordinances to American Legal Publishing Corporation for incorporation
therein in a revision to be published during 1998. Thereafter, all ordinances,
when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the President and
Board of Trustees to make them a part of the Chatham Code of Ordinances, shall
be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Chatham
Code of Ordinances" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments.
   SECTION 4: A copy of the Chatham Code of Ordinances shall be kept on file in
the Office of the Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form. It shall be the duty of
the Clerk, or someone authorized by the Clerk, to insert in their designated
places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the
President and Board of Trustees to make the same a part of the Code when the
same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from the Code
all provisions which may from time to time be repealed by the President and
Board of Trustees. This copy of the Chatham Code of Ordinances shall be
available for all persons desiring to examine it and shall be considered the
official Code of Ordinances of the Village of Chatham, Illinois.
   SECTION 5: The Chatham Code of Ordinances shall be in full force and effect,
after its passage, approval and publication, on January 23, 1998.
   SECTION 6: This Ordinance and the Chatham Code of Ordinances shall be
printed and published in book or pamphlet form by order of the President and
Board of Trustees.
   PASSED this 13th day of January, 1998.
                         Carl Oblinger /s/
                         VILLAGE PRESIDENT
ATTEST:
Robert Krueger /s/
Village Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Chatham,
Illinois shall be designated as the Code of Chatham and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
   CORPORATE or VILLAGE LIMITS. The legal boundaries of the village.
   COUNTY. Sangamon County, Illinois.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property except real property, as herein
described.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such
building or land, either alone or with others.
   VILLAGE, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Chatham.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
('70 Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority
of such persons or officers.
   (E)   Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
   (F)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   Statutory reference.
      (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that
the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (120 ILCS 40/14) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see ILCS Ch. 5,
       Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the village and subsequently amended, the previous code of
ordinance section number shall be indicated in the history by “('70 Code, § ).”
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES
      
31.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS
      
32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT; BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
      
33.   OTHER DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
34.   FINANCE
      
35.   PERSONNEL CODE
      
36.   VILLAGE POLICIES
      
37.   VILLAGE OFFICIAL AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS
      
38.   TAXPAYER’S BILL OF RIGHTS
      
39.   CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
Meetings
   
30.01   Regular meetings
   
30.02   Special meetings
   
30.03   Place of meetings
   
30.04   Presiding Officer
   
30.05   Quorum
   
30.06   Citizen participation in meetings
   
30.07   Remote attendance at meetings
   
30.08   Rules for conduct of meetings
Committees
   
30.20   Establishment of committees
Ordinances and Resolutions
   
30.50   Filed in writing; copies to each Board member
    
30.51   Procedure when ordinance is presented less than five days before action
is to be taken or three days prior to meeting
   
30.52   Consent Calendar
MEETINGS
§ 30.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   There shall be two regular meetings of the Village Board as set forth in
this section and one Committee of the Whole Meeting. The regular meetings of
the Board of Trustees shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesday of each
month beginning at 6:00 p.m. The Committee of the Whole Meeting shall be held
each month on the second Tuesday of the month, following the regular Village
Board meeting, scheduled to start at 6:05 p.m. (or immediately following the
regular Village Board meeting if it has not adjourned prior to 6:05 p.m.).
Public notice shall be given as provided by statute. If a meeting date should
fall on a legal holiday or if there is no quorum present, the meeting shall be
held on the next secular day.
(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-27-83; Am. Ord. 15-50, passed 12-8-15; Am. Ord. 17-10,
passed 2-28-17; Am. Ord. 17-10, passed 2-28-17; Am. Ord. 17-16, passed 3-28-17;
Am. Ord. 23-02, passed 1-24-23)
§ 30.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Board of Trustees may be called by the President of
the village or any three Trustees upon at least 24 hours written notice to all
Board members and the President. If all the Trustees are present at a special
meeting, no notice of the meeting shall be necessary and that notice shall be
deemed waived. Public notice shall be given as provided by statute.
(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-27-83)
§ 30.03 PLACE OF MEETINGS.
   The meeting place of the Board of Trustees shall be the Chatham Municipal
Building, unless otherwise ordered by the Board.
(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-27-83)
§ 30.04 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Village President shall be the presiding officer of all regular and
special meetings of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-27-83)
§ 30.05 QUORUM.
   The majority of the Corporate Authorities shall constitute a quorum, but no
ordinance shall be passed except on a favorable vote of the majority of the
elected members, as is provided by statute.
(Ord. 83-27, passed 9-27-83; Am. Ord. 21-40, passed 10-26-21)
§ 30.06 CITIZEN PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS.
   The following rules shall govern citizen participation in meetings.
   (A)   The Village recognizes the Illinois Open Meetings Act provides that
any person shall be permitted an opportunity to address public officials under
rules established by the village. The Village Board, by majority vote of its
members then holding office, may suspend the public comment rules herein
established as deemed prudent and in accordance with the law. These rules shall
apply to all committees, commissions and other subsidiary bodies of the Village
Board unless otherwise noted and specific to the Village Board.
   (B)   Persons desiring to be recognized and speak at open meetings of the
Village Board or other public bodies of the village are encouraged, but are not
required, to notify the Village Board or other public body at least one working
day prior to the meeting of the subject matter upon which they wish to speak so
that the village and its staff can better respond to the person’s concerns.
However, anyone desiring to address the Village Board must sign the public
comment sheet prior to the start of the meeting. The speaker must include their
name, agenda topic/village concern, and optionally any contact information that
they desire to provide. Although not required, speakers are encouraged to
provide contact information so that the village can be more responsive,
including following up on concerns or questions raised.
   (C)   There shall be two opportunities for the public to address the Village
Board during Village Board meetings. The first public comments period, "Public
Comment on Agenda Topics" shall follow Roll Call and shall be directed to
specific agenda topics. The second public comment period, "Public Comment on
Village Business" shall immediately precede meeting adjournment, and will
include general comments not specific to agenda topics or any further comments
not spoken in the first public comment period. Speakers are encouraged not to
be duplicative in remarks that are made. Nothing within this section shall
limit the ability of the Village Board, by majority vote, to change the
placement of the public comment periods on a specific agenda. Each public
comment period shall be limited to 30 minutes in time, unless that time is
extended at the discretion of the Village President or other presiding officer.
Each person shall have the floor for a maximum of five minutes unless that time
is extended at the discretion of the Village President or other presiding
officer.
   (D)   The Village Agenda shall contain an agenda topic entitled "Public
Announcements". Speakers wishing to speak during the first public comments
period under this topic may address the board on Public Announcements. For
purposes of this section, PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS shall mean a statement intended
to address the public at large about the details (time, place, etc.) of a
village event, plan, or other upcoming village affair.
   (E)   Persons addressing the Village Board or other public body of the
village shall be recognized at the time set forth on the agenda for the
meeting.
   (F)   Persons shall be recognized and called to address the public body by
name, in the order they signed in, by the Village President or other officer
presiding at the meeting. Any person who signed in to speak during the "Public
Comment on Agenda Topics" portion of a Village Board meeting that does not get
to speak during time, shall automatically have their name added to the list of
individuals desiring to speak at the "Public Comment on Village Business”
comment period at the end of the meeting. Each person shall have the floor for
a maximum of five minutes unless that time is extended at the discretion of the
Village President or other presiding officer.
   (G)   After the speaker is recognized by the Village President or other
presiding officer by name, said speaker will approach the designated area, the
Central Citizen Podium, to address the Village Board. The speaker shall begin
their statement by stating their name for the record.
   (H)   Public comment is not intended to require public officials to provide
any answers to the speaker.
   (I)   Discussions between speakers and members of the audience will not be
allowed.
   (J)   If a group of persons share a particular concern, the group will be
encouraged, but not required, to appoint one or more spokespersons to speak on
behalf of the group.
   (K)   The Village President or other presiding officer may in his or her
discretion limit a person’s remark below the five minutes provided in division
(C) or (E) of this section if the person’s remarks are cumulative or
duplicative of remarks already made by some other person.
   (L)   Persons addressing the Village Board or other public body of the
village shall do so with proper decorum and shall not engage in disorderly or
threatening behavior. Any person who disrupts the order and decorum of the
meeting may be removed.
   (M)   Presentations to the Village Board shall be limited to a person’s
business with the village or concerns regarding village business, property,
personnel or operations. The Village President or other presiding officer may
terminate any presentation that is unrelated to the business, property,
personnel or operations of the village.
   (N)   Presentations to any public body other than the Village Board shall be
limited to matters under the jurisdiction of such public body. The presiding
officer may terminate any presentation which includes matters not under the
jurisdiction of the public body.
   (O)   These rules are not a limit on the Village President’s or other
presiding officer’s authority to expel persons who have breached the peace at a
meeting.
   (P)   These rules are applicable to all boards, commissions, committees, and
other political subdivisions established by the Village Board and subject to
the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
(Ord. 11-10, passed 3-8-11; Am. Ord. 17-24, passed 6-13-17)
§ 30.07 REMOTE ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   (A)   Rules statement. Any member of the Village Board may attend any open
or closed meeting of the Village Board via electronic means (such as by
telephone, video or internet connection), provided that such attendance is not
otherwise prohibited and is in compliance with these rules and any applicable
laws.
   (B)   Prerequisites. A member of the Village Board may attend a meeting
electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
      (1)   The member must notify the Clerk at least 24 hours before the
meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications equipment can be
arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in
denial of a request for remote attendance.
      (2)   The member must assert one of the following three reasons why he or
she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
         (a)   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability; or
         (b)   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the Village Board; or
         (c)   The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
   (C)   Authorization to participate. After receiving the electronic
attendance request, the Clerk shall inform the Village Board of the request for
electronic attendance. After establishing that there is a quorum physically
present at a meeting where a member of the Village Board desires to attend
electronically, the presiding officer shall state that (i) a notice was
received by a member of the Village Board in accordance with these rules; and
(ii) the member will be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically,
unless a motion objecting to the member’s electronic attendance is made,
seconded, and approved by two-thirds of the members of the Village Board
physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and seconded or if
any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the members of the
Village Board physically present at the meeting, then the request by the member
to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed approved by the Village
Board and the presiding officer shall declare the requesting member present.
After such declaration by the presiding officer, the question of a member’s
electronic attendance may not be reconsidered.
   (D)   Adequate equipment required. The member participating electronically
and other members of the Village Board must be able to communicate effectively,
and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the
meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the Village
Board shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the
meeting site.
   (E)   Minutes. Any member attending electronically shall be considered an
off-site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the
member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state
specifically whether each member is physically present or present by electronic
means.
   (F)   Rights of a remote member. A member permitted to attend electronically
will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate
in the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all
general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to.
The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as
to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically
shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded
by the Clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member
attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any
member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her
leaving and returning.
   (G)   Committees, boards and commissions. These rules shall apply to all
committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the Village
Board.
   (H)   Participation while driving prohibited. Members permitted to attend a
meeting electronically may not participate while driving, unless they are in
compliance with all state driving laws regarding cell phone use.
   (I)   Limited participation rights. Nothing herein shall prohibit an
official who does not meet the prerequisites of division (B) from participating
in the meeting remotely, without voting rights, if the audio or video equipment
is available and a majority of those present do not vote against the
participation. Costs in such circumstances shall not be reimbursable.
(Ord. 15-38, passed 9-8-15)
§ 30.08 RULES FOR CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   The following rules shall govern the Village Board in its
deliberations:
      (1)   The President, while present, shall preside as Chairperson at all
meetings of the Village Board. In the President's absence from the meeting, the
President Pro Tem shall serve as the Chairperson, or if none, the Board members
present shall designate by vote another Board member to serve as Chairperson.
The meetings of the Village Board shall be called to order and conducted by the
Chairperson.
      (2)   A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum to
do business.
      (3)   The Chairperson's powers include, but are not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   To rule motions in or out of order. In doing so, he or she may
consult with legal counsel who shall serve as the parliamentarian.
         (b)   To regulate the course of the meeting in accordance with these
rules and applicable laws and ordinances. This includes the responsibility to
regulate speakers and attendees.
         (c)   To entertain and answer questions of parliamentary law or
procedure. In doing so, he or she may consult with legal counsel who shall
serve as parliamentarian.
         (d)   To call a brief recess at any time.
         (e)   To adjourn in an emergency.
      (4)   The separate yes, no, and abstain votes of each Board member shall
be taken by roll call upon the consideration of all ordinances, and all
propositions to create any liability against the Village, or for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money, and in all other cases at the
request of any member, which shall be entered on the minutes.
      (5)   Questions of parliamentary law at the meetings of the Board shall
be addressed as provided below. To the extent not provided for in these rules,
and to the extent it does not conflict with Illinois law, Village ordinances,
or with the spirit of these rules, the Board shall refer to Robert's Rules of
Order Newly Revised, and specifically the rules for small boards, to answer
unresolved procedural questions.
         (a)   Substantive motion. A substantive motion may deal with any
subject within the Board's legal powers, duties and responsibilities. A
substantive motion is out of order while another substantive motion is pending.
         (b)   Procedural motion. The following enumeration of procedural
motions are in order. Unless otherwise noted each motion is debatable, may be
amended, and requires a majority of the votes cast, a quorum being present, for
adoption. Procedural motions are in order while a substantive motion is
pending. The following is an exhaustive list; if a procedural motion is not on
the list, then it is not available. In order of priority, if applicable, the
procedural motions are:
            1.   Motion to appeal a procedural ruling of the chairperson. A
decision of the Chairperson ruling a motion in or out of order, entertaining
and answering a question of parliamentary law or procedure may be appealed to
the Board. This appeal is in order immediately after such decision is announced
and at no other time. The Board member making the motion need not be recognized
by the Chairperson and the motion, if timely made, may not be ruled out of
order. If the appeal is seconded, the Board member making the appeal may
briefly explain the ruling, but there shall be no debate on the appeal, and no
other Board member shall participate in the discussion. The Chairperson shall
then put the question, "Shall the decision of the Chair be sustained?" If a
majority of the members present vote "Aye," the ruling of the Chair is
sustained; otherwise, it is overruled.
            2.   Motion to adjourn. This motion may be made only at the
conclusion of action on a pending substantive matter; it may not interrupt
deliberation of a pending matter. This motion, if passed, requires the Board to
immediately adjourn to its next regularly scheduled meeting. A motion to
adjourn shall always be in order, except:
               A.   When a Board member is in possession of the floor;
               B.   When the Board members are voting;
               C.   When adjournment was the last preceding motion; and
               D.   When it has been decided that the previous question shall
be taken.
            3.   Motion to recess. Board members may propose a brief recess
during its proceedings. This motion, if passed, requires the Board to
immediately take a recess. Normally, the Chairperson determines the length of
the recess, which may range from a few minutes to an hour.
            4.   Motion to call to follow the agenda. This motion, if passed,
requires the Board to conform to its agenda or order of business. This motion
must be made at the first reasonable opportunity (when the item of business
that deviates from the agenda is proposed) or the right to make it is waived
for the out-of-order item in question.
            5.   Motion to suspend rules. This motion, if passed, allows the
body to suspend its own rules of order, conduct or procedure for a particular
purpose. The motion should specifically state the portion of the rules that are
being suspended. This motion requires a two-thirds vote. This motion must be
specific and state the reason for suspending the rules.
            6.   Motion to go into closed session (executive session). The
Board may go into closed session only for one or more of the permissible
purposes listed under Section 2 of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/
1). The motion to go into closed session shall cite one or more of these
purposes and shall be adopted at an open meeting.
            7.   Motion to leave closed session (executive session). This
motion provides a procedural mechanism for returning from closed session to an
open meeting.
            8.   Motion to divide a complex motion (question) and consider it
by paragraph. This motion is in order whenever a Board member wishes to
consider and vote on subparts of a complex motion separately.
            9.   Motion to defer consideration (table). The Board may defer a
substantive motion for later consideration at an unspecified time. A
substantive motion, the consideration of which has been deferred, expires 100
days thereafter unless a motion to revive consideration is adopted. If
consideration of a motion has been deferred, a new motion with the same effect
cannot be introduced while the deferred motion remains pending. A Board member
who wishes to revisit the matter during that time must take action to revive
consideration of the original motion, or else move to suspend the rules.
            10.   Motion to move the previous question (limit debate). This
motion may be made at any time after a substantive motion is made and a minimum
of ten minutes of debate time has passed. If made after ten minutes but before
20 minutes of debate, each Board member shall have up to two minutes to give a
final statement; and, after each Board member has been given an opportunity to
give his/her final statement, the motion requires a two-thirds vote. If made
after at least 20 minutes of debate, upon the motion, each Board member shall
have up to two minutes to give a final statement; and, after each Board member
has been given an opportunity to give his/her final statement, the motion
requires a majority vote.
            11.   Motion to postpone to a certain time or day. This motion
allows the Board to postpone consideration of an item to a specified day. If
consideration of a motion has been postponed, a new motion with the same effect
cannot be introduced while the postponed motion remains pending. A Board member
who wishes to revisit the matter must either wait until the specified time, or
move to suspend the rules.
            12.   Motion to amend. An amendment to a motion must be pertinent
to the subject matter of the motion. An amendment is improper if adoption of
the motion with that amendment added would have the same effect as rejection of
the original motion. A proposal to substitute completely different wording for
a motion or an amendment shall be treated as a motion to amend. A motion maybe
amended, and that amendment may be amended, but no further amendments may be
made until the last offered amendment is disposed of by a vote.
            13.   Motion to revive consideration. The Board may vote to revive
consideration of any substantive motion earlier deferred by adoption of a
motion to defer consideration (table). The motion is in order at any time
within 100 days after the day of a vote to defer consideration. A substantive
motion on which consideration has been deferred expires 100 days after the
deferral unless a motion to revive consideration is adopted.
            14.   Motion to reconsider.
               A.   The Board may vote to reconsider its action on a matter.
The motion to do so must be made by a member who voted with the prevailing side
(the majority) and:
                  i.   At the meeting during which the original vote was taken,
including any continuation of that meeting through recess or adjournment to a
time and place certain; or
                  ii.   At the next regularly scheduled Board meeting following
the meeting during which the original vote was taken.
               B.   The motion cannot interrupt deliberation on a pending
matter but is in order at any time before final adjournment of the meeting.
            15.   Motion to rescind or repeal. The Board may vote to rescind
actions it has previously taken or to repeal items that it has previously
adopted. This motion is used at a later meeting and has the purpose of
canceling the action the Board took at a previous meeting. This motion can be
made by any Board member, no matter how he or she voted on the original motion.
The motion requires a majority vote if a Board member provides notice to the
Board, prior to the meeting, that the motion will be made, or a two-thirds vote
if such notice is not provided.
            16.   Motion to prevent reintroduction for six months. This motion
shall be in order immediately following the defeat of a substantive motion and
at no other time, The motion requires, for adoption, a two-thirds vote. If
adopted, the restriction imposed by the motion remains in effect for six
months.
   (B)   These rules may be amended at any regular meeting or at any properly
called special meeting that includes amendment of the rules as one of the
stated purposes of the meeting, so long as the amendment is consistent with
generally accepted principles of parliamentary procedure.
   (C)   The failure to strictly adhere to these rules shall not invalidate any
action taken at a properly noticed meeting.
(Ord. 19-34, passed 11-26-19)
COMMITTEES
§ 30.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMITTEES.
   The Village Board of Trustees may from time to time establish such
committees of the Board of Trustees as are or may be necessary and convenient
for the conduct of village business. Such committees shall be established by
ordinance, which shall delineate the powers, duties and functions of the
committees so established.
(Ord. 93-26, passed 5-11-93)
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS
§ 30.50 FILED IN WRITING; COPIES TO EACH BOARD MEMBER.
   (A)   All ordinances and resolutions to be presented to the Board of
Trustees for action at a regular meeting shall be filed in writing with the
Village Clerk or Deputy Clerk on or before 3:00 p.m. of the date of the meeting
at which they are to be acted on.
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall cause copies thereof to be made and delivered
to each member of the Board on or before such meeting begins.
(Ord. 90-13, passed 4-10-90)
§ 30.51 PROCEDURE WHEN ORDINANCE IS PRESENTED LESS THAN FIVE DAYS BEFORE ACTION
IS TO BE TAKEN OR THREE DAYS PRIOR TO MEETING.
   If an ordinance or resolution is first presented to the Clerk less than five
days before the ordinance or written resolution is to be first acted upon by
the Board of Trustees, or if such ordinance or written resolution is delivered
to Board members less than three days prior to such meeting, then any two
members of the Board of Trustees may by written request or by oral request
reflected in the minutes of the meeting, request that final action on such
ordinance or written resolution be tabled until the next regular meeting of the
Board or until a special meeting called for the purpose of considering such
ordinance or written resolution, whichever comes first. In the event of such a
request, the ordinance or written resolution shall be tabled unless two-thirds
of the corporate authorities of the village vote for immediate consideration of
such ordinance or written resolution.
(Ord. 90-13, passed 4-10-90)
§ 30.52 CONSENT CALENDAR.
   (A)   In advance of every regular meeting of the Board of Trustees, the
Village Clerk shall prepare a document entitled “Consent Calendar” which shall
contain a list of all ordinances, resolutions or motions which, in the judgment
of the President or any Trustee requesting placement of the Consent Calendar,
are likely to be uncontested. The Consent Calendar shall be distributed to the
president and all Trustees at least 24 hours in advance of any regular meeting
of the Board. During the regular meeting of the Board, any item may be added to
or deleted from the Consent Calendar by motion of any Trustee which is fully
seconded and passed.
   (B)   The corporate authorities may by unanimous consent, take a single vote
by yeas and nays on the several questions of the passage of any two or more of
the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions or motions placed together for
voting purposes on the Consent Calendar. In the journal, the Clerk shall
designate such a vote on the Consent Calendar as a “Omnibus Vote” and may enter
the words “omnibus vote” in the journal in lieu of entering the names of the
members of the Village Board voting “yeah” and those voting “nay” on the
passage of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions and motions included
in the group. The taking of such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the
words “omnibus vote” in the journal shall be a sufficient compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and with 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40, to all intents and
purposes and with like affect as if the vote in each case had been taken
separately by yeas and nays on the question of the passage of each ordinance,
order, resolution and motion included in such omnibus group and separately
recorded in the journal. Likewise, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
question of the passage of any other resolution or motion or ordinance at the
request of any trustee and shall be recorded in the journal.
(Ord. 90-13, passed 4-10-90)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Inauguration
   
31.02   Compensation
   
31.03   Sexual Harassment Policy
   
31.04   Travel expense reimbursement
Deputy Clerk
   
31.20   Authorization
   
31.21   Appointment
   
31.22   Signature
   
31.23   Compensation
Village Administrator
   
31.35   Office abolished; delegation of authority
Other Officials
   
31.50   Village Treasurer
   
31.51   Accounting Clerk
   
31.52   Economic Development Coordinator/TIF District Administrator
   
31.53   Chief Fiscal Officer
   
31.54   Village Manager
   
31.55   Director of Public Works
   
31.56   Administrative Assistant/Human Resources Coordinator
   
31.57   General Foreman Water & Parks
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 INAUGURATION.
   The terms of elected municipal officers shall commence at the first regular
or special meeting of the Board of Trustees during the month of April following
the proclamation of the results of the regular village election at which the
officers were elected.
(Ord. 91-60, passed 12-10-91)
§ 31.02 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The annual salaries of elected officers of the village shall be
established by the Board of Trustees as necessary.
   (B)   The annual salaries shall be paid in equal monthly installments
commencing on a date as determined by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 81-1, passed 1-27-81; Am. Ord. 95-02, passed 1-24-95)
§ 31.03 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY.
   The Village Board has adopted a Sexual Harassment Policy, dated December 12,
2017, which shall be kept on file with the Village Manager. All employees and
officials shall be provided a copy and trained on the provisions of same.
Violation of the Sexual Harassment Policy shall subject an employee to
discipline including up to suspension and/or termination and village officials
shall be subject to fines and penalties as set forth in the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430), and shall subject any elected officials and/
or agent of the village to a fine up to $1,000 per violation, with each
occurrence constituting a separate violation.
(Ord. 18-1, passed 1-9-18)
§ 31.04 TRAVEL EXPENSE REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   Lodging. Each employee or officer shall be reimburse for the actual
cost of lodging incurred in the conduct of official village business up to $50
per night, not including tax. However, an employee or officer shall be
reimbursed for actual lodging costs higher than $50 per night above when the
following occur:
      (1)   The employee or officer is staying in the least expensive available
room in a hotel or motel in which the conference or meeting he or she is
attending is being held;
      (2)   The employee or officer has received the prior written approval of
the Board of Trustees;
      (3)   The employee or officer confirms at check-in time that the room is
the least expensive available; and
      (4)   The employee or officer certifies to the above on his or her
expense report.
   (B)   Meal/per diem.
      (1)   Each employee shall be reimbursed for his or her meal/per diem
expenses incurred in the conduct of official village business in accordance
with the following rate schedules:
      Meal Allowance: Breakfast, $ 8; dinner, $15.
      (2)   Meal reimbursement shall be determined in accordance with the
following rules:
         (a)   An employee must leave the village before 6:00 a.m. to be
eligible for breakfast reimbursement.
         (b)   An employee must return to the village after 7:00 p.m. to be
eligible for dinner reimbursement.
      (3)   (a)   Per diem allowance shall be paid for travel which includes
over night lodging or is 18 or more continuous hours. It is given instead of
the meal allowance and is to cover the cost of meals and meal tips. Thirty
dollars per diem or 50% of the basic room rate of the hotel in which you are
occupying. Per diem allowance shall be determined in accordance with the
following rules:
            1.   Per diem shall be based on the half system for computing the
allowance for days or fractions thereof. Each half shall be 12 hours commencing
at midnight and noon. The traveler shall be allowed one-half of the allowance
for each period of six hours or fraction thereof.
            2.   Meal allowance and per diem may not be mixed on the same trip
or day.
         (b)   Receipts need not be submitted to support the meal/per diem
allowances. There shall be no advance payment for meal/per diem allowances.
   (C)   Transportation.
      (1)   Auto. Each employee or officer using a personal vehicle in the
conduct of official village business shall be reimbursed at a rate of the then
current deductible rate under the regulations of the Internal Revenue Service.
      (2)   Other. Each employee or officer traveling on official village
business and utilizing modes of transportation other than his or her personal
automobile shall be reimbursed for the actual cost thereof, provided that he or
she utilizes the least expensive fare for the mode of transportation chosen,
and with the exception of taxi cabs, receives the prior written approval of the
Village Board.
   (D)   Reimbursement and documentation. Upon completion of travel, the
employee or officer shall submit the appropriate travel papers, including a
complete copy of the description brochure of any conference or training session
to the Village Administrator, along with receipts for expenses, except for per
diem and meal allowances, within 30 days in order to be eligible for
reimbursement.
   (E)   Purchase. Where possible, travel services shall be contracted for
using village purchase orders. If so, which trades should be regulated.
(Ord. 90-11, passed 5-8-90; Am. Ord. 06-58, passed 10-10-06)
DEPUTY CLERK
§ 31.20 AUTHORIZATION.
   There is authorized the office of Deputy Clerk, who shall have the powers
and duties specified in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-95.
(Ord. 82-28, passed 10-26-82)
§ 31.21 APPOINTMENT.
   The Village Clerk shall appoint the Deputy Clerk.
(Ord. 82-28, passed 10-26-82)
§ 31.22 SIGNATURE.
   When signing any documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the
Village Clerk followed by the word “By” and the Deputy Clerk's own name and the
words “Deputy Clerk.
(Ord. 82-28, passed 10-26-82)
§ 31.23 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation for the Deputy Clerk shall be an amount as established by
the Board of Trustees for each meeting attended by the Deputy Clerk during
which meeting the Deputy Clerk performs the duties of that office, as
prescribed in this subchapter or in the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 82-28, passed 10-26-82)
2007 S-11
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.35 OFFICE ABOLISHED; DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   The office of Village Administrator is abolished. Whenever a duty is
committed to the Village Administrator by this code, that duty is now to be
performed by the Director of Public Works, the Director of Utilities and
Administration, or the Chief Fiscal Officer, as appropriate, as set forth in §§
31.53 through
31.55 of this Code.
(Ord. 93-42, passed 8-10-93; Am. Ord. 01-44, passed 7-10-01)
Editor’s note:
   With the abolition of the office of Village Administrator and the
establishment of the office of Village Manager, all references within this code
to the Village Administrator shall be interpreted as referring to the Village
Manager.
OTHER OFFICIALS
§ 31.50 VILLAGE TREASURER.
   There is hereby created the office of Treasurer. Commencing May 1, 2001, the
term of office of the Treasurer shall be four years, or until a successor is
appointed and has qualified. The Treasurer shall be appointed by the Village
President with the consent of the Village Board. The Treasurer shall have the
duties prescribed in the Illinois Municipal Code, including but not limited to
those duties prescribed in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-40 - 3.1-35-85. The salary of the
Treasurer shall be not less than $500 per month. The Treasurer may be the same
person as the Chief Fiscal Officer of the village.
(Ord. 98-19, passed 3-10-98; Am. Ord. 01-28, passed 5-8-01; Am. Ord. 21-42,
passed 11-9-21)
§ 31.51 ACCOUNTING CLERK.
   There is hereby established the position of Accounting Clerk, who shall be a
full-time employee of the village. The Accounting Clerk shall have the duties
set forth in Appendix A attached to Ord. 98-18, passed 3-10-98, together with
such other duties as are assigned by the Village Administrator.
(Ord. 98-18, passed 3-10-98)
§ 31.52 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COORDINATOR/TIF DISTRICT ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Economic Development Coordinator
and TIF District Administrator. The TIF District Administrator shall be
appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Village
Board and shall serve a two-year term, or until his or her successor is
appointed. The Administrator shall be an officer of the village and shall have
all the qualifications for office established by the Illinois Municipal Code,
and shall be a resident of the village.
   (B)   The TIF District Administrator shall have the following duties with
respect to the Village Tax Increment Financing ("TIF") and economic development
programs:
      (1)   Advise and assist the corporate authorities in the coordination of
economic development programs, policies and activities;
      (2)   Serve as the primary liaison between the Village Board and the Tax
Increment and Economic Development Advisory Committee;
      (3)   Provide staff assistance to the Tax Increment and Economic
Development Advisory Committee;
      (4)   Provide assistance to parties interested in utilizing TIF funding
to develop or improve commercial property withing the TIF District;
      (5)   Assist in the negotiation of TIF agreements on behalf of the
village;
      (6)   Monitor the implementation of TIF projects and agreements;
      (7)   Prepare the annual budget of the TIF Special Allocation Fund;
      (8)   Prepare the annual report of the TIF District as required by
statute;
      (9)   Provide advice as needed to the corporate authorities on related
financial matters, including but not limited to property tax levies, bonded
indebtedness, utility rates, investment of funds, and budgeting.
   (C)   The TIF District Administrator's salary shall be paid from the several
funds of the village which are benefitted by the Administrator's work, as
determined from time to time by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 97-20, passed 6-10-97)
Cross-reference:
   Tax Increment Economic Development Advisory Committee, see §§
33.20 -
33.22
§ 31.53 CHIEF FISCAL OFFICER.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of the Chief Fiscal Officer.
Commencing May 1, 2001, the term of office of the Chief Fiscal Officer shall be
four years, or until a successor is appointed and has qualified. The Chief
Fiscal Officer shall be appointed by the Village President with the consent of
the Village Board. The Chief Fiscal Officer shall exercise general supervision
over all day-to-day financial operations of the village, and if the Chief
Fiscal Officer is not the same person as the Treasurer, the Chief Fiscal
Officer shall assist the Treasurer in all of the Treasurer’s duties. The Chief
Fiscal Officer’s specific duties include be are not limited to the following
specific following duties:
      (1)   Weekly: Review budget status reports and give to Accounting
Technician to distribute to Department Heads.
      (2)   Bi-weekly:
         (a)   Review time cards and payroll checks generated by staff, sign
payroll checks.
         (b)   Prepare necessary transfers for bi-weekly payroll.
      (3)   Semi-monthly: Prepare listing of warrants to be paid for Board
approval.
      (4)   Monthly:
         (a)   Supervise and assist in the completion of bank reconciliations.
         (b)   Prepare utility tax returns, sanitary usage reports and IMRF
reports.
         (c)   Review and track investment activity.
         (d)   Prepare various month-end adjustments.
         (e)   Transfer funds in accordance with bond ordinances.
      (5)   Quarterly:
         (a)   Prepare payroll tax returns.
         (b)   Prepare reports required in accordance with Federal COPS Grant.
         (c)   Prepare quarterly reports for Police Pension Fund.
      (6)   Annual:
         (a)   Assist the preparation of the budget. Coordinate budget requests
of various Department Heads to arrive at Department level budget.
         (b)   Prepare the annual estimate of revenues as required by 35 ILCS
200/18-50 of the Property Tax Code.
         (c)   Assist in preparation of appropriation and tax levy ordinances.
         (d)   Assist office personnel in preparation of W-2's, reconcile W-2's
to payroll returns and complete W-3.
         (e)   Prepare 1099's.
         (f)   Review fiscal year end account balances and make appropriate
adjustments.
         (g)   Prepare various audit schedules and assist auditors as needed.
         (h)   Assist in the preparation of the annual appropriation transfer
ordinance.
      (7)   Other:
         (a)   Maintain fixed asset records.
         (b)   Prepare schedules and reports as requested by the corporate
authorities and department heads.
         (c)   Review supporting documentation for all checks to be disbursed
from village accounts.
         (d)   Review all checks prior to signature by the Village President
and Treasurer, and maintain check register.
   (B)   The salary of the Chief Fiscal Office shall be not less than $29,000
per annum. If the Chief Fiscal Officer is the same person as the Treasurer, the
salary of the Chief Fiscal Officer shall be paid in addition to the Treasurer’s
salary.
(Ord. 01-28, passed 5-8-01; Am. Ord. 01-44, passed 7-10-01; Am. Ord. 21-42,
passed 11-9-21)
§ 31.54 VILLAGE MANAGER.
   (A)   The office of Village Manager is hereby established. The Manager shall
have the qualifications required by the Illinois Municipal Code for an officer
of the village. The Manager shall be appointed by the President, with the
advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees, and shall be removable by
the Village President in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-10. The term of
office of the Manager shall be coextensive with the term of the Village
President who appointed the Manager, but upon expiration of the Village
President's term, the Manager shall continue to serve until a new Manager has
been appointed and has qualified. The Manager's position shall be his or her
primary employment and shall require the investment of time required to
discharge the duties of the office. Any outside employment shall be approved by
the President.
   (B)   The Village Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
village. The Manager shall be responsible to the corporate authorities for the
proper administration of the affairs of the village. The Manager shall:
      (1)   Be entitled to notice of all special and regular meetings of the
Village Board and attend meetings of the Board and Committees as requested.
      (2)   Have the right to take part in the discussions of all matters
coming before the corporate authorities, but shall have no right to vote.
      (3)   Recommend to the corporate authorities adoption of such measures as
he/she may deem necessary or expedient.
      (4)   Exercise administrative control of all village departments or
divisions now in existence, or as reorganized by ordinance or as there may be
created hereafter, and recommend the creating, consolidating or combining of
offices, positions, departments, or units of the administrative and executive
departments of the village.
      (5)   After consultation with the department heads and Human Resources
Coordinator, make recommendations to the corporate authorities concerning the
hiring and firing of village employees other than employees under the
jurisdiction of the Police and Fire Commission.
      (6)   After consultation with the Human Resources Coordinator, make
recommendations to the corporate authorities concerning compensation for each
appointive office and position in the village service, including minimum,
intermediate and maximum rates.
      (7)   Prepare a status report for the Village President on the overall
administrative activities of the village on a quarterly basis. This report will
identify important activities that have and have not been accomplished over the
time period of the report. The report will also establish strategies and
schedules for the next quarter.
      (8)   Be responsible for the care and custody of all village property
that is not by statute or ordinance assigned to some other officer or body for
care and control.
      (9)   After review of requests for purchases from the several department
heads, purchase all material, supplies and equipment for which funds are
provided in the village budget.
      (10)   Negotiate with one or more vendors, at his or her discretion, for
the purchase of any goods or services costing under $10,000. For the individual
purchase of any goods or services costing over $10,000 but under $20,000,
unless otherwise directed by ordinance of the Village Board, the Manager shall
be authorized, but not required, to solicit two or more sealed bids or sealed
proposals; evaluate the bids and award the bid, to the lowest responsible
bidder whose bid conforms to village specifications, terms and conditions. For
the purchase of any goods or services over $20,000 or when the aggregate
combined cost of purchases of goods and/or services within a single fiscal year
is expected to exceed $20,000, based on the history of the past two fiscal
years or as otherwise determined by the Village Board, the Manager shall
solicit sealed bids in accordance with the law and any policies and procedures
established by the village. Such purchases shall be approved by action of the
corporate authorities. The Manager may not purchase any item that exceeds any
budget appropriation until such time as the corporate authorities have approved
an increase in the appropriation line item.
      (11)   Perform such other lawful duties as may be required by resolution
or ordinance of the corporate authorities.
   (C)   The Manager shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety
as may be approved by the corporate authorities. The bond to be conditioned on
the faithful performance of the duties of the office of Village Manager, and
shall be conditioned to indemnify the village for any loss by reason of any
neglect of duty or any act of the Village Manager. The cost of the bond shall
be paid by the village.
   (D)   The Manager shall receive such compensation as the corporate
authorities shall fix from time to time by ordinance after performance review,
but his or her compensation shall not be diminished during his or her term of
office.
   (E)   In the event that the Village Manager is unable to perform the duties
of the office, either by temporary absence or disability, the Village President
may appoint an Acting Manager with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
The Acting Manager shall serve until the Village Manager returns to duty or a
new Village Manager is appointed. The Acting Manager shall have all the powers
and duties of the office of Village Manager. The Acting Manager shall furnish
an additional bond if he or she is already under bond to the village in any
other capacity. If such appointee is not already under bond to the village,
such appointee shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety as may
be approved by the Village Board of Trustees. The cost of such bond shall be
paid by the village.
(Ord. 09-40, passed 8-11-09; Am. Ord. 17-13, passed 3-28-17)
Editor’s note:
   With the abolition of the office of Village Administrator and the
establishment of the office of Village Manager, all references within this code
to the Village Administrator shall be interpreted as referring to the Village
Manager.
§ 31.55 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   The position of Director of Public Works is hereby created. The
Director of Public Works shall be an employee of the village and not an
officer, and shall be subject to the Village Personnel Code. Under the direct
supervision of the Village President, subject to the policy determinations of
the Village Board and after consultation with the Public Works Committee, the
Director of Public Works shall be responsible for all activities associated
with Public Works Department. The Director of Public Works shall work as
required with the Village President to ensure completion of necessary tasks
while maintaining communication with the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The duties and responsibilities herein shall include, but are not
limited to the following:
      (1)   Plan, organize, direct and evaluate the village public works
functions; oversee engineering, street maintenance, public properties,
buildings, storm water, traffic and equipment.
      (2)   Direct the development of capital improvement plans and the
subsequent construction of public works projects; review plans for private
developments; assist inspection of the construction of public facilities by
private developers.
      (3)   Direct, coordinate and encourage the development of strategies to
resolve village issues related to public works.
      (4)   Supervise and evaluate the performance of assigned staff; interview
select employees and advise on promotions, reassignment, termination and
disciplinary actions of public works employees, all as subject to any
applicable collective bargaining agreements.
      (5)   Work with the Chief Fiscal Officer regarding the planning,
preparation and control of department budgets, including operating and capital
improvement budgets.
      (6)   Direct bidding, purchasing and budget procedures for the
department; monitor, control and authorize expenditures in accordance with
established limitations.
      (7)   Prepare and update short and long range strategic plans to assure
the department’s contribution to the village’s overall plan; participate in the
development of regional plans.
      (8)   Manage the coordination of department activities with other
departments and agencies.
      (9)   Serve as a member of the management team, participating in the
village’s strategic planning efforts and addressing village-wide policy and
management issues.
      (10)   Present departmental issues and recommendations requiring policy
direction to the Village Board.
      (11)   Communicate and coordinate efforts with a variety of individuals
and organizations, including employees, village board, other municipalities,
cities, citizens, contractors, committees and public and private sector
agencies.
      (12)   Make available public works services to the public and others.
      (13)   Take an active part in planning and scheduling street and traffic
construction and maintenance projects to meet the village’s transportation
needs.
      (14)   Participate in the review and approval of municipal engineering
and public works plans, drawings and plats submitted by the Village Engineer,
developers and other engineers or technicians.
      (15)   Direct the inspection and review of construction projects; assure
compliance with federal, state and local laws, codes and ordinances.
      (16)   Direct procedures for the replacement of village vehicles and
equipment as needed.
      (17)   Communicate with, respond to and resolve complaints, conflicts,
concerns and questions from citizens, contractors, customers, developers and
public and private agencies regarding department services, activities and
programs.
      (18)   Prepare reports for Village Board and others as needed.
      (19)   Act as Zoning Administrator and Building Code Administrator.
      (20)   Attend Village Board meetings and Public Works Committee meetings.
      (21)   All other duties as assigned by the Village President.
(Ord. 01-44, passed 7-10-01)
§ 31.56 ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT/HUMAN RESOURCES COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The position of Administrative Assistant/Human Resource Coordinator is
hereby established. The Administrative Assistant/Human Resources Coordinator
shall be a confidential employee of the village and not an officer thereof, and
shall be subject to the Village Personnel Code.
   (B)   The position of Administrative Assistant/Human Resource Coordinator
shall require a significant investment of time to discharge the duties of the
position. The position shall be the primary occupation of Administrative
Assistant/Human Resources Coordinator. Any employment of the Administrative
Assistant/Human Resources Coordinator outside the village shall in no event
conflict with his or her position with the village, and shall be approved by
the Village Manager.
   (C)   The Administrative Assistant /Human Resources Coordinator shall report
to the Village Manager. He or she shall be primarily responsible for the human
resources function of the village. Among other things, the Administrative
Assistant/Human Resources Coordinator shall make recommendations regarding
hiring, firing and discipline. He or she shall monitor federal and state laws
pertaining to personnel, wages and hours, equal opportunity and collective
bargaining issues, and ensure the village's compliance therewith. He or she
shall maintain the personnel files of all village employees. He or she shall be
the administrative assistant to the Village Manager, and as such, shall perform
such administrative duties as are required by the Village Manager from time to
time.
   (D)   The compensation of the Administrative Assistant /Human Resources
Coordinator shall be fixed by ordinance from time to time, and shall be paid
equally from the Electric, General, and Water Funds.
(Ord. 09-45, passed 8-11-09)
§ 31.57 GENERAL FOREMAN WATER & PARKS.
   There is hereby established the position of General Foreman Water & Parks,
who shall be a full- time employee of the village. The General Foreman Water &
Parks shall have the duties set forth in a job description approved by the
Village Board, together with such other duties as are assigned by the Village
Administrator.
(Ord. 18-42, passed 7-24-18)
CHAPTER 32: POLICE DEPARTMENT; BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
Section
Rules and Regulations
   
32.01   Adoption by reference
Positions within Department
   
32.10   Deputy Chief of Police
   
32.11   Sergeant
Police Pension Fund
   
32.20   Establishment
   
32.21   Board of Trustees of the Fund
   
32.22   Duties and powers of the Board of Trustees
   
32.23   Revenue deposited in the fund
   
32.24   Illinois Pension Code
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
   
32.40   Establishment
   
32.41   Application to firefighters
   
32.42   Appointment of Board members
   
32.43   Appointment of police officers; firefighters
   
32.44   Powers and duties of Board
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 32.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The rules and regulations proposed to the village and contained in the
“Chatham Police Department Duty Manual,” adopted September 25, 1979, a copy of
which is attached to Ordinance 79-36 and which is hereby incorporated by
reference, are approved, and adopted and declared to be binding upon all
personnel of the Police Department, both sworn and civilian.
(Ord. 79-36, passed 9-25-79)
POSITIONS WITHIN DEPARTMENT
§ 32.10 DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4, the position of Deputy Chief of
Police is hereby created. The Deputy Chief of Police shall be appointed by the
Chief of Police. The Deputy Chief position shall be an exempt rank immediately
below that of Chief. The Deputy Chief may be appointed from any rank of sworn,
full-time officers of the Police Department, but shall have at least five years
of full-time service as a police officer in the Department. The Deputy Chief
shall serve at the discretion of the Chief and, if removed from the position,
shall revert to the rank currently held, without regard as to whether a vacancy
exists in that rank. The Deputy Chief of Police, having been appointed from any
rank of sworn full-time officers of the Police Department, shall be permitted,
regardless of rank, to take promotional exams and be promoted to a higher
classified rank than he or she currently holds, without having to resign as
Deputy Chief.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall prescribe the duties the Deputy Chief of
Police and incorporate those duties into a general order of the Police
Department.
   (C)   The salary of the Deputy Chief shall be established from time to time
by the corporate authorities in a salary ordinance.
(Ord. 9-38, passed 8-11-09)
§ 32.11 SERGEANT.
   (A)   The position of Sergeant of the Police Department is hereby
established, and the job description for such position shall be but is not
limited to the following. The duties as described are not all inclusive
expectations of responsibilities. The Sergeant shall:
      (1)   Supervise uniform patrol officers.
      (2)   Be held responsible for the appearance, conduct, discipline and
strict attention to duty of all officers under his/her command.
      (3)   Thoroughly familiarize him/herself with the duties of patrol
officers and shall assist and instruct officers under his/her supervision in
the proper discharge of their duties.
      (4)   Counsel subordinates in the performance of their duties and take
suitable action in the case of incompetence, inefficiency, laxity, misconduct,
or neglect of duty that may come to his/her attention.
      (5)   Unless otherwise ordered, be present at regular roll call of patrol
officers and shall inform him/herself as to all special duty assignments,
orders and instructions to ensure that all duties are performed and orders
carried out.
      (6)   Make necessary assignments of patrol officers under his/her command
during his/her tour of duty.
      (7)   At the conclusion of roll call make a careful inspection of patrol
officers to ascertain that they are properly uniformed and equipped and fitted
for duty.
      (8)   At the conclusion of roll call, inspect each vehicle reported to
have new damage or mechanically out of order before the vehicle is taken out of
service.
      (9)   Patrol within the village limits and shall be responsible for the
efficient handling of all calls for service.
      (10)   Constantly observe and follow-up the activities of patrol officers
to ascertain whether police duties and orders are promptly and efficiently
executed.
      (11)   During his/her tour of duty, visit all assigned areas of patrol
and patrol officers detailed to public gathering, guard duty, or other special
duties assignments as often as practicable.
      (12)   If a patrol officer is absent from his/her assigned area of
patrol, failed to report over the radio, or neglects any other duty, make a
diligent investigation into the situation and promptly correct the situation.
      (13)   When he/she has been out of service for a protracted period, ask
the dispatcher for information on incidents deserving his/her attention that
may have occurred during his/her absence.
      (14)   Ensure that patrol officers shall not unnecessarily go off the
air, out of service, or loiter at the headquarters.
      (15)   Personally respond to any emergency or occurrences of a serious or
unusual nature which may arise, and shall take personal command in such cases
as come under the jurisdiction of the patrol section.
      (16)   Coordinate the efforts of patrol officers with the activities of
other agencies involved in the police functions.
      (17)   At all times maintain knowledge of how the Chief of Police can be
contacted for messages and keep the Chief advised of any unusual incidents
occurring during his/her tour of duty.
      (18)   At all times maintain a record of officers on duty and a list of
telephone numbers of officers not on duty.
      (19)   Scrutinize all police reports completed by officers to ensure that
they are accurate and in full detail.
      (20)   Perform other duties as directed by the Chief of Police or other
ranking officer of which he/she is subordinate.
      (21)   Give personal attention to locations where crimes are frequently
committed and ascertain the reason and take such action as is necessary to
apprehend the criminals or eliminate the crimes.
      (22)   Frequently respond to routine calls for the purpose of observing
the manner in which patrol officers respond and handle their calls, noting
their degree of promptness, efficiency, and competence.
      (23)   Inspect headquarters at uncertain and unexpected hours to satisfy
him/her self that officers are not unnecessarily loafing or loitering.
      (24)   Be directly responsible to his/her superior for the efficiency,
discipline and morale of the patrol officers.
   (B)    There may be four Police Sergeant positions in the Village Police
Department.
   (C)   Whenever there is a vacancy in a Sergeant position, the Chief of
Police shall notify the Village Board of the vacancy. If the Village Board
determines that it wishes to fill the vacancy, it shall by motion duly made,
seconded and passed, notify the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the
vacancy and request that the vacancy be filled in accordance with the
provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code pertaining to Boards of Fire and
Police Commissioners. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall fill no
vacancy unless the Village Board has given notice to it in accordance with this
section.
(Ord. 89-39, passed 8-8-89; Am. Ord. 04-03, passed 2-10-04; Am. Ord. 04-44,
passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 18-6, passed 1-23-18)
POLICE PENSION FUND
§ 32.20 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a Police Pension Fund in this municipality, as required
by law.
(Ord. 81-12, passed 6-9-81)
§ 32.21 BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE FUND.
   The Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall consist of five
members, all of whom shall be residents of the Village. The members of the
Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall be selected as provided for
by law, for the respective terms provided by law. Two of the members of the
Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall be appointed by the
President of the Board of Trustees of this village. One of the members so
appointed shall serve for the period of one year beginning on the second
Tuesday in May after this municipality came, by virtue of having obtained the
necessary population, within the provisions of the Illinois Pension Code, and
one of said members shall serve for a period of two years, beginning on the
same date. The successors to each of the foregoing Trustees shall serve for a
period of two years each commencing on the second Tuesday in May, or until such
time as their successors are appointed and qualified. The third and fourth
members of the Board of Trustees of the Fund shall be elected from the regular
police force by the active members of said force. The fifth member shall be
elected by and from among the beneficiaries of the Fund as soon as there are
such beneficiaries. The members to be elected shall be elected by ballot for a
term of two years, beginning on the second Tuesday of the first May after said
election, at a regular election, at which election all members of the regular
police force shall be entitled to vote for the police force members of the
Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund and all beneficiaries of lawful
age shall be entitled to vote for the members chosen from among the
beneficiaries. The election provided for in this section shall be held
biennially on the third Monday in April, under the Australian ballot system, at
such place or places in said village, under such regulations as shall be
prescribed by the appointed members of the Board of Trustees of the Police
Pension Fund. In the event of the death, resignation, or inability to act of
any member of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund , elected under
the provisions of this section, the successor of such member shall be elected
for the unexpired term at a special election, which shall be called by the
Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund and shall be conducted in the
manner as are the regular elections provided for above. Suitable rooms for
offices and meetings of the Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund shall
be assigned by the President or Board of Trustees of the village. The Board of
Trustees of the Pension Fund, which shall be known as The Board of Trustees of
the Police Pension Fund of the Village of Chatham, Sangamon County, Illinois,
shall meet at least quarterly on the second Tuesday of July, October, January,
and April annually, as provided by law, and shall hold such additional meetings
as may be called by the President of said Board. (See 40 ILCS 5/3-128 through
3-130.)
(Ord. 81-12, passed 6-9-81)
§ 32.22 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   The Board of Trustees of the Pension Fund shall have control of the
management of all funds belonging to, or designated by law or ordinance as a
part of, the aforesaid Police Pension Fund and of the administration thereof,
as provided by statue and ordinance.
(Ord. 81-12, passed 6-9-81)
§ 32.23 REVENUE DEPOSITED IN THE FUND.
   There shall be deposited in the Pension Fund the sums required by law, which
presently shall include 8.5% per month deducted from the salary of each member
of the police force, the proceeds of an annual tax to be levied in such amount
as is required by § 3-125 of the Illinois Pension Code, 40 ILCS 5/3-125, and
such other funds as provided for by that section.
(Ord. 81-12, passed 6-9-81)
§ 32.24 ILLINOIS PENSION CODE.
   Reference is made to Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code as amended (40
ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.) for such details and matters as are not set forth herein.
In case of any conflict, if any, the applicable provisions of said Code shall
control, and as said Code is amended from time to time, the provisions hereof,
insofar as any variance may develop therefrom, if any, shall automatically be
construed so as to conform therewith.
(Ord. 81-12, passed 6-9-81)
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
§ 32.40 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Board of Fire and Police Commissioners consisting of three persons is
established for the village.
(Ord. 81-11, passed 6-9-81)
§ 32.41 APPLICATION TO FIREFIGHTERS.
   So long as fire protection for the village is provided by other than the
village, and unless and until the village establishes a full time fire
department, §§
32.40 through
32.44 shall not apply to the appointment of firefighters.
(Ord. 81-11, passed 6-9-81)
§ 32.42 APPOINTMENT OF BOARD MEMBERS.
   Within 30 days after this chapter becomes effective as set forth in §
32.40, the Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, shall
appoint the members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners to serve for
a term of three years and until their respective successors are appointed and
have qualified. Of the first members appointed one shall serve until the end of
the then current municipal year, one until the end of the next ensuing
municipal year and one until the end of the second ensuing municipal year, as
designated by the Village President with the consent of the Board of Trustees
at the time of appointment. The members of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall be considered officers of the municipality, and shall file
an oath and a fidelity bond in such amount as may be required by ordinance.
Such Commissioners shall possess the qualifications required by 65 ILCS 5/10-
2.1-3, shall be subject to removal as set out in that section, and shall serve
without compensation but shall be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred
in the discharge of their duties.
(Ord. 81-11, passed 6-9-81)
§ 32.43 APPOINTMENT OF POLICE OFFICERS; FIREFIGHTERS.
   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village President with consent
of the Board of Trustees and may be removed or discharged by the Village Board
as set forth in 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4. All other full-time police officers shall
be appointed, promoted, removed, or discharged in the manner provided in 65
ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. If the village becomes disconnected from the fire
protection district and provides by ordinance for the creation and operation of
a fire department by full-time firefighters employed by the village, such
firefighters, except for the Chief of the Fire Department, who shall be
appointed by the Village President with consent of the Board of Trustees, shall
be appointed, promoted, removed, or discharged in the same manner as police
officers.
(Ord. 81-11, passed 6-9-81)
§ 32.44 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.
   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall adopt and publish rules and
regulations for the conduct of examinations for original appointments,
promotions and the conduct of hearings on charges brought against a member of
the Police Department, discipline, removal, and discharge of officers covered
by 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq. No such rule or regulation shall be made by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners to govern the operation of the Police
Department or the conduct of its members. Such Board, from time to time, may
revise such rules and regulations in the same manner as for the adoption of
original rules and regulations.
(Ord. 81-11, passed 6-9-81)
CHAPTER 33: OTHER DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Public Properties and Recreation Commission
   
33.01   Creation; composition
   
33.02   Terms of Commissioners
   
33.03   Meetings and Officers
   
33.04   Duties and functions
Tax Increment Economic Development Advisory Committee
   
33.20   Creation; composition
   
33.21   Duties and powers
   
33.22   Members subject to ethics provisions
Establishment of Standing Committees
   
33.30   Establishment of the Committee of the Whole
   
33.31   Procedures
   
33.32   Transfer of powers, duties and functions
Investment Policy Advisory Board
   
33.50   Establishment
   
33.51   Duties
   
33.52   Staffing
Veterans Memorial Commission
   
33.60   Establishment
   
33.61   Duties and powers
   
33.62   Abolishment
   
33.63   Rules and regulations
Entertainment Advisory Board
   
33.70   Establishment
   
33.71   Meetings and compensation
   
33.72   Duties and responsibilities
   
33.73   Staff support; reports to the Village Board
PUBLIC PROPERTIES AND RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 33.01 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created the Chatham Public Properties and Recreation
Commission. Whenever the word “Commission” is used in this subchapter it shall
mean and refer to the Chatham Public Properties and Recreation Commission. The
Commission shall consist of seven Commissioners. All Commissioners shall be
appointed by the President of the Village with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees. All Commissioners shall be residents of the village and
shall meet all qualifications for appointive office as established by the
Illinois Municipal Code. Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 11-41, passed 9-27-11; Am. Ord. 18-7, passed 1-23-18)
§ 33.02 TERMS OF COMMISSIONERS. 
   Four Commissioners shall be appointed to serve a two-year term, with the
first terms ending April 30, 2019 and three Commissioners shall be appointed to
serve a four-year term, with the first terms ending April 30, 2021. All
Commissioners are subject to appointment and shall otherwise continue to serve
until a succeessor is appointed and qualified to serve. Members of the
Commission may be removed by the President, subject to reinstatement by the
Board of Trustees, as in the case of other village officers. Any member who is
absent for two consecutive meetings without informing the Chairperson without a
good and sufficient reason shall be deemed to have requested removal by the
Village President. Notification of such absence shall be given to the
Chairperson of the Commission. The President of the Village and a person
representing the Ball-Chatham School District shall be ex-officio, nonvoting
members of the Commission.
(Ord. 11-41, passed 9-27-11; Am. Ord. 12-24, passed 7-10-12; Am. Ord. 18-7,
passed 1-23-18)
§ 33.03 MEETINGS AND OFFICERS.
   The Village President shall appoint one of the members of the Commission as
its Chairman with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The
Commission may select any other officers as it deems advisable from its own
members. The initial officers shall serve until April 30, 2013. All subsequent
officers shall serve for two years. The initial selection of officers shall be
heard at the first meeting of the newly constituted Commission, with subsequent
elections being held on the first meeting date following April 30 of the odd
number years. Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
conduct of all business of the Commission. The Commission shall meet at least
once a month. Meetings shall be scheduled on a regular basis; special meetings
may be called by the Chairperson. Notices of meetings shall be given and
meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act. Records
of the Commission are subject in all respects to the Freedom of Information
Act.
(Ord. 11-41, passed 9-27-11; Am. Ord. 18-7, passed 1-23-18)
§ 33.04 DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   The Commission shall have, exercise and perform the following powers, duties
and functions.
   (A)   Create subcommittees including four subcommittees entitled Long and
Short Term Planning, Policy and Procedures, Fundraising and Organizing
Volunteers. The Commission may create any other ad-hoc committees as it deems
necessary.
   (B)   Promote, encourage and guide the development of village recreation
programs and services.
   (C)   Solicit and obtain funds, services and real and personal property for
purposes related to the goals and purpose of the Commission from individuals,
organizations, municipal corporations and any other source permitted by law.
All funds and real and personal property solicited or received by the
Commission shall be received in the name of the village. Funds received by the
Commission shall be delivered to the Village Treasurer and accounted for by the
Treasurer in accordance with normal village practices.
   (D)   Coordinate with the Parks Supervisor volunteer activities and
coordinate volunteer days to help maintain and improve park properties.
   (E)   Review the annual Chatham summer recreation program and provide
comments. The Commission may also be asked to assist in the activities or help
provide volunteers for the Chatham summer recreation program.
   (F)   Provide policy guidance and program recommendations to the Village
Board.
   (G)   Prepare minutes of its meetings and prepare an annual report to the
Village Board not later than April 1 of each year.
   (H)   Adopt by-laws governing the organization and the exercise of the
powers herein given to it and the performance of the duties and functions
imposed on it by this subchapter; provided, that such by-laws shall not be in
conflict with any of the provisions of this subchapter and shall be subject to
approval by the Village Board prior to adoption by the Commission.
(Ord. 11-41, passed 9-27-11)
TAX INCREMENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 33.20 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby created a Tax Increment Economic Development Advisory
Committee (hereinafter, the COMMITTEE) which shall consist of a chairperson and
eight members appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees. All nine members of the Committee shall be persons who by
occupation, training or experience have knowledge of economic development or of
the social and economic needs of the village. All such persons shall also meet
the qualifications for office established by the Illinois Municipal Code,
except that they need not be residents of the village. All members shall serve
five year terms or until their successors have been appointed. Of the initial
board members appointed pursuant to this subchapter, two including the
chairperson, shall have an initial term of five years, two shall have an
initial term of four years, two shall have an initial term of three years, two
shall have an initial term of two years, and one shall have an initial term of
one year. Members shall serve without compensation. The Village President, the
Village Administrator, and the Trustee appointed by the Board of Trustees to
serve as liaison shall be ex officio, nonvoting members of the Committee. Other
business persons, developers or interested parties can be added as ex officio
members at the discretion of the President. A member who has missed three
consecutive unexcused absences from meetings may at the discretion of the
Village President be deemed to have vacated the office.
(Ord. 96-93, passed 5-28-96)
Cross-reference:
   Economic Development Coordinator/TIF District Administrator, see §
31.52
§ 33.21 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Committee shall have the following duties and powers:
   (A)   It shall meet at least once every six weeks, except during the months
of June, July and August. Additional meetings may be called at any time by the
Chairperson, the Village President, or the Village Trustee serving as liaison
to the Committee. All meetings shall be open to the public, and the Committee
shall comply in all respects with statues and ordinances pertaining to open
meetings and availability of public documents. In the event a quorum of the
Committee is not present for a meeting, the members present may discuss the
business of the Committee but may make and record no votes except a vote on a
motion to adjourn the meeting to a later time and place.
   (B)   It shall have the duties of the former Economic Development
Commission, and as such shall consider and, when requested by the President or
the Village Board, render reports regarding the following subjects:
      (1)   Survey existing information and determine what additional
information is needed.
      (2)   Assess the types of development that will be supported by the
community;
      (3)   Develop a strategy for expansion of Chatham's economic base with a
view to increasing services available to citizens and net tax revenues for the
village;
      (4)   Determine whether the village should engage an economic development
consultant, and if so, recommended a consultant.
   (C)   It shall advise the Village Board regarding redevelopment issues and
opportunities within any redevelopment project area, including but not limited
to considering all applications for private redevelopment project activities in
any TIF District, and when requested by the corporate authorities, for public
redevelopment project activities in any TIF District (as those terms are
defined in "An Ordinance Approving the Village of Chatham Downtown Tax
Increment Redevelopment Plan, Designating the Downtown Tax Increment Project
Area, Adopting Tax Increment Financing and Establishing Procedures with Respect
to the Downtown Tax Increment Financing Area and Plan, Ordinance No. 92-47), in
accordance with "Regulations Governing Applications for Private Redevelopment
Project Activities--Village of Chatham TIF Districts" attached to Ordinance No.
96-93 as Exhibit A.
(Ord. 96-93, passed 5-28-96)
§ 33.22 MEMBERS SUBJECT TO ETHICS PROVISIONS.
   The Tax Increment Economic Development Advisory Committee and its members
are subject to the Village of Chatham Ethics Ordinance, §
31.03 of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 96-93, passed 5-28-96)
ESTABLISHMENT OF STANDING COMMITTEES
§ 33.30 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE.
   There is hereby established a Village Board Committee of the Whole. The
Committee of the Whole shall be made up of the trustees serving on the Village
Board at the time. A chairman and vice-chairman shall be selected from the
membership of the Committee of the Whole.
(Ord. 15-21, passed 5-26-15; Am. Ord. 16-32, passed 6-28-16)
§ 33.31 PROCEDURES.
   The Committee of the Whole shall establish a regular schedule of meeting
dates and times as prescribed by the Open Meetings Act. Meetings shall be
conducted in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order and the Open Meetings Act.
The Committee of the Whole shall consider for discussion and recommendation to
the Board any matters to be brought before the corporate authorities of the
village at the regular meeting of the corporate authorities. The Village Clerk.
Deputy Clerk, or staff shall attend all committee meetings and shall keep a
record of all proceedings. The Village Clerk, Deputy Clerk, or staff shall
prepare the minutes of each committee meeting. A copy of the minutes shall be
available at the next committee meeting. The Committee of the Whole shall
review the minutes, may amend the minutes and shall approve the minutes.
(Ord. 15-21, passed 5-26-15)
Cross-reference:
   Regular meeting, see §
30.01
§ 33.32 TRANSFER OF POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   All powers, duties and functions previously committed to some standing
committee in this code, by other ordinance or by custom, are henceforth
committed to the Committee of the Whole.
(Ord. 15-21, passed 5-26-15)
§ 33.33 COMMITTEE MEETINGS.
   (A)   All committee meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's
Rules of Order, or such other rules of procedure as may be adopted by the
committee.
   (B)   A majority of the members appointed to any committee constitutes a
quorum. Ex officio members may not be counted for the purpose of determining
the presence of a quorum.
   (C)   Meetings of committees may be called by the chairperson. The
chairperson shall within two days call a meeting of a committee upon the
written request of a majority of the members thereof.
   (D)   Notices of meetings of committees shall be duly posted or published
and such meetings shall be open to the public, and otherwise conducted in full
compliance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 97-13, passed 5-13-97; Am. Ord. 97-73, passed 11- -97)
§ 33.34 REPORTS.
   (A)   Any written committee reports shall be signed by a majority of the
members thereof and filed with the Village Clerk. Minority reports may be
filed.
   (B)   The chairperson of each committee shall report committee action to the
President and Board of Trustees at the regular meeting thereof next ensuing
after the occurrence of such committee action.
   (C)   The President shall promptly advise the appropriate committee
chairperson of actions or occurrences relating to the subject of review, or
field of responsibility, which do not comport with policies, procedures, or
practices approved by the committee or the Board of Trustees. In case of any
emergency concerning the subject or responsibility of a standing committee, the
President or such other responsible village official or employee shall promptly
advise the chairperson of such committee of the occurrence. The chairperson
shall forthwith advise the members of the committee of such emergency and shall
take such action as may be deemed necessary and convenient, all circumstances
considered.
   (D)   The President shall provide each committee copies of correspondence
and documents received and engaged in by the President relative to the subject
of review of field of responsibility of the appropriate committee. The
chairperson of each committee shall provide the President with copies of
correspondence and documents received or engaged in by the committee relative
to its subject of review or field of responsibility.
(Ord. 97-13, passed 5-13-97; Am. Ord. 97-73, passed 11- -97)
§ 33.35 TERMS OF APPOINTMENTS.
   Appointments to all committees shall become effective upon approval of such
appointment by the Village Board of Trustees. Appointments to standing
committees shall be for two years or for the appointee's term of office,
whichever occurs sooner, unless sooner terminated by law, resignation or action
of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 97-13, passed 5-13-97; Am. Ord. 97-73, passed 11- -97)
INVESTMENT POLICY ADVISORY BOARD
§ 33.50 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established an advisory board known as the Chatham
Investment Policy Advisory Board. The Board shall have five members, all of
which will be residents of the village. Committee members shall be appointed by
the President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. Committee
members shall serve without compensation, except reimbursement of their out-of-
pocket expenses in accordance with the reimbursement policies of the village.
At its initial meeting, the Advisory Board shall appoint from its members a
chairperson and a recording secretary. The Board shall meet from time to time,
and shall conduct its meetings in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, and
shall be subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Law (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) and
the Illinois Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.).
(Ord. 98-29, passed 5-12-98; Am. Ord. 98-59, passed 9-22-98)
§ 33.51 DUTIES.
   The Investment Policy Advisory Board is charged with advising the Village
Board as to whether the Village of Chatham Investment Policy, which was adopted
on March 13, 1990 pursuant to Ordinance 90-10, should be revised, and if so, to
develop specific proposed revisions. The Board shall be advisory only, and
shall not have the power to establish or modify policies, enter into contracts,
schedule events or spend public funds. The Board shall periodically review, a
minimum of annually, the village investment activities to ensure compliance
with policy.
(Ord. 98-29, passed 5-12-98; Am. Ord. 98-59, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 99-45,
passed 9-28-99)
§ 33.52 STAFFING.
   The Village Administrator shall provide the Investment Policy Advisory Board
with whatever staff support the Board reasonably requests.
(Ord. 98-29, passed 5-12-98; Am. Ord. 98-59, passed 9-22-98)
VETERANS MEMORIAL COMMISSION
§ 33.60 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby created a Veterans Memorial Commission, which shall consist
of a chairperson and two additional members appointed by the President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. All members shall be residents of
the village; they shall be officers of the village, and they shall meet all
qualifications for office established by the Illinois Municipal Code. All
members shall serve an initial term until August 31, 2005. Members shall serve
without compensation, except that they shall be entitled to reimbursement of
their out-of-pocket expenses. The Director of Public Works and Trustee
appointed by the Board of Trustees to serve as liaison to the Memorial
Commission shall be ex officio, nonvoting members of the Commission. A member
of the Memorial Commission who has missed three consecutive unexcused absences
from meetings may, at the discretion of the Village President, be deemed to
have vacated the office.
(Ord. 01-45, passed 8-14-01)
§ 33.61 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Veterans Memorial Commission shall have the following duties and powers:
   (A)   It shall meet at least once every calendar quarter. Additional
meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson or Village Trustee
serving as liaison to the Committee. All meetings shall be open to the public,
and the Commission shall comply in all respects with statutes and ordinances
pertaining to open meetings and availability of public documents. In the event
a quorum of the Commission is not present for a meeting, the members present
may discuss the business of the Commission but may make and record no votes
except a vote on a motion to adjourn the meeting to a later time and place. The
Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and shall provide a copy of
its minutes to the Village Clerk and to its trustee liaison.
   (B)   It shall recommend to the Village Board policies governing the
Veterans Memorial.
   (C)   It shall administer the Veterans Memorial in accordance with the
policies set forth in §
33.63, as amended from time to time by the Village Board.
   (D)   It shall, in conjunction with the Village Treasurer, administer the
Veterans Memorial Fund, a special fund within the Village Treasury which is
hereby established. It shall, in conjunction with the Chief Fiscal Officer,
submit an annual budget request to the Village Board for inclusion in the
annual appropriation ordinance of the village.
   (E)   It shall, on or before May 31 of each year, render a report of its
activities to the Village Board during the preceding fiscal year.
   (F)   It shall coordinate its activities with the Director of Public Works
and other village officials as required.
   (G)   It may enter into contracts for construction, repair and maintenance
of the Veteran Memorial, or it may otherwise spend up to $500 from the Veterans
Memorial Fund in any single transaction, on the signature of the Chairman, so
long as such contracts or expenditures are within its annual appropriation.
(Ord. 01-45, passed 8-14-01)
§ 33.62 ABOLISHMENT.
   The Commission is abolished on September 1, 2005, unless continued by action
of the Village Board. At such time as the Veterans Memorial Commission is
abolished, its functions shall be transferred to the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 01-45, passed 8-14-01)
§ 33.63 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The following rules shall govern the Veterans Memorial and Veterans Memorial
Commission:
   (A)   The Veterans Memorial is intended to honor veterans and veterans
organizations through the placement of memorial bricks in the Memorial. Only
veterans who served in the Armed Forces of the United States of America
(including reserves and National Guard), and bona fide veterans organizations
of the United States of America, will be allowed bricks in the Memorial. If
there is a question as to the authenticity of a veterans organization, the
Memorial Commission shall consult with the local American Legion and VFW Post
before rendering a decision on eligibility.
   (B)   Each person or organization desiring a brick shall submit an
application on a form designed by the Memorial Commission. The Memorial
Commission shall determine the applicant’s eligibility with these rules, and
shall accept or reject the application based thereon. If an application is
accepted, the Memorial Commission will notify the applicant, and upon the
applicant’s payment of $50, the Memorial Commission will order the brick.
   (C)   Each brick shall contain the name of the veterans organization or the
name of the veteran. No ranks or insignia will be allowed in the Veterans
Memorial, however, a brick may designate the veterans’ unit (e.g., 33rd
Infantry Division) or ship (e.g., USS Dwight D. Eisenhower). If there is a
question as to unit or ship, the Memorial Commission shall consult with the
local American Legion and VFW Post before rendering a decision on eligibility.
   (D)   A veteran need not a resident of the village to qualify for the
Veterans Memorial. The general policy is to be inclusive rather than exclusive
for determining names on the Veteran’s Memorial. Only one name may appear on
each brick; family bricks are not allowed. However, the Memorial Commission
will make reasonable efforts to group family members and friends upon their
request.
   (E)   To qualify for a brick, an individual must hold an honorable discharge
or a discharge under honorable conditions. If an individual has served more
than one enlistment or in more than one branch of service, then the Memorial
Commission will consider the most recent discharge for purposes of this rule.
If after a brick is ordered, an individual is discovered to have had a less
than honorable discharge or has otherwise materially misrepresented his or her
service in the application, the Memorial Commission may refuse to place the
brick in the Memorial, and may remove any bricks already placed in the
Memorial. There will be no refunds in such event.
   (F)   The Commission may add bricks to the Memorial at such times as it
determines in its sole discretion. A minimum of 50 memorial bricks will be
added at a time to the Memorial.
   (G)   Bricks will be of uniform size, design, color and engraving style.
Arnold Monument has supplied all bricks prior to enactment of these rules;
their bricks are acceptable.
   (H)   The Chatham American Legion and VFW Posts may, without further
permission from the Memorial Commission, conduct joint Memorial Day services at
the Veterans Memorial. Other bona fide veterans groups and individuals may
conduct services at the Veterans Memorial on a first-come, first-serve basis by
making application in advance to the Memorial Commission.
   (I)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Veterans Memorial Commission
under these rules may appeal to the Village President, who shall conduct an
informal hearing and render a decision within seven working days of receipt of
the appeal.
(Ord. 01-45, passed 8-14-01)
ENTERTAINMENT ADVISORY BOARD
§ 33.70 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established an advisory board known as the Entertainment
Board. The Entertainment Board shall have ten members, all of which will be
residents and registered voters of the village and shall otherwise qualify as
officers of the village. Board members shall be appointed by the Village
President, with the advice and consent of the Village Board. Initially, there
will be a chairperson and three members appointed with a term ending April 30,
2005; three members will be appointed with a term ending April 30, 2004, and
three members will be appointed with a term ending April 30, 2003. Thereafter,
members shall have a term of four years or until a successor has been appointed
and has qualified. Members may be removed from office in accordance with the
Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 01-33, passed 11-27-01)
§ 33.71 MEETINGS AND COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Entertainment Board shall serve without compensation, except
reimbursement of their out-of-pocket expenses in accordance with the
reimbursement policies of the village. The Board shall from time to time
appoint from its members a recording secretary. The Board shall meet at least
once per calendar quarter; if a member is absent for three consecutive
meetings, he or she shall be deemed to have abandoned the position. The Board
shall conduct its meetings in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, and
shall be subject to the Illinois Open Meetings Law and the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act. The Board shall provide minutes of its meetings to the Village
Clerk. The Village President and a trustee of the Village Board appointed by
the Village President shall be non- voting, ex officio members of the
Entertainment Board.
(Ord. 01-33, passed 11-27-01)
§ 33.72 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Entertainment Board shall have the duty of promoting, coordinating and
scheduling musical and cultural entertainment in the Village Parks. Scheduling
of such events shall be coordinated with the Village Recreation Commission, the
Park Advisory Committee and the Director of Public Works. Where entertainers
require payment, the Board may work with individuals, groups and companies,
both for-profit and not-for-profit, to arrange for financial sponsorship of
such entertainment. The Board may from time to time recommend general policies
regarding the use of Village Parks for entertainment and cultural events for
adoption by the corporate authorities, and shall be bound by such policies when
they are adopted. The Board shall not itself have the power to establish or
modify policies, enter into contracts, or spend public funds.
(Ord. 01-33, passed 11-27-01)
§ 33.73 STAFF SUPPORT; REPORTS TO THE VILLAGE BOARD.
   The several departments heads of the village shall provide the Entertainment
Board with whatever staff support the Board reasonably requests. From time to
time, and at least annually, the Entertainment Board shall render reports to
the Village Board of its activities.
(Ord. 01-33, passed 11-27-01)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Fiscal year
   
34.02   Participation in Illinois Municipal Risk Management Association
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 FISCAL YEAR.
The fiscal year for the village shall commence May 1 and end April 30 of each
year.
(Ord. 74-4, passed 7-18-74)
§ 34.02 PARTICIPATION IN ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RISK MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION.
   The village shall be a member of the Illinois Municipal League Risk
Management Association pursuant to an Intergovernmental Cooperation Contract
with the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management Association. The village
shall renew its participation in said Risk Management Association each year.
(Ord. 87-8, passed 6-23-87)
CHAPTER 35: PERSONNEL CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
35.001   Introduction
   
35.002   Equal opportunity; statement of policy
   
35.003   Definitions
Hiring and Firing Authority
   
35.015   Chief of Police and police officers
   
35.016   Other employees
Lines of Authority
   
35.025   Departments and department heads
   
35.026   Committees of the Board
   
35.027   Reserved
   
35.028   Department heads
   
35.029   Deputy Clerk
   
35.030   Supervisors other than department heads
Attendance and Hours of Work
   
35.040   Administrative office
   
35.041   Public works and utilities
   
35.042   Police Department
   
35.043   Basic work week
   
35.044   Attendance
   
35.045   Breaks
Compensation and Time Keeping
   
35.055   New hires
   
35.056   Annual salary review
   
35.057   Time records
   
35.058   Overtime
   
35.059   Compensatory time
   
35.060   Pay period
   
35.061   Docking of pay
Benefits
   
35.070   Vacations
   
35.071   Reserved
   
35.072   Unpaid vacations for temporary employees
   
35.073   Paid holidays
   
35.074   Sick leave
   
35.075   Personal hours
   
35.076   Bereavement leave
   
35.077   Unpaid leaves of absence
   
35.078   Tuition Reimbursement Program
   
35.079   Other benefits
   
35.080   Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
Employee Relations
   
35.090   Anti-discrimination and harassment policy
   
35.091   Changes in personal status
   
35.092   Dress code
   
35.093   Nepotism/revolving door provisions
   
35.094   Performance measurement
   
35.095   Residency requirements
   
35.096   Outside employment
   
35.097   Physical examination
   
35.098   Whistleblower protection
Probationary and Temporary Employees
   
35.110   Probationary employees
   
35.111   Temporary employees
Disciplinary Actions
   
35.120   General
   
35.121   Verbal warning
   
35.122   Written warning
   
35.123   Suspension without pay
   
35.124   Dismissal
   
35.125   Demotions
   
35.126   Disciplinary rules
   
35.127   Hearing rights
Terminations
   
35.140   Resignations
   
35.141   Layoffs
   
35.142   Return of village property
Director Benefits
   
35.155   Vacations
   
35.156   Compensatory time
   
35.157   Personal leave
Personnel Files
   
35.165   Contents of personnel files
   
35.166   Inspection of personnel files
Classification
   
35.175   Electric Department employee classification
Employment Process
   
35.190   In general
   
35.191   Vacant position
   
35.192   Position posting
   
35.193   Application processing
   
35.194   Selection; interview
   
35.195   Reference check; background investigation
   
35.196   Job offer
   
35.197   Verification of employment requirements
   
35.198   Employment eligibility requirements
   
35.199   Educational Loan Default Act
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.001 INTRODUCTION.
   The purpose of this Personnel Code is to establish policies, procedures and
plans relating to employees of the village. The village reserves the right in
the sole discretion of the Village Board to add, change, or eliminate its
policies, procedures or plans, or to make special allowances for situations not
specifically addressed in this Code. This Code governs all village employees,
but should not be considered as a contract of employment or a guarantee of
employment. This Code does not apply to officers of the village except where
specifically indicated. This code does not apply to the extent it is expressly
or, impliedly superseded by a collective bargaining agreement, an employment
contract or a statute granting special rights to certain classes of employees.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.002 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY; STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is the policy of the village to provide equal opportunity to all
employees and applicants for employment in accordance with all applicable laws,
directives and regulations of federal, state and local legislative bodies and
administrative agencies.
   (B)   The village shall recruit, hire, train and promote persons in all job
classifications without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
age, handicap or political affiliation; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall impair the right of the village to establish bona fide
occupational qualifications for any job category.
   (C)   The village shall insure that all personnel actions, including
compensation, benefits, transfers, terminations, reductions in work force,
rehires, education, tuition assistance, and the like, shall be administered
without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age, disability
or political affiliation.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE. The Committee of the Village Board having
jurisdiction over personnel.
   BOARD. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village.
   COMPENSATION. All form of valuable consideration, including salary wages,
benefits, and allowances earned by and paid to any employee by reason of
service in a position with the village.
   DIRECTOR. The Chief of Police, Chief Fiscal Officer, Public Works Director
and the Administration and Utilities Director.
   EMPLOYEE. A person other than an officer or an independent contractor who
regularly performs remunerative work for the village.
   FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee who is not a part-time employee or a
temporary employee.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Includes and is limited to parents, spouses, brothers,
sisters, children, grandparents, grandchildren, parents-in-law, brothers-in-
law, sisters-in-law, legal guardians, and stepchildren.
   INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR. A person who performs remunerative work for the
Village on a contractual basis. Examples of independent contractors include
vendors of goods and services, and engineers, attorneys and consultants for the
Village.
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
   OFFICER.
      (1)   A person designated by the Municipal Code or by ordinance as an
officer of the village, including, but not limited to, the Village President,
Village Trustees, the Village Clerk, members of the Boards and Commissions who
take an oath of office (such as the Zoning Board and Plan Commission), and the
Chief of Police. OFFICER does not include police officers other than the Chief
of Police; they are considered employees.
      (2)   Although the Chief of Police and Village Administrator are officers
of the village and not employees, both shall be subject to the rules and
regulations governing full-time employees and shall have the rights and
benefits of a full-time employee as set forth in this Personnel Code, except
where a specific exception is made.
   PART-TIME EMPLOYEE. An employee other than a temporary employee who works
for the village or is reasonably expected to work for the village less than
1664 hours in a calendar year.
   PRESIDENT. The President of the village.
   PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE. A part-time or full-time employee who has worked for
the village less than six continuous calendar months.
   TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. An employee who is hired for a period of not more than
six continuous months, or who is hired only to work during particular seasons
of the year (for example, a person hired to work in the Street Department for
the summer).
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 02-55,
passed 1-14-03)
HIRING AND FIRING AUTHORITY
§ 35.015 CHIEF OF POLICE AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Board as set forth in provisions relating to
appointment of officers in the Municipal Code.
   (B)   Firing authority for the Chief of Police is vested in the President,
subject to the Board's right of override in the manner set forth in Municipal
Code relating to removal of appointed officers.
   (C)   Police officers are hired and fired by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners as required by statute and ordinances of the village.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.016 OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   All authority for creating positions for employment with the village
is vested in the President and Board. All employees, except the Village
Manager, Chief of Police, and police o fficers, shall be hired by the Village
Manger per village policy.
   (B)   Firing authority for all employees, except the Village Manager, Chief
of Police and police officers, is vested in the Village Manager and shall be
exercised as set forth in the sections of this chapter relating to discipline.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 13-42,
passed 11-22-13)
LINES OF AUTHORITY
§ 35.025 DEPARTMENTS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   Each employee of the village is assigned to a department(s) with an
appointed department head. For purposes of this Personnel Code, the departments
of the village are as follows: Electric, Water and Sewer, Police,
Transportation, Zoning and Building, Finance and Administration, Recreation and
Human Services. Department heads may, on a temporary basis, lend department
employees to other departments.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94)
§ 35.026 COMMITTEES OF THE BOARD.
   The various committees of the Village Board have no direct involvement with
operations of the departments. The committees have oversight jurisdiction and
responsibility for establishing department policy and programming.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.027 RESERVED.
§ 35.028 DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   The several Department Heads are supervised by no committee of the Village
Board, but rather directly by the President and their functions are as follows:
   (A)   Chief of Police is the head of the Police Department and reports as
necessary to the Village Manager regarding the activities of the Department.
   (B)   The Public Works Manager is the head of Zoning, Public Properties, and
Streets Departments and reports as necessary to the Village Manager regarding
the activities of the departments.
   (C)   Public Utilities Manager is the head of the Electric and Water and
Sewer departments and reports as necessary to the Village Manager the
activities of the departments.
   (D)   Code Enforcement Coordinator is the head of the Building and Codes
Department and reports as necessary to the Village Manager regarding the
activities of the Department.
   (E)   Chief Fiscal Officer is the head of the Financial and Administration
Departments and reports as necessary to the Village Manager regarding the
activities of the departments.
   (F)   Administrative Assistant/Human Resource Coordinator is the head of the
Human Resource Department and reports to the Village Manager regarding the
activities of the department.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 13-42,
passed 11-22-13)
§ 35.029 DEPUTY CLERK.
   The Deputy Clerk reports to the Clerk insofar as the Deputy Clerk's
clerkship duties are concerned. If the Deputy Clerk is a full-time or part-time
employee of the village, insofar as all of the employee's other duties are
concerned, he or she reports to such employee's department head. The Deputy
Clerk does not lose his or her status as employee by virtue of appointment to
the position of Deputy Clerk.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.030 SUPERVISORS OTHER THAN DEPARTMENT HEADS.
   For administrative convenience department heads may designate one or more
employees to assist them with their supervision of other employees; however,
while authority is delegated, responsibility is not. Department heads are
always responsible as supervisors for all employees within their departments.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
ATTENDANCE AND HOURS OF WORK
§ 35.040 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE.
   The Village Administrative Office shall be open for business from 7:30 a.m.
until 4:15 p.m., Monday through Friday. Employees assigned to the Finance and
Administration Department are subject to shift assignment by the department
head, with the advice and consent of the Administrator.
(Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.041 PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES.
   The Village Public Works and Utilities shall be open for business from 7:30
a.m. until 4:15 p.m., Monday through Friday, which shall be the normal work
schedule and hours for all employees assigned to Public Works and Utilities
Departments.
(Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.042 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   The Police Department shall be open for business at all times and Department
employees are subject to shift assignment by the department head. The normal
work hours for each shift shall be set by the department head with the advice
and consent of the Administrator.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.043 BASIC WORK WEEK.
   The basic work week is 40 hours, but all employees are expected and required
to work overtime as instructed by their department heads.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.044 ATTENDANCE.
   Reliable attendance of all employees is essential. Continual absences,
tardiness and unsatisfactory attendance will be dealt with under provisions of
this code pertaining to disciplinary actions.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.045 BREAKS.
   All employees are entitled to a paid 15 minute rest period in each half of
their shift to be calculated from the time work is ceased, until the time work
is commenced. All employees, except police officers, are entitled to an unpaid
one hour lunch period. Police officers are entitled to a paid one-half hour
lunch period, during which they are on call and may not leave the village
limits. Breaks and lunch periods shall be scheduled by the department head.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
COMPENSATION AND TIME KEEPING
§ 35.055 NEW HIRES.
   (A)   The salary of a newly hired employee shall be established when the
employee is hired.
   (B)   The salary of a new employee, other than temporary employees, shall be
reviewed at the end of that employee's six month probationary period, and the
Village Manager may in his/her discretion decide to raise, lower or keep in
force the employee's initial salary.
   (C)   The salary for of a newly promoted police sergeant shall be their
standard base police officer salary plus 8% the first year, plus 10% the second
year and plus 12% thereafter.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 13-42, passed 10-22-13)
§ 35.056 ANNUAL SALARY REVIEW.
   The Village Manager shall perform or cause to be performed an annual review
of salaries of the jobs within the village. Report to the Village President
with recommended adjustments.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 13-38, passed 10-8-13; Am. Ord. 13-42,
passed 10-22-13)
§ 35.057 TIME RECORDS.
   Employees shall keep accurate time records. Each employee, except employees
who are exempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act, shall daily record his or
her time worked and absences on timesheet forms approved by the Administrator.
Timesheets shall be signed by the employee upon completion of each pay period's
entries and reviewed and signed by the department head (or in the absence of a
department head, by a person designated by the department head). A department
head's timesheets shall be signed by the department head and reviewed and
signed by the Administrator. In no event shall any hourly employee be paid for
time not recorded on a timesheet and approved by his or her department head or
the Administrator. No department head or other supervisor shall permit or
encourage any employee to work but not record his or her time. Timesheets are
important legal documents and are the source documents for the village payroll
system. Their accuracy is an absolute must.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.058 OVERTIME.
   All employees, except employees who are exempt under the Fair Labor
Standards Act, are entitled to time and one-half for all hours in excess of 40
hours in a seven-day period. Paid time off shall be credited as eight hours
worked for purposes of this section; any unpaid time off shall not be credited
toward the 40 hours. Double time shall be paid on Sundays and all days observed
as official holidays.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.059 COMPENSATORY TIME.
   Employees not exempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act are eligible for
compensatory time. Employees may accumulate a maximum of 60 hours, and may
carry 20 hours to the following calendar year. Employees not exempt under the
Fair Labor Standards Act shall be compensated for all hours not eligible to be
carried forward. Employees not exempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act may
elect compensatory time in lieu of overtime compensation. Compensatory time
shall be scheduled and approved by the Department Head at least one week in
advance, except in the case of emergency call outs where the employee utilizes
the compensatory time the following day. In all cases, the employee shall
notify his or her department head of their intent to utilize compensatory time.
(Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.060 PAY PERIOD.
   Village employees shall be paid on Fridays of alternating weeks. The pay
period for each paycheck covers a two week period ending the Sunday before
payday. (In the case of police officers working a Sunday night to Monday
morning shift, the pay period shall include the hours worked on the Monday
morning).
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94)
§ 35.061 DOCKING OF PAY.
   Employees shall not be compensated for absences other than paid absences as
set forth in the sections of this code pertaining to paid vacations and leaves.
Except for employees who are exempt employees under the Fair Labor Standards
Act, salaries shall be docked for unpaid absences.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94)
BENEFITS
§ 35.070 VACATIONS.
   (A)   Full-time employees shall earn paid vacation time. No employee on
leave of absence may earn vacation. Vacation time may be taken in increments of
not less than four hours at a time, at any time after it is earned in
accordance with this section.
   (B)   Rate for earning vacation.
      (1)   From the date of hire until the completion of five years continuous
service: 6.67 hours a year per the month.
      (2)   From the completion of five years of continuous service until the
completion of ten years of continuous service: 10 hours per month.
      (3)   From the completion of ten years of continuous service until the
completion of 15 years of continuous service: 13.33 hours per month.
      (4)   From the completion of 15 years of continuous service: 8 additional
hours per year up to a maximum of 40 additional hours. Culminating in 16.67
hours earned per month.
   (C)   Limitations on vacation length. No employee may take more than 120
consecutive hours of vacation (exclusive of holidays) without the prior consent
of the Administrator.
   (D)   Carryover of vacation days. Vacation time shall not be carried over
for more than 24 months after the end of the calendar year in which it is
earned.
   (E)   Request of pay for accrued and unused vacation time. An employee may
request pay for vacation time accrued and unused once per calendar year. The
request shall be submitted in writing to the Administrator and shall be
processed on the ensuing pay period.
   (F)   Requests for vacations. Preference for vacation shall be given those
scheduled by February 15. An employee shall request vacation at least one week
prior to the vacation requested. Department heads have the discretion and
responsibility to grant or deny vacations subject to the needs of the village.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord.13-42,
passed 10-22-13)
§ 35.071 RESERVED.
§ 35.072 UNPAID VACATIONS FOR TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES.
   Temporary employees are entitled to no vacation but may take unpaid
vacations in the discretion of their respective department heads.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.073 PAID HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Employees, except temporary employees, are entitled to paid holidays.
Payment for part-time employees shall be paid based on the decimal calculated
in §
35.071.
   (B)   The village has nine holidays per year. If a holiday falls on a Sunday
, the following Monday is observed as a holiday. If a holiday falls on a
Saturday, the preceding Friday is observed as a holiday. The official holidays
of the village are as follows:
      (1)   New Year's Day;
      (2)   Presidents Day;
      (3)   Memorial Day;
      (4)   Independence Day;
      (5)   Labor Day;
      (6)   Veterans Day;
      (7)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (8)   Christmas Day;
      (9)   Floating holiday;
   (C)   The floating holidays may be used at the employees discretion, with
the approval of the department head. Department heads have the discretion and
responsibility to grant floating holiday approval based on employee fairness
and the needs of the village.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.074 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Full-time employees may take sick leave in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   An eligible employee shall accumulate sick leave at a rate of eight
hours for each months service.
   (C)   An eligible employee may accumulate sick leave up to a maximum of 960
hours. After accumulation of 960 hours, sick time shall be transferred to
personal time at a rate of one-half (eight hours sick to four hours personal).
When the services of an employee are terminated as a result of disciplinary
action, no compensation will be paid for accrued sick leave. In all other
cases, accrued paid sick leave will be paid at half of the employee's then
current straight time rate of pay.
   (D)   An employee without accumulated paid sick leave who requires
additional sick leave will have sick days deducted from vacation time, if the
employee has accumulated vacation time, or the time will be docked.
   (E)   Sick leave shall be taken in minimum increments of one hour and may be
used for illness, disability or injury, doctor or dentist appointments, or
appointments with other professional medical practitioners. Sick leave may be
used for injury or disability of the employee's immediate family.
   (F)   An employee taking sick leave shall, unless incapacitated, notify his
or her department head by telephone no later than starting time on the date of
the absence, and of each day thereafter of absence. (If a department head is
sick, he or she shall notify the Administrative Assistant. The department head
shall notify the Administrative Assistant of the employee's absence. An
employee who does not comply with these rules shall be charged with an
unauthorized absence.
   (G)   An employee must have a doctor's slip to return to work after three
consecutive days of sick leave.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 11-52,
passed 11-8-11; Am. Ord. 13-42, passed 10-22-13)
§ 35.075 PERSONAL HOURS.
   (A)   Full-time employees may take personal hours in accordance with this
section.
   (B)   Full-time employees shall receive 48 hours personal leave on January 1
of each year.
   (C)   Personal hours may not be accumulated and carried over to the
following year nor shall unused days be paid on termination.
   (D)   Personal hours may be used in minimum increments of two hours.
   (E)   Applications shall be filed with the department head a minimum of 24
hours prior to the requested leave, except in an emergency. The department head
shall allow or deny the request based on department needs.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 13-42,
passed 10-22-13)
§ 35.076 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.
   You are entitled to take up to three work days with pay to attend the
funeral and take care of personal matters related to the death of a member of
your immediate family. (IMMEDIATE FAMILY herein shall be defined as a spouse,
child, grandchild, parent, brother, sister, niece, nephew, aunt, uncle, and
equivalent relatives of an existing spouse). In the event that an employee has
pallbearer duties, the employee shall be granted four hours the day of the
funeral off with no loss of pay. Only regular full-time employees are eligible
for paid funeral leave. Upon returning to work, the employee must record his/
her absence as a bereavement leave on their attendance record. Proof of death
and relationship to the deceased may be required.
(Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03; Am. Ord. 09-56, passed 10-13-09; Am. Ord.13-42,
passed 10-22-13)
§ 35.077 UNPAID LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
   Occasionally, for medical, personal, or other reasons, an employee may need
to be temporarily released from the duties of his or her job with the village,
but may not wish to submit his or her resignation. Under certain circumstances,
an employee may be eligible for an unpaid leave of absence. There are several
types of unpaid leaves which the employee may be eligible for:
   (A)   Family/medical leave of absence. In general, a leave of absence is an
official authorization to be absent from work without pay for a specified
period of time. Eligible employees may be entitled to job-protected family or
medical leaves of absence if they are unable to come to work due to pressing
family or medical concerns as described under the following family/medical
leave policy, which shall be administered in accordance with applicable state
and federal laws:
      (1)   Employees are eligible if they have been actively employed for 12
months and worked at least 1,250 hours (an average of 25 hours per week) during
those 12 months.
      (2)   Under the circumstances set forth below, each eligible employee
shall have up to a total of 12 weeks leave during any one year period.
      (3)   A family leave shall be granted upon the birth or adoption of a
child of the employee, or upon the serious illness of the employee’s child,
spouse or parent.
      (4)   A medical leave shall be granted upon the employee’s own serious
illness.
      (5)   Whenever possible, and subject to the employee’s health care
provider’s approval, absences for planned medical treatment should be scheduled
so as not to unduly disrupt village operations.
      (6)   In appropriate circumstances, the village may require the employee
to be examined by a village designated physician, at village expense.
      (7)   In the event of serious illness to the employee or his or her
child, spouse or parent, creating a need for unforeseeable family or medical
leave, the employee should provide the Director notice, as soon as practicable,
of any time needed off, and a written doctor’s certificate indicating the
expected duration and nature of the illness, particularly as it relates to the
employee’s ability to come to work or the need for that employee’s presence at
home to care for a seriously ill family member.
      (8)   Employee’s shall be required to give 30 days advance notice in the
event of a foreseeable medical treatment. To assist the village in arranging
work assignments during the employee’s absence, the village asks that the
employee give the village prior notice, to the extent possible, of an expected
birth or adoption, as well as an indication, to the extent known, of the
employee’s expected return date. To facilitate the employee’s return to work,
the village also asks that the employee provide the village with two weeks
advance notification of the employee’s intended return date. Failure to do so
may delay the employee’s return date.
      (9)   For purposes of this policy, a child is defined as a natural,
adopted, or foster child, a stepchild or a legal ward. If the child is over 18
he or she must be unable to care for himself or herself due to a serious
illness.
      (10)   A parent is defined as the employee's or his or her spouse's
natural, adoptive, or foster parent, stepparent, or legal guardian.
      (11)   A serious illness is defined as a disabling physical or mental
illness, injury, impairment, or condition involving: (1) inpatient care in a
hospital, nursing home, or hospice; or (2) outpatient care requiring continuing
treatment or supervision from a health care professional.
      (12)   Leave of absence rights available to the employee under other
sections of the village’s policy shall be counted towards the total time off
available under this section.
      (13)   Upon completion of a leave granted under this section, the
employee shall be reinstated to his or her original position, or an equivalent
one.
      (14)   If, due to the employee’s own medical circumstances, the employee
is no longer able to perform his or her original job, the village will attempt
to transfer the employee to alternate suitable work, if available.
      (15)   While on a leave of absence provided for under this policy, the
village will continue the employee’s group health insurance benefits under the
same terms as provided to other employees, for up to a maximum of 12 weeks
leave time during any one year period. If the employee’s leave extends beyond
12 weeks, the employee shall be offered the opportunity to purchase continuing
coverage under state and federal COBRA continuation rules.
      (16)   Other accumulated fringe benefits such as seniority, retirement,
service credits, sick pay, vacation pay, and the like, shall be preserved at
the level earned as of commencement of the leave, but shall not accrue further
during any such leave period.
      (17)   Should the employee require an extended leave beyond the period of
time described in this policy, the village will seek to return the employee to
a suitable position, but cannot guarantee that one will be available.
   (B)   Disability (including pregnancy) leave of absence. Medical
documentation, to the satisfaction of the village may be required for all
periods of time during short-term disability. The village reserves the right to
require independent medical verification of an employee's inability to work,
based on a medical exam by a physician chosen by and paid for by the village.
      (1)   The village classifies pregnancy as any other medically disabling
condition, and will provide reasonable leave for all employees for the period
of disability as determined by the employee and her physician. When ready to
return to work, the employee will be reinstated to her original job or a
similar level position providing circumstances have not so changed as to make
it impossible or unreasonable to do so. At all times the village’s maternity
leave policy will be in compliance with the state and federal laws.
      (2)   Extended maternity leave. Should an employee with an excellent work
record desire more time after using all vacation and sick time, allowances may
be made at the discretion of the Director and on an individual basis. The
deciding factor will be the ability of the village to cover, without
interruption, the position as described in the employee's job description.
      (3)   Extended disability leave. If the employee’s disability, (other
than pregnancy), prevents the employee from working for longer than six weeks,
when the employee is ready to return to work the village will do its best to
reinstate the employee to his or her position or a similar position, but the
village cannot guarantee that the employee’s job or any job will be available.
   (C)   Educational leave of absence. An educational leave of absence may be
approved if the desired curriculum is of mutual benefit to the employee and to
the village. Apply in the same manner as the employee would for a personal
leave of absence.
   (D)   Election day. The village encourages the employee to exercise his or
her voting privileges in local, state, and national elections. However, since
the polls are open for long periods, the employee is encouraged to vote before
or after regular working hours. If it should be necessary, the employee may
take up to thirty minutes leave from work to vote in a governmental election or
referendum. The employee will be expected to notify his or her department head
at least one week in advance. The employee will not be paid for such time.
Personal leave time, if available, may be used for this purpose.
   (E)   Military leave of absence. If the employee is a full-time employee and
is inducted into the U.S. Armed Forces, the employee will be eligible for re-
employment after completing military service, provided:
      (1)   The employee show his or her orders to the Director as soon as the
employee receives them.
      (2)   The employee satisfactorily completes his or her active duty
service.
      (3)   The employee enters the military service directly from his or her
employment with the village.
      (4)   The employee applies for and is available for re-employment within
90 days after discharge from active duty. If the employee is returning from up
to six months active duty for training, the employee must apply within a
reasonable time (usually 30 days) after discharge.
   (F)   Military reserves or National Guard leave of absence. Employees who
serve in U. S. military organizations or state militia groups may take the
necessary time off without pay to fulfill this obligation, and will retain all
of their legal rights for continued employment under existing laws. These
employees may apply accrued personal leave and unused earned vacation time to
the leave if they wish; however, they are not obliged to do so. The employee is
expected to notify the Director as soon as the employee is aware of the dates
he or she will be on duty so that arrangements can be made for replacement
during this absence.
   (G)   Personal leave of absence. In very special circumstances, the village
may grant a leave for a personal reason, but never for taking employment
elsewhere or going into business for one’s self. The employee should request an
unpaid personal leave of absence from the Director. A personal leave of absence
must not interfere with the operations of the employee’s department or the
village. A personal leave of absence may be granted for up to 30 days. If the
employee’s leave is extended for more than 30 days, vacation and other benefits
will no longer continue to accrue. Consult employee group insurance booklet to
determine employee insurance coverage during a leave of absence. Failure to
return from a leave at the time agreed will result in termination of
employment.
   (H)   Accepting other employment or going into business while on leave of
absence. If an employee accepts any employment or goes into business while on a
leave of absence from the village, the employee will be considered to have
voluntarily resigned from employment with the village as of the day on which
the employee began his or her leave of absence.
   (I)   Insurance premium payment during leaves of absence. While the employee
is on unpaid leave of absence from the village, the employee will be
responsible for paying the total premiums for his or her coverage and that of
his or her dependents while on leave. Failure to do so may result in loss of
coverage and possible refusal by the insurance carrier to allow the employee’s
coverage to be reinstated.
   (J)   Jury leave. An employee called for jury duty shall be given leave to
attend jury duty. The employee upon receiving a summons shall immediately
provide a copy to his or her department head, or if the employee is a
department head, to the Director of Administration. An employee taking jury
leave has the following options regarding pay:
      (1)   The employee may continue to receive pay from the village and pay
over to the Village Treasurer all compensation paid by the court;
      (2)   The employee may take an unpaid leave of absence from the village
and retain all compensation paid by the court; or
      (3)   The employee may take paid vacation days and retain all
compensation paid by the court.
   (K)   Leaves required under Workers Compensation Laws. An employee suffering
from an injury that is job related under the Workers Compensation Laws shall be
entitled to leave for such injury strictly and exclusively in accordance with
those laws.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.078 TUITION REIMBURSEMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The village encourages its employees to further their education and,
therefore, will reimburse tuition as set forth in this section.
      (1)   Only full-time employees are entitled to participate in the tuition
reimbursement program. An employee must make application for reimbursement to
the Administrative Committee in time for the Administrative Committee to rule
on the application prior to commencement of the course work.
      (2)   An employee who takes a course is required to obtain a license or
certification required for the employee to perform his or her job
responsibilities is entitled to 100% tuition reimbursement upon receiving a
passing grade in any such course from a suitable institution.
      (3)   An employee electing to take course work not required for but
related to the employee's job responsibilities is eligible to partial tuition
reimbursement according to the grade received by the employee from a suitable
institution, as follows:
 
Course Grade Percent of Reimbursement
Aa           100%
B            75%
C            50%
D or F       0%
Pass         100%
Fail         0%
 
      (4)   The Administrative Committee shall in its sole discretion determine
whether or not course work meets the criteria of subdivisions (2) and (3) and
whether the institution selected by the employee is suitable. The
Administrative Committee shall notify the employee of its findings in writing
prior to the employee commencing the course work. Any adverse decision by the
Administrative Committee may be appealed by the employee to the Board.
      (5)   On completion of an approved course the employee shall submit to
the Committee:
         (a)   An official grade notice;
         (b)   A copy of the official fee schedule;
         (c)   A copy of a canceled check or other proof of payment;
         (d)   Prior written authorization from the Administrative Committee.
   (B)   The Committee shall approve reimbursement of any properly submitted
application. Reimbursement is limited to tuition only and does not include
other costs such as books, travel, health fees, late fees, application fees,
and the like.
   (C)   As a condition of receiving tuition reimbursement, each applicant
shall sign an agreement providing that if the employee voluntarily terminates
his or her employ, the employee shall reimburse the Village for educational
costs paid within the previous 24 months of the date of departure, and that
such sums may be withheld from the employees final paycheck.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94; Am. Ord. 02-55,
passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.079 OTHER BENEFITS.
   (A)   Medical benefits.
      (1)   The village provides an eligible employee and his or her dependents
with medical insurance as set forth in the governing medical insurance policy
at a cost to be determined from time to time by the Board. Employees
terminating employment with the village are entitled to participate in the
village's medical insurance program at their own cost as set forth in the
village's governing medical insurance policy. The village's medical insurance
program is subject to change without notice.
      (2)   The village shall extend the benefit of medical insurance coverage
to retired personnel who meet the following guidelines as of the date of their
retirement:
         (a)   The employee must have worked a minimum of ten years for the
village.
         (b)   The employee must have been insured under the approved village
plan for a minimum of five years.
         (c)   The employee must be a minimum of 60 years of age the date of
their retirement.
         (d)   The employee may be covered under this plan to a maximum age of
65.
   (B)   Retirement benefits.
      (1)   Retirement benefits for employees, other than police officers and
the Chief of Police, are provided by the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund
(IMRF). Employees qualify for participation in the IMRF as set forth in the
participation rules and regulations; the village has no control over these
rules and regulations and they are subject to change without notice.
      (2)   Police officers and the Chief of Police are entitled to benefits
under Article 3 of the Illinois Pension Code, exclusively as determined by the
Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund of the village.
   (C)   Clothing allowance.
      (1)   The Chief of Police and full-time employees, other than office
employees, are entitled to replacement uniform items purchased by the village
in an amount up to $350 each year beginning in the January after the eligible
employee's first full year of employment.
      (2)   For each newly hired eligible employee, the village shall purchase,
from vendors selected by the department head, the uniform items set forth in
Appendix A to Ordinance 92-11. The newly hired employee shall within ten days
of being hired provide at his or her own expense the uniform items set forth in
Appendix B to Ordinance 92-11. Upon termination, a employee may keep items of
clothing but is expected to return all other items set forth on Appendix A to
the village.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 97-34, passed 8-5-97; Am. Ord. 02-55,
passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.080 ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND.
   The village shall participate in the Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund.
(Ord. 74-7, passed 9-19-74)
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
§ 35.090 ANTI-DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT POLICY.
   The village is committed to employment opportunities which are based upon
ability and performance demonstrating in a productive climate free from racial,
sexual or other discrimination and harassment. Discrimination and harassment
based on categories listed in the village's equal opportunity policy (Article 1
of this Code) will not be tolerated. An employee who believes he or she has
been so discriminated against or harassed shall immediately contact his or her
supervisor, the Director of Administration or a member of the Board. Any
employee determined by investigation to have so discriminated against or
harassed another employee shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.091 CHANGES IN PERSONAL STATUS.
   An employee shall report immediately any change of name, address, telephone
number or marital status to his or her supervisor.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.092 DRESS CODE.
   An employee shall wear attire appropriate to his or her job functions. An
employee working out of the shop is not expected to be neat and clean at all
times because of the demanding nature of the job; however, the employee shall
report to work in a clean uniform in good repair. Office personnel shall wear
attire appropriate to a business office. If an employee is in question as to
what is appropriate, he or she may inquire of his or her supervisor. Police
officers shall, unless called out on emergency or on special assignment, wear
their uniforms at all times while on duty.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.093 NEPOTISM/REVOLVING DOOR PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Anti-nepotism. Consistent with these provisions, the Village of
Chatham shall prohibit nepotism. Consistent with that prohibition and the
principle that village employees and prospective employees should be evaluated
on the basis of individual merit, without reference to considerations of race,
sex, religion or national origin, or any other factors not involving personal
professional qualifications and performance, the following restrictions,
designed to avoid the possibility of favoritism based on family relationship,
shall be observed with respect to employment of all village personnel:
      (1)   Immediate family members of elected officials. Members of a village
elected official's immediate family may not be considered for employment by the
village and may not be hired by the village. Immediate family shall be defined
herein to mean a spouse, parents, children, brothers, sisters, grandparents,
all step relationships, all in-law relationships, all half relationships and
any and all guardians and wards of the elected official.
      (2)   Extended family members of elected officials. Members of a village
elected official's extended family may not be considered for employment by the
village and may not be hired if any of the following may apply:
         (a)   A supervisor/subordinate relationship is created between the
family members;
         (b)   There is a potential for creating an adverse impact on work
performance;
         (c)   The employment could create either an actual conflict of
interest or the appearance of a conflict of interest. Extended family shall be
defined herein as any familial relation not within the immediate relationship
defined above.
      (3)   Family members of staff. Members of a staff member's immediate or
extended family will be considered for employment on the basis of their
qualifications. However, immediate family may not be hired, if employment
would:
         (a)   Create a supervisor/subordinate relationship between family
members;
         (b)   Have the potential for creating an adverse impact on work
performance; or
         (c)   Create either an actual conflict of interest or the appearance
of a conflict of interest.
   (B)   Revolving door prohibitions. Elected officials and/or former elected
officials of the village shall not be eligible for employment with the village
until at least 90 days after their last date of service as an elected official.
   (C)   Board of Fire and Police Commissioners. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the Village Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall evaluate candidates in
accordance with state statute and its duly approved testing rules.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 21-44, passed 11-23-21)
§ 35.094 PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT.
   In March of each year all full-time and part-time employees shall be
evaluated by their immediate supervisors in accordance with Village Board
evaluation policies.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.095 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   All department heads of the village shall maintain bonafide residences
within the corporate limits of the village. A new department head who is not a
resident of the village shall be given 180 days to relocate inside the village
limits. If the employee requires more time to relocate, he or she shall submit
a request for an extension of time in writing to the Administrator stating the
reason for requesting an extension. The Administrator may grant or deny the
request for extension in his/her discretion. Any employee on call must be
capable of responding on site within 20 minutes of the page or call.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 94-59, passed 9-27-94)
§ 35.096 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   Since village service is the primary responsibility of each employee,
outside employment is discouraged. However, an employee may accept occasional
or part-time jobs if:
   (A)   There is no conflict with village working hours.
   (B)   The employee's efficiency is maintained.
   (C)   There is no conflict of interest.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 95-50, passed - -95)
§ 35.097 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION.
   Prior to and during employment, any and all employees shall be subject to a
physical examination at the request of the village, with the expense of such
examination to be borne by the village with the doctors to be designated by the
village. If an employee is unable at any given time to qualify physically to
carry out his or her designated duties, said employee shall be subject to
transfer or dismissal.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.098 WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION.
   All village employees are protected by rights afforded under the Illinois
Whistleblower Act, being 740 ILCS 174/1 et seq.
(Ord. 14-01, passed 1-14-14)
PROBATIONARY AND TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES
§ 35.110 PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES.
   A full-time employee shall be subject to a probationary period of six
months. During the probationary period, an employee may be terminated by the
Village Board without notice or hearing. On or about the end of the fourth
month of a new employee's tenure, the new employee's department head shall
provide a written review of the probationary employee's job performance to the
Administrator. The Administrator shall decide on or before the end of the fifth
month of the new employee's tenure whether or not to retain the new employee
and shall make recommendations on that subject to the Village Board along with
a recommendation regarding any salary adjustment. The Board shall decide
whether or not to retain the employee on or before the end of the sixth month
of the new employee's tenure.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.111 TEMPORARY EMPLOYEES.
   Temporary employees may be terminated at any time by the Administrator
without notice or hearing.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
§ 35.120 GENERAL.
   Any village employee may be subject to disciplinary action because of the
employee's failure or refusal to perform assigned duties in a manner acceptable
to the Administrator.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.121 VERBAL WARNING.
   One method of disciplinary action is a verbal warning by the employee's
department head or Administrator. The department head or Administrator shall
document such verbal warning as to date, time, place, who is present, the
reason for the verbal warning and the substance of the verbal warning.
Documentation shall be placed in the employee's personnel file.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.122 WRITTEN WARNING.
   Another method of disciplinary action is a written warning by the department
head or Administrator. The written warning shall be filed in the employee's
personnel file.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.123 SUSPENSION WITHOUT PAY.
   Suspension without pay is another method of disciplinary action, to be used
only for serious infractions or where the employee has not rectified
deficiencies noted in verbal or written warnings. (Neither a verbal warning nor
a written warning is a condition precedent for a suspension). Suspensions
without pay are limited to ten working days for any infraction. The authority
to suspend is vested in the Administrator and, if the Administrator is not
available, in the President.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.124 DISMISSAL.
   Dismissal is another method of disciplinary action for serious offenses or
for failure to correct problems or deficiencies which have resulted in written
warnings or in suspension. Dismissal shall only be after hearing with the
approval of the Board.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.125 DEMOTIONS.
   Demotions are, strictly speaking, not a disciplinary action, but the Board
may demote any employee whose work in his or her job has not been satisfactory,
but who, in the opinion of the Board, can satisfactorily perform less difficult
work.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.126 DISCIPLINARY RULES.
   The following actions may result in disciplinary action up to and including
discharge:
   (A)   Conviction of any felony, or of any misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude or dishonesty.
   (B)   Use of the employee's official position for personal gain.
   (C)   Falsification of village records or timesheets.
   (D)   Sexual harassment or discrimination based on race, color, creed,
religion, national origin or handicap.
   (E)   Carelessness in handling village equipment.
   (F)   Illegal or abusive use of sick or other leave.
   (G)   Use of, or being under the influence of, alcohol or illegal drugs as
defined by the Illinois Criminal Code while on the job, or failure to pass a
urinalysis examination as set forth in any village drug testing program.
   (H)   Incompetence in the performance of assigned duties or inattention to
duties.
   (I)   Insubordination by disobedience to any order or directive, or
disrespect toward a department
head or officer of the village.
   (J)   Misuse or abuse of village working time for personal gain or for any
reason other than performing the employee's assigned duties.
   (K)   Excessive absenteeism or tardiness, including leaving work early and
overstaying meal periods.
   (L)   Solicitation or acceptance of any gratuity, gift, present, reward or
other thing of value in return for the performance of the employee's official
duties, or as a condition for not performing those duties.
   (M)   Failure to pay promptly any indebtedness owed to the village,
including, but not limited to, taxes and utility bills.
   (N)   Habitual discourtesy or disrespect to the public or to fellow
employees.
   (O)   Theft, destruction, loss or unauthorized use of village property,
equipment and materials, either willfully or through unnecessary carelessness.
   (P)   Unauthorized dissemination of information protected from disclosure
under the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   (Q)   The loss of a license or the inability to obtain a license to operate
the plant, vehicles, or equipment which materially derogates the ability to
perform job responsibilities.
   (R)   The doing of any other act which brings disrepute upon the village or
the Village Board.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.127 HEARING RIGHTS.
   Any full or part-time employee not on probation shall have the right to a
hearing and appeal of the disciplinary action, as follows:
   (A)   (1)   Verbal and written warnings may be appealed by presentation of a
grievance in writing to the employee's department head (or, in the case of
discipline of a department head, to the Administrator) who, if possible, will
resolve the grievance. If the aggrieved employee is not satisfied with the
disposition of the written or verbal warning, the employee shall submit his
case in writing to the Administrative Committee within five working days. The
Administrative Committee shall require in writing the action taken and
justification therefore against the aggrieved employee. The Administrative
Committee may conduct a hearing allowing witnesses for both or either side to
testify, or it may call witnesses of its own, before deciding on the issue.
      (2)   The Administrative Committee shall render its decision within ten
days of the receipt of the appeal of the aggrieved employee and will advise the
aggrieved employee of its decision in writing; the decision shall be placed in
the personnel file if the verbal or written warning is sustained. The verbal or
written warning will be removed from the personnel file if the verbal or
written warning is overruled.
   (B)   In case of suspension, the employee is entitled to a hearing before
the Board. The hearing shall be pre-suspension unless in the judgment of the
President, circumstances require immediate suspension and a post-suspension
hearing. At the hearing, the employee may present witnesses, may be represented
by counsel, and may, at the employee's own expense, have a court reporter
present. The notice of hearing shall explain these rights and identify any
complainants. The President shall preside at any such hearing, and the Village
Attorney shall be present to advise the Board. After such hearing, the Board
may elect to affirm the suspension without pay, shorten or lengthen the
suspension without pay, or if it determines in a post-suspension hearing that
the suspension was improper, terminate the suspension and award back pay.
   (C)   Any employee faced with discharge is entitled to a statement of
reasons for the discharge and a pre-discharge hearing, which shall be held by
the Board in the same manner as a suspension hearing and as to which the
employee has the same rights as in a suspension hearing. The pre-discharge
hearing shall, in the case of an employee suspended without pay pending
discharge, be held in conjunction with the post-suspension hearing.
   (D)   The Board shall make its decision in a suspension or pre-discharge
hearing by majority vote of those present. The President is entitled to vote at
such hearing and shall be counted in determining the majority.
   (E)   Discipline of Police Officers other than written and verbal warnings
shall be conducted in accordance with statutes and rules governing the Board of
Fire and Police Commission and not under §§
35.123 through
35.125 and divisions (A) through (D) of this section.
   (F)   Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements may have hearing
and grievance rights in conflict with those set forth herein. In event of a
conflict the collective bargaining agreement shall control.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
TERMINATIONS
§ 35.140 RESIGNATIONS.
   An employee shall give at least ten working days written notice prior to the
effective date of resignation. The resignation shall be filed with the
employee's supervisor, who, in turn, will notify the Administrator. The
Administrator shall determine the proper termination pay and see to it that any
village property is either returned or charged as a deduction from termination
pay.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.141 LAYOFFS.
   When it is necessary in the judgment of the Board to reduce the number of
employees on the village payroll or on the payroll of any department, the
Board, or in the case of police officers the Board of Fire and Police
Commission, may lay off employees in its sole discretion. Full-time employees
shall be laid off in seniority order within department starting with the lowest
seniority employees. A laid off employee shall be paid for ten days following
the notice of layoff. An employee thus separated is eligible for re-employment
and if re-employed shall retain seniority rights as of the date of separation
for purposes of this section.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
§ 35.142 RETURN OF VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   An employee leaving the village's service, whether through resignation,
layoff or dismissal, shall return any property of the village which the
employee has in his or her possession. The property shall be returned to the
employee's supervisor, before the employee receives his or her final check.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92)
DIRECTOR BENEFITS
§ 35.155 VACATIONS.
   Directors shall earn paid vacation and time may be taken in one hour
increments at any time after it is earned in accordance with this section.
   (A)   Rate for earning vacation.
      (1)   From the date of hire until the completion of five years continuous
service: 80 hours a year per the following schedule:
      (2)   From the completion of five years of continuous service until the
completion of ten years of continuous service; 120 hours a year per the
following schedule:
      (3)   From the completion of ten years of continuous service until the
completion of 15 years of continuous service: 160 hours a year per the
following schedule:
      (4)   From the completion of 16 years of continuous service: 168 hours a
year per the following schedule:
      (5)   From the completion of 17 years of continuous service: 176 hours a
year per the following schedule:
      (6)   From the completion of 18 years of continuous service: 184 hours a
year per the following schedule:
      (7)   From the completion of 19 years of continuous service: 192 hours a
year per the following schedule:
      (8)   From the completion of 20 years of continuous service: 200 hours a
year per the following schedule:
(Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.156 COMPENSATORY TIME.
   Directors may not earn compensatory time.
(Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.157 PERSONAL LEAVE.
   Directors shall receive hours of personal leave per year. Personal leave may
not be carried forward and may be used in four hour increments.
(Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
PERSONNEL FILES
§ 35.165 CONTENTS OF PERSONNEL FILES.
   The Director of Administration shall maintain a personnel file on each
employee. The file shall contain the employee's employment application, a copy
of every annual review, copies of all letters of commendation or awards deemed
relevant by the Director, copies of verbal and written disciplinary warnings,
records pertaining to suspensions and discharge, and any other information
deemed relevant by the Director.
(Ord. 92-11, passed 4-28-92; Am. Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
§ 35.166 INSPECTION OF PERSONNEL FILES.
   The personnel files are confidential and not subject to disclosure to the
public without a legitimate subpoena or other judicial order. An employee shall
have the right, upon written request and at reasonable times and places, to
inspect and copy all or part of his or her personnel file and to request the
Director of Administration to make legitimate additions hereto or deletions
therefrom. The personnel files shall be maintained in a secure file cabinet
which shall be kept locked when not in use. The Administrative Committee shall
have free access to the personnel files and shall allow the President and other
trustees to review the files upon request.
(Ord. 02-55, passed 1-14-03)
CLASSIFICATION
§ 35.175 ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEE CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   The following classification shall be established and hereafter
designate positions of employment within the Electric Department, exclusive of
clerical or office personnel primarily engaged in matters of billing and other
administrative duties, in descending order of rate of pay, responsibility, and
authority within the Department:
      (1)   Lineman.
      (2)   Electrician.
      (3)   Assistant Electrician.
   (B)   There shall be no requirement that all three classifications, or any
particular classification or classifications, be filled at any given time.
   (C)   No employee shall have a proprietary interest in any job
classification and there shall be no presumption of automatic progression from
one classification to the next higher level. Rather, each person shall be
employed in a classification according to his or her skill, experience, and the
responsibility assigned to him or her by the Electric Department from time to
time.
   (D)   The salary or rate of pay for each classification shall be fixed by
the salary/pay provisions adopted as a part of the village appropriation
ordinance.
(Ord. 85-14, passed 10-8-85)
EMPLOYMENT PROCESS
§ 35.190 IN GENERAL.
   (A)   The process of recruitment, selection, and employment is to attract,
promote, or hire individuals who fit the needs of the village and who have the
required knowledge, skills, and abilities to perform the duties assigned to the
position being filled.
   (B)   This policy applies to all positions approved by the Village President
and Board of Trustees. Only the Village Manager has the authority to fill a
vacant position, except Village Manager, Chief of Police and police officers.
The Village Manager may appoint an individual to fill any vacancy or authorize
the recruitment and selection process described in this policy.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.191 VACANT POSITION.
   When a position becomes vacant, the department head informs the Human
Resources Coordinator and the Village Manager gives approval to initiate the
recruiting and selection process. The Human Resource Coordinator provides the
posting, hiring criteria, and job description to the supervisor of the vacant
position for review. The Human Resource Coordinator posts the vacancy and
monitors the hiring process to assure compliance with this policy.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.192 POSITION POSTING.
   Vacancies may be posted to internal applicants only or to both internal and
external applicants. All postings will contain a summary of the position’s
duties and responsibilities, and will list the salary information, knowledge,
skill, and ability requirements. Selection criteria will be included with the
costing and will be available to applicants. Generally, posted vacancies will
contain a closing date and will be posted a minimum of five working days.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.193 APPLICATION PROCESSING.
   External applicants are required to submit a resume with a cover letter and
a village employment application form. Internal applicants are required to
submit an updated resume with a cover letter. All resumes and/or applications
received for a posted position will be screened by the Human Resources
Department and separated into two categories. Category A will consist of
applicants who meet the requirements for the posted position. Category B will
consist of applicants who do not meet the posted requirements. The Human
Resources Department will provide the interviewing supervisor with all Category
A applications and resumes. The supervisor, in consultation with the Director
of Human Resources, will select the applicants to interview and return all
applications and resumes to the Human Resources Department. The Human Resources
Department will contact the applicants to schedule interviews.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.194 SELECTION; INTERVIEW.
   Generally, the village will follow a structured interview process. Interview
questions will be used to assess the applicant’s ability to perform the
essential functions of the job, with or without a reasonable accommodation, if
appropriate. All interview questions will be derived from the identified
selection criteria. Applicants who are village employees may request a post-
interview counseling session to discuss their performance in the interview. The
purpose of a post-interview counseling session is to help the employee discover
areas of knowledge, skill, and ability that should be increased in preparation
for future interview opportunities.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.195 REFERENCE CHECK; BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION.
   Reference checks and/or criminal background checks will be conducted on all
individuals prior to being offered employment with the village. The village
will not make any employment decision based on an expunged or sealed record of
conviction.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.196 JOB OFFER.
   (A)   The Human Resources Coordinator, or his or her designee, will contact
the successful applicant or appointment and make the job offer. The
unsuccessful applicants will be contacted in writing by the Human Resources
Department.
   (B)   The Human Resources Department or the Village Manager will announce
the name of the successful applicant or appointment via e-mail.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.197 VERIFICATION OF EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Certain positions within the village require particular degrees,
licenses, certifications or other designations as a condition of employment or
as a condition of continued employment. The Human Resources Coordinator is
responsible for verifying that all employees whose positions require particular
degrees, licenses, certifications or other designations have satisfied those
requirements. Copies of the appropriate documents verifying the employee’s
degree(s) or licensure(s) shall be retained in the employee’s personnel file.
Employees who have continuing educational obligations connected with any
professional license or designation required for their village position must
notify the village of such obligations and provide proof of compliance. Copies
of documents demonstrating compliance will be retained in the employee’s
personnel file.
   (B)   If a candidate who has not yet obtained the necessary credentials is
being considered for a position, the supervisor recommending the hiring should
submit a written explanation to the Village Manager and the Human Resource
Coordinator detailing the request to hire that individual. Generally, in the
event the village decides to hire an individual who is not currently in
compliance with the village’s credential requirements that individual will be
given 60 days to obtain compliance. Upon the sixty-first day, the Human
Resource Coordinator will provide verification to the Village Manager that the
individual is in compliance or will notify the Village Manager if additional
time is necessary to obtain compliance.
   (C)   Any instance of non-compliance or an employee not having the
appropriate employment-related credentials shall be brought to the attention of
the Village Manager.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.198 EMPLOYMENT ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   Applicants must certify they are legally authorized to work in the United
States. All new employees are required to complete an I-9 Employment
Eligibility Verification Form. All documentation required for the I-9 form must
be provided on the first day of employment or within three days. Failure to
supply all required documentation for the I-9 form may result in termination of
employment. The village may consider sponsorship for temporary and/or permanent
residency and/or citizenship on a case-by-case basis. The village reserves the
right to limit and deny any sponsorship requests.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
§ 35.199 EDUCATIONAL LOAN DEFAULT ACT.
   Village employees are subject to the provisions of the Educational Loan
Default Act (5 ILCS 385). The Act states, in pertinent part, that any employee
in default on any educational loan for a period of six months or more and in an
amount of $600 or more must, as a condition of employment, make satisfactory
arrangements to repay the loan. Failure to make satisfactory arrangements
within six months of the first day of employment will result in termination of
employment.
(Ord. 12-38, passed 10-9-12)
CHAPTER 36: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Prevailing wage rates
   
36.02   Investment policy
   
36.03   Motor fuel tax reimbursement account
Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policies
   
36.20   Policies incorporated by reference
Public Records; Freedom of Information Act
   
36.40   Definitions
   
36.41   Policy
   
36.42   Individual privacy protected
   
36.43   Public records available
   
36.44   Freedom of Information Act Officer
   
36.45   Requests to be in writing
   
36.46   Fees
   
36.47   Time limit for compliance with request
   
36.48   Extension of time limit (non-commercial purpose); notice
   
36.49   Unduly burdensome requests
   
36.50   Certain information exempt from inspection and copying
   
36.51   Notice of denial of request; request for review
   
36.52   Public Access Counselor; opinions
   
36.53   Granting of request; procedure for inspection
   
36.54   Written request not required for certain documents
   
36.55   Special provisions pertaining to certain law enforcement records
   
36.56   Dissemination of information about public bodies
   
36.57   List of categories of records
Identity Protection Policy
   
36.70   Identity Protection Policy incorporated by reference
   
Appendix A:   Exempt Materials per the FOIA (as amended 2009)
Cross-reference:
   Sexual Harassment Policy, see §
31.03
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 PREVAILING WAGE RATES.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by the Prevailing Wage Act, ILCS Ch.
820, Act 130, §§ 0.01 et seq., the general prevailing rate of wages in this
locality for laborers, mechanics, and other workers engaged in construction of
public works coming under the jurisdiction of the village, is hereby
ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for construction
work in the county area as of June, 1993, as determined by the Department of
Labor, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance 93-35 as Exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any terms appearing in this
section which are also used in the Act shall be the same as in the Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply the general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the village, to the extent required by the Act.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection
by any interested party in the main office of the village, this determination
or any revisions of the prevailing rate of wages. A copy of this determination
or of any revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect
shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   (D)   The Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any employer, and
to any association of employers and to any person or association of employees
who have filed their names and addresses, requesting copies of any
determination stating the particular rates and the particular class of workers
whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   (E)   The Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this section with
the Secretary of State Index Division.
   (F)   The Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation with the area, a notice in the form of Exhibit B as attached to
Ordinance 93-35, that this determination of this public body is effective.
(Ord. 90-16, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 90-35, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 91-37, passed
8-13-91; Am. Ord. 92-25, passed 7-7-92; Am. Ord. 93-35, passed 7-13-93)
§ 36.02 INVESTMENT POLICY.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted a village investment policy, a copy of which
is attached to Ordinance 90-10 as Exhibit A and herein incorporated by
reference.
   (B)   All deposits and investments of village funds shall henceforth be in
accordance with the village investment policy.
(Ord. 90-10, passed 3-13-90)
§ 36.03 MOTOR FUEL TAX REIMBURSEMENT ACCOUNT.
   From and after the effective date of this section, it shall be the policy of
the village that all funds contained in the Motor Fuel Tax Reimbursement
Account of the General Fund of the village shall be earmarked for expenditure
on street purposes only.
(Ord. 92-19, passed 6-9-92)
DRUG AND ALCOHOL ABUSE POLICIES
§ 36.20 POLICIES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   For CDL drivers. The Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy referred to in
Section 1 of Ordinance No. 08-04 and attached thereto shall apply to all
village employees who are required to hold a valid commercial driver’s license.
A copy of this Policy is available for public inspection during normal business
hours in the office of the Village Clerk.
   (B)   For police officers and dispatch employees. The Drug and Alcohol Abuse
Policy referred to in Section 2 of Ordinance No. 08-04 and attached thereto
shall apply to all police officers and dispatch employees of the village. A
copy of this Policy is available for public inspection during normal business
hours in the office of the Village Clerk.
   (C)   For all other full-time or permanent part-time employees. The Drug and
Alcohol Policy referred to in Section 3 of Ordinance No. 08-04 and attached
thereto shall apply to all full-time or permanent part-time employees of the
village, except for those employees described in divisions (A) and (B) above. A
copy of this Policy is available for public inspection during normal business
hours in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 95-58, passed 11-28-95; Am. Ord. 08-04, passed 1-22-08)
PUBLIC RECORDS; FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
§ 36.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL PURPOSE.  The use of any part of a public record or records, or
information derived from public records, in any form for sale, resale, or
solicitation or advertisement for sales or services. For purposes of this
definition, requests made by news media and non-profit, scientific, or academic
organizations shall not be considered to be made for a COMMERCIAL PURPOSE when
the principal purpose of the request is (1) to access and disseminate
information concerning news and current or passing events, (2) for articles of
opinion or features of interest to the public, or (3) for the purpose of
academic, scientific, or public research or education.
   COPYING.  The reproduction of any public record by means of any
photographic, electronic, mechanical, or other process, device or means now
known or hereafter developed and available to the village.
   EXEMPT MATERIALS.  Materials which are exempt from disclosure pursuant to
Sections 7 and 7.5 of the Freedom of Information Act. See Appendix A to this
subchapter.
   FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT or "FOIA".  The Illinois Freedom of Information
Act, 5 ILCS 140/1.1 et seq.
   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, organization, or
association, acting individually or as a group.
   PRIVATE INFORMATION.  Unique identifiers, including a person's social
security number, driver's license number, employee identification number,
biometric identifiers, personal financial information, passwords or other
access codes, medical records, home or personal telephone numbers, and personal
email addresses.  PRIVATE INFORMATION also includes home address and personal
license plates, except as otherwise provided by law or when compiled without
possibility of attribution to any person.
   PUBLIC ACCESS COUNSELOR.  The Public Access Counselor is an Illinois
Attorney General Office appointee responsible for various duties described in
Section 9.5 of the Illinois Freedom of Information Act and Section 7 of the
Attorney General Act (15 ILCS 205/7). Contact information for the Public Access
Counselor is as follows:
               Public Access Bureau
               500 S. 2nd Street Springfield, Illinois 62706
               217-558-0486
               publicaccess@atg.state.il.us
   PUBLIC RECORD.  All records, reports, forms, writings, letters, memoranda,
books, papers, maps, photographs, microfilms, cards, tapes, recordings,
electronic data processing records, electronic communications, recorded
information and all other documentary materials pertaining to the transaction
of public business, regardless of physical form or characteristics, having been
prepared by or for, or having been or being used by, received by, in the
possession of, or under the control of the village. PUBLIC RECORD also includes
the following:
      (1)   All records relating to the obligation, receipt, and use of public
funds.
      (2)   Certified payroll records submitted to the village under Section 5
(a)(2) of the Prevailing Wage Act [820 ILCS 130/5] are public records; except
that contractors' employees' addresses, telephone numbers, and social security
numbers must be redacted by the village prior to disclosure.
      (3)   Arrest reports (except for arrests of persons under the age of 21
subject to the Juvenile Court Act of 1987). (See §
36.55 for further provisions with respect to arrest reports).
      (4)   Criminal history records (except for arrests of persons under the
age of 21 subject to the Juvenile Court Act of 1987), including but not limited
to:
         (a)   Court records that are public;
         (b)   Records that are otherwise available under state or local law;
and
         (c)   Records in which the requesting party is the individual
identified, except as provided under Section 7(l)(d)(vi) [5 ILCS 140/7] of the
Freedom of Information Act.
   VILLAGE.  The Village of Chatham, Illinois.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.41 POLICY.
   It is declared to be the public policy of the village that all persons are
entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of the village.
The official acts and policies of the public officials and public employees of
the village shall be consistent with the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.42 INDIVIDUAL PRIVACY PROTECTED.
   This subchapter is not intended to be used to violate individual privacy or
to disrupt the duly undertaken work of the village.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.43 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Freedom of Information Act.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.44 FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICER.
   (A)   The village shall designate one or more officials or employees to act
as its Freedom of Information Act officer ("FOIA Officer"). The Chief of Police
is hereby designated as deputy FOIA Officer for FOIA requests involving the
police department and the Village Attorney is designated as deputy FOIA Officer
in the place and stead of the FOIA Officer if the FOIA Officer is unavailable.
Except in instances when records are furnished immediately, the FOIA Officer,
or designee, shall receive requests submitted to the village under this
subchapter and issue responses accordingly. All village officers and employees
who receive a FOIA request from any source whatsoever shall notify the FOIA
Officer within one working day. If the FOIA Officer is not available, the
Village Attorney shall be notified. Upon receiving a request for a public
record, the FOIA Officer shall:
      (1)   Note the date the village receives the written request;
      (2)   Compute the day on which the period for response will expire and
make a notation of that date on the written request;
      (3)   Maintain an electronic or paper copy of a written request,
including all documents submitted with the request until the request has been
complied with or denied; and
      (4)   Create a file for the retention of the original request, a copy of
the response, a record of written communications with the requester, and a copy
of other communications.
   (B)   The Village FOIA Officer and deputies shall, by July 1, 2010,
successfully complete an electronic training curriculum to be developed by the
Public Access Counselor and thereafter successfully complete an annual training
program. Thereafter, whenever a new FOIA Officer is designated by the village,
that person shall successfully complete the electronic training curriculum
within 30 days after assuming the position. Successful completion of the
required training curriculum within the periods provided shall be a
prerequisite to continue serving as a FOIA Officer.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.45 REQUESTS TO BE IN WRITING.
   (A)   All requests for inspection or copying of public records shall be in
writing and shall be addressed to the FOIA Officer. The requestor shall include
the following information in any request for public records:
      (1)   The requestor's full name, mailing address and telephone number at
which the requestor can be reached during normal business hours;
      (2)   A description of the records sought, as specific as possible;
      (3)   An indication of whether the records are requested for a commercial
purpose and whether the requestor seeks a fee waiver; and
      (4)   A statement as to whether the request is for inspection, copying,
or both.
   (B)   The FOIA Officer shall make available a form for use by requestors;
however, no request shall be denied for failure to use the form. All requests
for inspection and copying received by the village shall immediately be
forwarded to its FOIA Officer or designee.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.46 FEES.
   (A)   The village hereby establishes and shall charge fees reasonably
calculated to reimburse its actual cost for reproducing and certifying public
records and for the use, by any person, of the equipment of the village to copy
records. Such fees exclude the costs of any search for and review of the
record, and shall not exceed the actual cost of reproduction and certification,
unless otherwise provided by state statute. The charge for copying shall be
$.10 per page for photocopies, $.05 per page for computer printouts, and $2.50
per audio tape, CD, or DVD. No fees shall be charged for the first 50 pages of
black and white, letter or legal sized copies requested by a requestor. If the
village provides copies in color or in a size other than letter or legal, it
shall charge the actual cost for reproducing the records. In calculating the
actual cost for reproducing records or for the use of the equipment of the
village to reproduce the records, the village shall not include the costs of
any search for and review of the records or other personnel costs associated
with reproducing the records. The cost for certifying a record shall be $1.
   (B)   Documents shall be furnished without charge or at a reduced charge
where the village determines that waiver or reduction of the fee is in the
public interest because furnishing information can be considered as primarily
benefitting the general public. Waiver or reduction of the fee is in the public
interest if the principal purpose of the request is to access and disseminate
information regarding the health, safety and welfare or the legal rights of the
general public and is not for the principal purpose of personal or commercial
benefit. For purposes of this section, "commercial benefit" shall not apply to
requests made by news media when the principal purpose of the request is to
access and disseminate information regarding the health, safety, and welfare or
the legal rights of the general public. In setting the amount of the waiver or
reduction, the village may take into consideration the amount of materials
requested and the cost of copying them.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.47 TIME LIMIT FOR COMPLIANCE WITH REQUEST.
   (A)   Compliance with request (non-commercial purpose).  The village shall
either comply with or deny a request for public records within five business
days after its receipt. If the village fails to respond to a request within the
requisite periods in this section but thereafter provides the requester with
copies of the requested public records may not impose a fee for such copies. If
the village fails to respond to a request received may not treat the request as
unduly burdensome under §
36.49. Denials shall be in writing and in accordance with §
36.51.
   (B)   Compliance with request (commercial purpose). The village shall
respond to a request for records to be used for a commercial purpose within 21
working days after receipt. The response shall:
      (1)   Provide to the requestor an estimate of the time required by the
village to provide the records requested and an estimate of the fees to be
charged, which the village may require the person to pay in full before copying
the requested documents;
      (2)   Deny the request pursuant to one or more of the exemptions set out
in this subchapter;
      (3)   Notify the requestor that the request is unduly burdensome and
extend an opportunity to the requestor to attempt to reduce the request to
manageable proportions; or
      (4)   Provide the records requested.
   (C)   Unless the records are exempt from disclosure (see Appendix A to this
subchapter), the village shall comply with a request within a reasonable period
considering the size and complexity of the request, and giving priority to
records requested for non-commercial purposes. No person shall knowingly obtain
a public record for a commercial purpose without disclosing that it is for a
commercial purpose, if requested to do so by the village.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.48 EXTENSION OF TIME LIMIT (NON-COMMERCIAL PURPOSE); NOTICE.
   (A)   The time limit prescribed in §
36.47(A) may be extended in each case for not more than five additional
business days from the original due date for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The requested records are stored in whole or in part at other
locations other than the office having charge of the requested records.
      (2)   The request requires the collection of a substantial number of
specified records.
      (3)   The request is couched in categorical terms and requires an
extensive search for the records responsive to it.
      (4)   The requested records have not been located in the course of
routine search and additional efforts are being made to locate them.
      (5)   The requested records require examination and evaluation by
personnel having the necessary competence and discretion to determine if they
are exempt from disclosure under the terms of the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act or should be revealed only with appropriate deletions.
      (6)   The request for records cannot be complied with by the village
within the time limits prescribed by the foregoing paragraph without unduly
burdening or interfering with the operations of the village.
      (7)   There is a need for consultation, which shall be conducted with all
practicable speed, with another public body or among two or more components of
a public body having a substantial interest in the determination or in the
subject matter of the request.
   (B)   The person making a request and the village may agree in writing to
extend the time for compliance for a period to be determined by the parties. If
the requestor and the village agree to extend the period for compliance, a
failure by the village to comply with any previous deadlines shall not be
treated as a denial of the request for the records.
   (C)   When additional time is required for any of the above reasons, the
FOIA Officer shall notify the person making the request, by letter, within the
five business days after receipt of the request, of the reasons for the delay
and the date by which the records will be made available or denial will be
forthcoming. In no instance may the delay in processing last longer than five
business days. A failure to render a decision within the time permitted for
extension shall be considered a denial of the request.
   (D)   If the village fails to respond to a request within the time permitted
for extension but thereafter provides the requestor with copies of the
requested public records, the village may not impose a fee for those copies. If
the village requests an extension and subsequently fails to respond to the
request, it may not treat the request as unduly burdensome under §
36.49.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.49 UNDULY BURDENSOME REQUESTS.
   (A)   Requests calling for all records falling within a category shall be
complied with unless compliance with the request would be unduly burdensome for
the village, there is no method of narrowing the request, and the burden on the
village strongly outweighs the public interest in the information. Before
invoking this exemption, the village shall extend to the person making the
request an opportunity to confer with it in an attempt to reduce the request to
manageable proportions. If the village responds to a categorical request by
stating that compliance would unduly burden its operation and the conditions
described above are met, it shall do so in a writing signed by the FOIA Officer
specifying the reasons why it would be unduly burdensome and the extent to
which compliance will so burden the operation of the village. Such a response
shall be treated as a denial of the request for information.
   (B)   Repeated requests for the same public records by the same person shall
be deemed unduly burdensome. Repeated requests from the same person for the
same records that are unchanged or identical to records previously provided or
properly denied under this subchapter shall be deemed unduly burdensome.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.50 CERTAIN INFORMATION EXEMPT FROM INSPECTION AND COPYING.
   (A)   Information exempted by Sections 7 and 7.5 of the Freedom of
Information Act shall be exempt from inspection and copying (see Appendix A to
this subchapter). If a record contains both exempt and nonexempt information,
the village may elect to redact the information that is exempt and make the
remainder of the record available for inspection and copying.
   (B)   Moreover, information described in divisions (1) through (4) of the
definition for "Public Record" may be withheld if it is determined that
disclosure would: (1) interfere with pending or actually and reasonably
contemplated law enforcement proceedings conducted by any law enforcement
agency; (2) endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement or
correctional personnel or any other person; or (3) compromise the security of
any correctional facility.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.51 NOTICE OF DENIAL OF REQUEST; REQUEST FOR REVIEW.
   (A)   The FOIA Officer, when denying a request for public record, shall
notify the requestor, by letter, of the decision to deny the information, the
reason for the denial, including a detailed factual basis for the application
of any exemption claimed, and the names and titles or positions of each person
responsible for the denial.
   (B)   Each notice of denial by the FOIA Officer shall inform the person of
the right to review by the Public Access Counselor and provide the address and
phone number for the Public Access Counselor.
   (C)   Each notice of denial shall also inform such person of his or her
right to judicial review in accordance with Section 11 of the Freedom of
Information Act.
   (D)   When a request is denied on the grounds that the records are exempt
under the provisions of this subchapter, the notice of denial shall specify the
exemption claimed to authorize the denial and briefly explain how the exemption
applies to the specified records withheld.
   (E)   Copies of all notices of denials shall be retained by the village in a
single central office file that is open to the public and indexed according to
the type of exemption asserted and, to the extent feasible, according to the
types of records requested.
   (F)   Any person making a request for public records shall be deemed to have
exhausted his or her administrative remedies with respect to that request if
the village fails to act within the time periods provided in §
36.47 and §
36.48.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.52 PUBLIC ACCESS COUNSELOR; OPINIONS.
   (A)   A person whose request to inspect or copy a public record is denied by
the village may file a request for review with the Public Access Counselor
established in the Office of the Attorney General not later than 60 days after
the date of the final denial. The request for review must be in writing, signed
by the requester, and include (1) a copy of the request for access to records
and (2) any responses from the public body.
   (B)   If the village receives a request for records, and asserts that the
records are exempt under general exemptions (1)(C) or (1)(F) (see Appendix A of
this subchapter), it shall, within the time periods provided for responding to
a request, provide written notice to the requester and the Public Access
Counselor of its intent to deny the request in whole or in part. The notice
shall include:
      (1)   A copy of the request for access to records;
      (2)   The proposed response from the public body; and
      (3)   A detailed summary of the public body's basis for asserting the
exemption.
   (C)   In accordance with FOIA, upon receipt of a notice of intent to deny
from the village, the Public Access Counselor determines whether further
inquiry is warranted. Within five working days after receipt of the notice of
intent to deny, the Public Access Counselor notifies the village and the
requester whether further inquiry is warranted. If the Public Access Counselor
determines that further inquiry is warranted, the procedures set out in this
section regarding the review of denials, including the production of documents,
shall also be applicable to the inquiry and resolution of a notice of intent to
deny from the village. Times for response or compliance by the village under §
36.47 and §
36.48 shall be tolled until the Public Access Counselor concludes his or her
inquiry.
   (D)   In accordance with FOIA, upon receipt of a request for review, the
Public Access Counselor determines whether further action is warranted. If the
Public Access Counselor determines that the alleged violation is unfounded, he
or she so advises the requester and the village and no further action shall be
undertaken. In all other cases, the Public Access Counselor forwards a copy of
the request for review to the village within seven working days after receipt
and specifies the records or other documents that the village shall furnish to
facilitate the review. Within seven working days after receipt of the request
for review, the FOIA Officer shall provide copies of records requested and
shall otherwise fully cooperate with the Public Access Counselor. If the FOIA
Officer fails to furnish specified records pursuant to this section, or if
otherwise necessary, the Attorney General may issue a subpoena to any person or
public body having knowledge of or records pertaining to a request for review
of a denial of access to records under the Freedom of Information Act. By
statute, to the extent that records or documents produced by the village
contain information that is claimed to be exempt from disclosure under Appendix
A of this subchapter, the Public Access Counselor does not further disclose
that information.
   (E)   In accordance with FOIA, within seven working days after it receives a
copy of a request for review and request for production of records from the
Public Access Counselor, the FOIA Officer may, but is not required to, answer
the allegations of the request for review. The answer may take the form of a
letter, brief, or memorandum. The Public Access Counselor forwards a copy of
the answer to the person submitting the request for review, with any alleged
confidential information to which the request pertains redacted from the copy.
The requester may, but is not required to, respond in writing to the answer
within seven working days and shall provide a copy of the response to the
village, in addition to the request for review, and the answer and the response
thereto, if any, a requester or the village may furnish affidavits or records
concerning any matter germane to the review.
   (F)   (1)   In accordance with FOIA, unless the Public Access Counselor
extends the time by no more than 21 business days by sending written notice to
the requester and the village that includes a statement of the reasons for the
extension in the notice, or decides to address the matter without the issuance
of a binding opinion, the Attorney General examines the issues and the records,
makes findings of fact and conclusions of law, and issues to the requester and
the village an opinion in response to the request for review within 60 days
after its receipt. The opinion is binding upon both the requester and the
village, subject to administrative review under Section 11.5 of the Freedom of
Information Act [5 ILCS 140/11.5].
      (2)   Upon receipt of a binding opinion concluding that a violation of
FOIA has occurred, the FOIA Officer shall either take necessary action
immediately to comply with the directive of the opinion or shall initiate
administrative review under Section 11.5 of FOIA. If the opinion concludes that
no violation of FOIA has occurred, the requester may initiate administrative
review under Section 11.5 of FOIA. If the village discloses records in
accordance with an opinion of the Attorney General, it is immune from all
liabilities by reason thereof and shall not be liable for penalties under FOIA.
   (G)   In accordance with FOIA, the Attorney General may also issue advisory
opinions to the Village regarding compliance with FOIA. A review may be
initiated upon receipt of a written request from the Village Mayor or the
Village Attorney, which shall contain sufficient accurate facts from which a
determination can be made. The Public Access Counselor may request additional
information from the village in order to assist in the review. If the village
relies in good faith on an advisory opinion of the Attorney General in
responding to a request, it is not liable for penalties under FOIA, so long as
the facts upon which the opinion is based have been fully and fairly disclosed
to the Public Access Counselor.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.53 GRANTING OF REQUEST; PROCEDURE FOR INSPECTION.
   When a freedom of information request is granted, the documents will be made
available for inspection at the Village Hall during regular business hours.
Copies shall be made upon request as set forth in §
36.46.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.54 WRITTEN REQUEST NOT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN DOCUMENTS.
   The following documents shall be made available for inspection and copying
without a written request; however, the requestor shall contact the FOIA
Officer or designee in advance to set a mutually convenient time. These
documents, if copied, shall be subject to the copying fee set forth in §
36.46:
   (A)   Ordinances and written resolutions.
   (B)   The journal of the Board of Trustees, not including executive session
minutes.
   (C)   Any personnel code, building code, other technical code, or any other
regulation of the village adopted by the village, whether by ordinance,
resolution or otherwise.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.55 SPECIAL PROVISIONS PERTAINING TO CERTAIN LAW ENFORCEMENT RECORDS.
   The following chronologically maintained arrest and criminal history
information maintained by the village Police Department shall be furnished as
soon as practical, but in no event later than 72 hours after the arrest,
notwithstanding the time limits otherwise provided for in §
36.47 of this subchapter:
   (A)   Information that identifies the individual, including the name, age,
address, and photograph, when and if available;
   (B)   Information detailing any charges relating to the arrest;
   (C)   The time and location of the arrest;
   (D)   The name of the investigating or arresting law enforcement agency;
   (E)   If the individual is incarcerated, the amount of any bail or bond; and
   (F)   If the individual is incarcerated, the time and date that the
individual was received into, discharged from, or transferred from the village
Police Department's custody.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.56 DISSEMINATION OF INFORMATION ABOUT PUBLIC BODIES.
   (A)   The village shall prominently display at the Village Hall, make
available for inspection and copying without charge, and shall send through the
mail if requested, each of the following:
      (1)   A brief description of itself, which will include, but not be
limited to a short summary of its purpose, a block diagram giving its
functional subdivisions, the total amount of its operating budget, the number
and location of all of its separate offices, the approximate number of full and
part-time employees, and the identification and membership of any board,
commission, committee, or council which operates in an advisory capacity
relative to the operation of the village, or which exercises control over its
policies or procedures, or to which the village is required to report and be
answerable for its operations;
      (2)   A brief description of the methods whereby the public may request
information and public records, a directory designating for the FOIA Officer or
officers, the address where requests for public records should be directed, and
any fees' allowable under §
36.46; and
   (B)   The village shall also post this information on its website, if one is
maintained.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
§ 36.57 LIST OF CATEGORIES OF RECORDS.
   As to public records prepared or received after the effective date of this
subchapter, the FOIA Officer shall maintain and make available for inspection
and copying a reasonably current list of all types or categories of records
under its control. The list shall be reasonably detailed in order to aid
persons in obtaining access to public records pursuant to this subchapter. The
FOIA Officer shall furnish upon request a description of the manner in which
public records stored by means of electronic data processing may be obtained in
a form comprehensible to persons lacking knowledge of computer language or
printout format.
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
IDENTITY PROTECTION POLICY
§ 36.70 IDENTITY PROTECTION POLICY INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE.
   The Identity Protection Policy pursuant to the Illinois Identity Protection
Act referred to in Section 1 of Ordinance No. 14-20 is incorporated as if set
forth in full herein. A copy of this policy is available for public inspection
during normal business hours in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 14-20, passed 4-22-14)
APPENDIX A: EXEMPT MATERIALS PER THE FOIA (AS AMENDED 2009)
Section 7 of FOIA: General Exemptions
   (1)   The following shall be exempt from inspection and copying:
      (A)   Information specifically prohibited from disclosure by federal or
state law or rules and regulations implementing federal or state law.
      (B)   Private information, unless disclosure is required by another
provision of this Act, a state or federal law or a court order.
      (C)   Personal information contained within public records, the
disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal
privacy, unless the disclosure is consented to in writing by the individual
subjects of the information. "Unwarranted invasion of personal privacy" means
the disclosure of information that is highly personal or objectionable to a
reasonable person and in which the subject's right to privacy outweighs any
legitimate public interest in obtaining the information. The disclosure of
information that bears on the public duties of public employees and officials
shall not be considered an invasion of personal privacy.
      (D)   Records in the possession of the village created in the course of
administrative enforcement proceedings, and any law enforcement or correctional
agency for law enforcement purposes, but only to the extent that disclosure
would:
         (i)   interfere with pending or actually and reasonably contemplated
law enforcement proceedings conducted by any law enforcement or correctional
agency that is the recipient of the request;
         (ii)   interfere with active administrative enforcement proceedings
conducted by the village that is the recipient of the request;
         (iii)   create a substantial likelihood that a person will be deprived
of a fair trial or an impartial hearing;
         (iv)   unavoidably disclose the identity of a confidential source,
confidential information furnished only by the confidential source, or persons
who file complaints with or provide information to administrative,
investigative, law enforcement, or penal agencies; except that the identities
of witnesses to traffic accidents, traffic accident reports, and rescue reports
shall be provided by agencies of local government, except when disclosure would
interfere with an active criminal investigation conducted by the agency that is
the recipient of the request;
         (v)   disclose unique or specialized investigative techniques other
than those generally used and known or disclose internal documents of
correctional agencies related to detection, observation or investigation of
incidents of crime or misconduct, and disclosure would result in demonstrable
harm to the agency or public body that is the recipient of the request;
         (vi)   endanger the life or physical safety of law enforcement
personnel or any other person; or
         (vii)   obstruct an ongoing criminal investigation by the agency that
is the recipient of the request.
      (E)   Records that relate to or affect the security of correctional
institutions and detention facilities.
      (F)   Preliminary drafts, notes, recommendations, memoranda and other
records in which opinions are expressed, or policies or actions are formulated,
except that a specific record or relevant portion of a record shall not be
exempt when the record is publicly cited and identified by the Village Mayor.
      (G)   Trade secrets and commercial or financial information obtained from
a person or business where the trade secrets or commercial or financial
information are furnished under a claim that they are proprietary, privileged
or confidential, and that disclosure of the trade secrets or commercial or
financial information would cause competitive harm to the person or business,
and only insofar as the claim directly applies to the records requested.
         (i)   All trade secrets and commercial or financial information
obtained by the village, including a public pension fund, from a private equity
fund or a privately held company within the investment portfolio of a private
equity fund as a result of either investing or evaluating a potential
investment of public funds in a private equity fund. The exemption contained in
this item does not apply to the aggregate financial performance information of
a private equity fund, nor to the identity of the fund's managers or general
partners. The exemption contained in this item does not apply to the identity
of a privately held company within the investment portfolio of a private equity
fund, unless the disclosure of the identity of a privately-held company may
cause competitive harm. Nothing contained in this division (G) shall be
construed to prevent a person or business from consenting to disclosure.
      (H)   Proposals and bids for any contract, grant, or agreement, including
information which if it were disclosed would frustrate procurement or give an
advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contractor agreement with the
village, until an award or final selection is made. Information prepared by or
for the village in preparation of a bid solicitation shall be exempt until an
award or final selection is made.
      (I)   Valuable formulae, computer geographic systems, designs, drawings
and research data obtained or produced by any public body when disclosure could
reasonably be expected to produce private gain or public loss. The exemption
for "computer geographic systems" provided in this division (I) does not extend
to requests made by news media as defined in Section 2 of the FOIA when the
requested information is not otherwise exempt and the only purpose of the
request is to access and disseminate information regarding the health, safety,
welfare, or legal rights of the general public.
      (J)   Architects' plans, engineers' technical submissions, and other
construction related technical documents for projects not constructed or
developed in whole or in part with public funds and the same for projects
constructed or developed with public funds, including but not limited to power
generating and distribution stations and other transmission and distribution
facilities, water treatment facilities, airport facilities, sport stadiums,
convention centers, and all government owned, operated, or occupied buildings,
but only to the extent that disclosure would compromise security.
      (K)   Minutes of meetings of public bodies closed to the public as
provided in the Open Meetings Act until the public body makes the minutes
available to the public under Section 2.06 of the Open Meetings Act.
      (L)   Communications between the village and its attorney or auditor
representing the village that would not be subject to discovery in litigation,
and materials prepared or compiled by or for the village in anticipation of a
criminal, civil or administrative proceeding upon the request of the Village
Attorney advising the village, and materials prepared or compiled with respect
to internal audits of the village.
      (M)   Records relating to the village's adjudication of employee
grievances or disciplinary cases; however, this exemption shall not extend to
the final outcome of cases in which discipline is imposed.
      (N)   Administrative or technical information associated with automated
data processing operations, including but not limited to software, operating
protocols, computer program abstracts, file layouts, source listings, object
modules, load modules, user guides, documentation pertaining to all logical and
physical design of computerized systems, employee manuals, and any other
information that, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security of the system or
its data or the security of materials exempt under this section.
      (O)   Records relating to collective negotiating matters between the
village and its employees or representatives, except that any final contract or
agreement shall be subject to inspection and copying.
      (P)   Test questions, scoring keys, and other examination data used to
determine the qualifications of an applicant for a license or employment.
      (Q)   The records, documents and information relating to real estate
purchase negotiations until those negotiations have been completed or otherwise
terminated. With regard to a parcel involved in a pending or actually and
reasonably contemplated eminent domain proceeding under the Eminent Domain Act,
records, documents and information relating to that parcel shall be exempt
except as may be allowed under discovery rules adopted by the Illinois Supreme
Court. The records, documents and information relating to a real estate sale
shall be exempt until a sale is consummated.
      (R)   Any and all proprietary information and records related to the
operation of an intergovernmental risk management association or self-insurance
pool or jointly self-administered health and accident cooperative or pool.
Insurance or self insurance (including any intergovernmental risk management
association or self insurance pool) claims, loss or risk management
information, records, data, advice or communications.
      (S)   Information contained in or related to examination, operating, or
condition reports prepared by, on behalf of, or for the use of the village
responsible for the regulation or supervision of financial institutions or
insurance companies, unless disclosure is otherwise required by state law.
      (T)   Information that would disclose or might lead to the disclosure of
secret or confidential information, codes, algorithms, programs, or private
keys intended to be used to create electronic or digital signatures under the
Electronic Commerce Security Act.
      (U)   Vulnerability assessments, security measures, and response policies
or plans that are designed to identify, prevent, or respond to potential
attacks upon a community's population or systems, facilities, or installations,
the destruction or contamination of which would constitute a clear and present
danger to the health or safety of the community, but only to the extent that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the effectiveness of the
measures or the safety of the personnel who implement them or the public.
Information exempt under this item may include such things as details
pertaining to the mobilization or deployment of personnel or equipment, to the
operation of communication systems or protocols, or to tactical operations.
      (V)   Maps and other records regarding the location or security of
generation, transmission, distribution, storage, gathering, treatment, or
switching facilities owned by a utility, by a power generator, or by the
Illinois Power Agency.
      (W)   Information contained in or related to proposals, bids, or
negotiations related to electric power procurement under Section 1-75 of the
Illinois Power Agency Act and Section 16-111.5 of the Public Utilities Act that
is determined to be confidential and proprietary by the Illinois Power Agency
or by the Illinois Commerce Commission.
   (2)   A public record that is not in the possession of the village but is in
the possession of a party with whom the agency has contracted to perform a
governmental function on behalf of the village, and that directly relates to
the governmental function and is not otherwise exempt under this Act, shall be
considered a public record of the village, for purposes of the FOIA.
Section 7.5 of FOIA: Statutory Exemptions
   To the extent provided for by the statutes referenced below, the following
shall be exempt from inspection and copying:
   (A)   All information determined to be confidential under Section 4002 of
the Technology Advancement and Development Act [20 ILCS 700/4002].
   (B)   Library circulation and order records identifying library users with
specific materials under the Library Records Confidentiality Act [75 ILCS 70/
1 et seq.].
   (C)   Applications, related documents, and medical records received by the
Experimental Organ Transplantation Procedures Board and any and all documents
or other records prepared by the Experimental Organ Transplantation Procedures
Board or its staff relating to applications it has received.
   (D)   Information and records held by the Department of Public Health and
its authorized representatives relating to known or suspected cases of sexually
transmissible disease or any information the disclosure of which is restricted
under the Illinois Sexually Transmissible Disease Control Act [410 ILCS 325/
1 et seq.].
   (E)   Information the disclosure of which is exempted under Section 30 of
the Radon Industry Licensing Act [420 ILCS 44/30].
   (F)   Firm performance evaluations under Section 55 of the Architectural,
Engineering, and Land Surveying Qualifications Based Selection Act [30 ILCS
535/55].
   (G)   Information the disclosure of which is restricted and exempted under
Section 50 of the Illinois Prepaid Tuition Act [110 ILCS 979/50].
   (H)   Information the disclosure of which is exempted under the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act [5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.], and records of any
lawfully created state or local inspector general's office that would be exempt
if created or obtained by an executive inspector general's office under that
Act.
   (I)   Information contained in a local emergency energy plan submitted to a
municipality in accordance with a local emergency energy plan ordinance that is
adopted under Section 11-21.5-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code [65 ILCS 5/11-
21.5-5].
   (J)   Information and data concerning the distribution of surcharge moneys
collected and remitted by wireless carriers under the Wireless Emergency
Telephone Safety Act [50 ILCS 751/1 et seq.].
   (K)   Law enforcement officer identification information or driver
identification information compiled by a law enforcement agency or the
Department of Transportation under Section 11-212 of the Illinois Vehicle Code
[625 ILCS 5/11-212].
   (L)   Records and information provided to a residential health care facility
resident sexual assault and death review team or the Executive Council under
the Abuse Prevention Review Team Act [210 ILCS 28/1 et seq.].
   (M)   Information provided to the predatory lending database created
pursuant to Article 3 of the Residential Real Property Disclosure Act [765 ILCS
77/70 et seq.], except to the extent authorized under that Article.
   (N)   Defense budgets and petitions for certification of compensation and
expenses for court appointed trial counsel as provided under Sections 10 and 15
of the Capital Crimes Litigation Act [725 ILCS 124/10 and 725 ILCS 124/15].
This subsection (n) shall apply until the conclusion of the trial of the case,
even if the prosecution chooses not to pursue the death penalty prior to trial
or sentencing.
   (O)   Information that is prohibited from being disclosed under Section 4 of
the Illinois Health and Hazardous Substances Registry Act [410 ILCS 525/4].
   (P)   Security portions of system safety program plans, investigation
reports, surveys, schedules, lists, data, or information compiled, collected,
or prepared by or for the Regional Transportation Authority under Section 2.11
of the Regional Transportation Authority Act [70-3615/2.11] or the St. Clair
County Transit District under the Bi-State Transit Safety Act [45-111/1 et
seq.].
   (Q)   Information prohibited from being disclosed by the Personnel Records
Review Act.
   (R)   Information prohibited from being disclosed by the Illinois School
Student Records Act [105 ILCS 10/1 et seq.].
   (S)   Information the disclosure of which is restricted under Section 5-108
of the Public Utilities Act [220 ILCS 5/5-108].
(Ord. 10-02, passed 1-12-10)
CHAPTER 37: VILLAGE OFFICIAL AND EMPLOYEE ETHICS
Section
   
37.01   Definitions
   
37.02   Prohibited political activities
   
37.03   Gift ban—General rule
   
37.04   Exceptions to general rule
   
37.05   Disposition of gifts
   
37.06   Ethics advisor
   
37.99   Penalty
§ 37.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Illinois Gift Ban Act, Public Act 90-737 (5 ILCS 425/1 et seq.).
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or
vice-presidential electors, but does not include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in Section 1-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS
5/1-3).
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING has the same meaning as that term is defined in
Section 3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations Act (5 ILCS 315/3).
   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
chapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal
time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of
absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed,
COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on premises
under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer or
employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 9-1.4
of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-1.4).
   EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the village, whether on a full-time or part-
time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction
and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work
is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
   EMPLOYER. The Village of Chatham.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance,
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
      (1)   Compensation for employment:
      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and
      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a county clerk under
Section 9-3 of the Election Code (10 ILCS 5/9-3), but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a county
clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
      (4)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
      (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
      (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
      (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
      (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
      (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
      (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE.  Any person or entity who or which:
      (1)   Is seeking official action by an officer, by an employee, or by the
officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business with the officer, with an
employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated by the officer, by an employee, or by
the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Chatham, Illinois.
(Ord. 00-03, passed 1-25-00; Am. Ord. 04-21, passed 5-11-04)
§ 37.02 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the Village in
connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity as part
of that officer or employee’s duties, as a condition of employment, or during
any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation, or personal time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   (E)   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the Federal
Standards for a Merit System of Personnel Administration applicable to grant-
in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club.
(Ord. 04-21, passed 5-11-04)
§ 37.03 GIFT BAN-GENERAL RULE.
   Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse
of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively
referred to herein as “recipients”), shall intentionally solicit or accept any
gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer
or make a gift that violates this section.
(Ord. 00-03, passed 1-25-00; Am. Ord. 04-21, passed 5-11-04) Penalty, see §
37.99
§ 37.04 EXCEPTIONS TO GENERAL RULE.
   (A)   Section
37.03 is not applicable to the following:
      (1)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the
same conditions as for the general public.
      (2)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
      (3)   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code or
activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      (4)    Educational materials and missions.
      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      (6)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister, and including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancee.
      (7)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
         (a)    The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
         (b)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual
who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and
         (c)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual
who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other
officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
      (8)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that the food or refreshments are consumed on the
premises from which they were purchased or prepared or catered. For the
purposes of this section, “catered” means food or refreshments that are
purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any means.
      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      (10)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the purpose
of this Act, “intra- governmental gift” means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and “inter-governmental gift” means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
      (11)   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
      (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
   (B)   Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive
and independent of every other.
(Ord. 00-03, passed 1-25-00; Am. Ord. 04-21, passed 5-11-04)
§ 37.05 DISPOSITION OF GIFTS.
   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member
living with the officer or employee, does not violate this chapter if the
recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited
source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an
appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under Section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered,
or succeeded.
(Ord. 00-03, passed 1-25-00; Am. Ord. 04-21, passed 5-11-04)
§ 37.06 ETHICS ADVISOR.
   The Village Attorney shall be the ethics advisor for the village. As such,
the Village Attorney shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of
the village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions
of this chapter and state ethics laws.
(Ord. 04-21, passed 5-11-04)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   Persons violating this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $750 per
offense. Violations shall be prosecuted by the Village Attorney at the specific
request of a majority of corporate authorities upon motion made, seconded and
adopted. In any case where a member of the corporate authority is accused of a
violation of this chapter, such member shall abstain from any such vote. In any
case of an alleged violation of this chapter by the Village Attorney or by a
member of the corporate authorities, the village shall obtain separate counsel
to handle the prosecution. In a case where the corporate authorities believe a
criminal act has occurred, they may direct the Village Attorney to refer the
matter to the States Attorney for prosecution.
(Ord. 00-03, passed 1-25-00; Am. Ord. 04-21, passed 5-11-04)
CHAPTER 38: TAXPAYER’S BILL OF RIGHTS
Section
General Provisions
   
38.01   Applicability
   
38.02   Definitions
   
38.03   Notices
Filing and Paying
   
38.14   Late payment
   
38.15   Payment
   
38.16   Certain credits and refunds
Assessment Process
   
38.26   Audit procedure
   
38.27   Appeal
   
38.28   Hearing
   
38.29   Interest and penalties
   
38.30   Abatement
Other Provisions
   
38.40   Installment contracts
   
38.41   Statute of limitations
   
38.42   Voluntary disclosure
   
38.43   Publication of tax ordinances
   
38.44   Liens
   
38.45   Application
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 38.01 APPLICABILITY.
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act", 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   EMPLOYEE. All full-time, part-time and contractual employees fo the village,
including each office, board, commission, agency, department thereof.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Village Treasurer, or other officer or employee
designated from time to time by the Corporate Authorities, who is charged with
the administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered
taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized
by the local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead.
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of
this chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such
authority by the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this
chapter and the Act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or department
of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under
the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER.  Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Chatham, Illinois.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.03 NOTICES.
   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing mailed not less than seven calendar days prior to
the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the
local tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax
administrator as follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
FILING AND PAYING
§ 38.14 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is (1)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or (2) received
in an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark
dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with
adequate postage prepaid.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.15 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: (1) to any interest due for the applicable period; (2) to the
tax due for the applicable period; and (3) to the penalty for the applicable
period.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.16 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
ASSESSMENT PROCESS
§ 38.26 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax
shall comply with the notice requirements of this section.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not more than 30 days from the date the
notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local tax administrator agreed to
some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer is unable to comply with the
audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another date within the
30 days, approved in writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local
tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.27 APPEAL.
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the assessment;
      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled within 14 days
of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing, unless the taxpayer
requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45 day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after tile expiration of the 45 day period.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.28 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under §
38.27, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.29 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Time frame. In the event a determination has been made that a tax is
due and owing, through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be
paid within the time frame otherwise indicated.
   (B)   Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or non-payment of the tax to be 9%
per annum based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (C)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty, of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.30 ABATEMENT.
   The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty, if the
local tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
OTHER PROVISIONS
§ 38.40 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14 day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.41 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A) The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
   (B)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (C)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the village,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
   (D)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.42 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing
of the application but not more than four years before the date of filing the
application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not
be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be
paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local tax
administrator, whichever is longer.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.43 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
    Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk's office.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.44 LIENS.
   The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
§ 38.45 APPLICATION.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all
of the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any present tax ordinance
is in conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall
control.
(Ord. 01-04, passed 1-23-01)
CHAPTER 39: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
Section
   
39.01   Definition
   
39.02   Code Hearing Department established
   
39.03   Hearing procedures not exclusive
   
39.04   Hearing Officer
   
39.05   Instituting code hearing procedures
   
39.06   Subpoenas; defaults
   
39.07   Continuances; representation at code hearings
   
39.08   Hearing; evidence
   
39.09   Findings; decision; order
   
39.10   Review under Administrative Review Law
   
39.11   Judgment on findings; decision; order
   
39.12   Adoption by reference of code hearing provisions of Municipal Code
§ 39.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE. Any provision of the Village of Chatham Code of Ordinances except for
(i) building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-
31.1 et seq. pertaining to demolition of unsafe buildings; (ii) any offense
under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic
regulations governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable
offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-204).
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.02 CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   The village hereby establishes a Code Hearing Department as a separate and
independent agency in the municipal government. The function of the Hearing
Department is to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in
the manner set forth in this chapter. The Code Hearing Department may
adjudicate any violation of the Code of Ordinances. The Code Hearing Department
shall be supervised by the Director of Utilities and Administration, who shall
also arrange for and provide all required staff assistance to the Hearing
Officer.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.03 HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to
enforce the provisions of its Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.04 HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The position of Hearing Officer is hereby created. The Hearing Officer
shall be appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the
Village Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village President. The
Hearing Officer shall be compensated at an hourly rate of $200 per hour plus
expenses and shall be an independent contractor.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in
the State of Illinois for at least three years. Prior to conducting proceedings
under this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall successfully complete a formal
training program as prescribed by Section 1-2.2-1 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1).
   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall have the duty to:
      (1)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a code violation exists;
      (2)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
      (3)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript, if any, and record of the
hearing and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      (4)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating
whether a code violation exists.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.05 INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code
violation finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation
on a multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates:
      (1)   The name and address of the defendant;
      (2)   The type and nature of the violation;
      (3)   The date and time the violation was observed; and
      (4)   The names of witnesses to the violation.
   (B)   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the Code Hearing
Department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report
and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose
on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more than 60 days
after the violation is reported.
   (C)   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files
of the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one
copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the
municipality in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy
of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along
with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing. If the
violation report form requires the respondent to answer within a certain amount
of time, the village shall reply to the answer within the same amount of time
afforded to the respondent.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 21-08, passed 2-23-21)
§ 39.06 SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS.
   At any time prior to the hearing date, the Hearing Officer may, at the
request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the
hearing. If on the date set for hearing the defendant or his or her attorney
fails to appear, the Hearing Officer may find the defendant in default and
shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of
a code violation.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.07 CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS.
   No continuances shall be authorized by the Hearing Officer in proceedings
under this chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary
to protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be
grounds for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a Hearing Officer
under this chapter shall not exceed 60 days. The case for the municipality may
be presented by an attorney designated by the village. The case for the
defendant may be presented by the defendant or his or her attorney.
Corporations, limited liability companies, and other legal persons other than
natural persons shall be represented by an attorney.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08; Am. Ord. 21-08, passed 2-23-21)
§ 39.08 HEARING; EVIDENCE.
   At the hearing the Hearing Officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and
shall accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-existence of a code
violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply to hearings authorized by this chapter. The proceedings shall
be electronically recorded, and any party to the proceedings may, at his, her
or its discretion, have the proceedings transcribed by a court reporter.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.09 FINDINGS; DECISION; ORDER.
   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings,
decision, and order shall include (i) the hearing officer’s findings of fact;
(ii) a decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact; and (iii) an order that states the sanction or dismisses the
case if a violation is not proved. A monetary sanction for a violation under
this chapter shall not exceed $750 or the amount specified in the relevant
section of this Code of Ordinances governing the offense, whichever is the
lesser. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served on the
defendant within five days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same
manner that the report form and summons are served under §
39.05. Payment of an penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be
by payment to the Village Clerk or to the village office, which is authorized
to receive fine money on behalf of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.10 REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW.
   The findings, decision, and order of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of the county in which the municipality is located.
The provisions of the Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the
findings, decision, and order of a Hearing Officer under this chapter.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.11 JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS; DECISION; ORDER.
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law shall be a debt due and owing to the municipality and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the Circuit Court of
Sangamon County for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings,
decision, and order. The village may consolidate multiple findings, decisions,
and orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the
action, the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order were issued in
accordance with this chapter and the applicable provision of this Code of
Ordinances. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any
method provided for by Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure (735 ILCS
5/2-203) or by certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that the
total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings,
decision, and order does not exceed $2,500. If the court is satisfied that the
findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and the applicable provision of this Code of Ordinances and
that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for
judicial review as provided in this chapter:
      (1)   The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against
the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision, and order,
plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
      (2)   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the Hearing Officer to
correct a code violation.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
§ 39.12 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE OF CODE HEARING PROVISIONS OF MUNICIPAL CODE.
   Division 2.2 of Article 1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-
1 et seq., is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. In the event of a
conflict between Division 2.2 and this chapter, Division 2.2 shall control.
(Ord. 08-40, passed 9-23-08)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES: GENERAL PROVISIONS; COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWER SYSTEM; AND
ELECTRIC SERVICE REGULATIONS
         
APPENDIX: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL REGULATIONS
      
51.   [RESERVED]
      
52.   [RESERVED]
      
53.   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES: GENERAL PROVISIONS; COMBINED WATERWORKS
AND SEWER SYSTEM; AND ELECTRIC SERVICE REGULATIONS
Section
Utility Collection Procedures
   
50.001   Definitions
   
50.002   Collection
   
50.003   Deposit
   
50.004   Due date and monthly service payments
   
50.005   Delinquent charges; discontinued service
   
50.006   Discontinued service to apartments or rental property
   
50.007   Discontinued service of residential heating
   
50.008   Reconnection
   
50.009   Dispute resolution procedure
   
50.010   Lien
   
50.011   Dishonor of check
   
50.012   Prosecution
   
50.013   Outside collection services
Service
   
50.020   Application for service
   
50.021   Permitted use of water and electric services
   
50.022   Application
   
50.023   Permit
   
50.024   Interference with equipment
   
50.025   Connection of equipment
   
50.026   Meters; testing
   
50.027   Meter reading schedule
   
50.028   Access to meters
   
50.029   Relocating meters
   
50.030   Identifying meters
   
50.031   Interruption of service
   
50.032   Guidelines for interruption of utility service
   
50.033   Service department appointments
   
50.034   Temporary electric and water service for special events
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWER SYSTEM
Customer Billing
   
50.050   Multi-month billing
   
50.051   Errors in billing
   
50.052   Payment arrangements
   
50.053   Budget billing program
   
50.054   Payment options
General Provisions
   
50.101   Declaration as combined system
   
50.102   Property of the combined system
   
50.103   System owned and operated by village
   
50.104   Damage to sewer works unlawful
   
50.105   Connection of sewers to storm water drainage systems on Gordon Drive
prohibited
   
50.106   Prohibiting the use of groundwater as a potable water supply by the
installation or use of potable water supply wells
Water Regulations
   
50.110   Water Department
   
50.111   [Reserved]
   
50.112   [Reserved]
   
50.113   [Reserved]
   
50.114   Failure of meter
   
50.115   Connection of equipment
   
50.116   Suspension of service for certain purposes
   
50.117   Tap regulation; fee
   
50.118   Rates and charges
   
50.119   Water leaks and hazardous conditions
   
50.120   Bill adjustments for water leaks
   
50.121   [Reserved]
   
50.122   Water service to premises located within other municipalities
   
50.123   Liability for charges
Backflow Prevention
   
50.130   Cross-connection control
   
50.131   Notice to customer; backflow prevention device installation
   
50.132   Approval of water supply
   
50.133   Surveys and investigations
   
50.134   Right of entry for inspector
   
50.135   Disconnection of service for violation; reconnection fee
   
50.136   Responsibility for cost of cleanup
Building Sewers
   
50.150   Connection of building sewer
   
50.151   Cost of building sewer installation
   
50.152   Independent building sewer required
   
50.153   Prior constructed building sewers
   
50.154   Building sewer construction standards
   
50.155   Drain connections
   
50.156   Connection specifications
   
50.157   Building sewer excavation
Sewer Use and Discharge Regulations
   
50.170   Definitions
General Sewer Provisions
   
50.171   Connection to system required; fees
   
50.172   Sewers in new subdivisions
   
50.173   Storm water drainage
   
50.174   Objectionable waste disposal
   
50.175   Unlawful discharge of sewage
   
50.176   Construction of sewage disposal facility unlawful
   
50.177   Suitable toilet facilities required
   
50.178   Construction material standards
   
50.179   Public sewer permit
   
50.180   Public sewer disposal standards
   
50.181   Capacity of downstream sewer facilities
   
50.182   Restrictive provisions; notice
   
50.183   Use of public sewers
   
50.184   Regulations concerning use of storm sewers and sump pumps
   
50.185   Discharge of prohibited wastes
   
50.186   Prohibited waste disposal options
   
50.187   Interceptors
   
50.188   Maintenance of flow equalizing facilities
   
50.189   Control manhole installation
   
50.190   Waste analysis; compliance
   
50.191   Analysis standards
Sewer Rates and Charges
   
50.205   Connection fee
   
50.206   Minimum charge; basic user rate
   
50.207   [Reserved]
   
50.208   [Reserved]
   
50.209   [Reserved]
   
50.210   [Reserved]
   
50.211   Access to records
Sewer Inspections; Enforcement
   
50.225   Inspection necessary for connection permit
   
50.226   Inspection permit
   
50.227   Inspection expenses; authorized inspectors
   
50.228   Inspector powers and duties
   
50.229   Observance of safety rules
   
50.230   Admittance to private property
   
50.231   Notice of violation; hearing
   
50.232   Liability to village for violation
   
50.233   Disconnection
ELECTRIC SERVICE REGULATIONS
Service
   
50.501   Definitions
   
50.502   Electric Department
   
50.503   [Reserved]
   
50.504   [Reserved]
   
50.505   Temporary or permanent service; installation charges
   
50.506   Extension of service
   
50.507   [Reserved]
   
50.508   Additional service and other charges
   
50.509   Service connection
   
50.510   [Reserved]
   
50.511   [Reserved]
   
50.512   Commercial or industrial bill adjustment
   
50.513   Fuel adjustment cost
   
50.514   Liability disclaimed by village
   
50.515   Special agreements
   
50.516   Extraterritorial service
   
50.517   [Reserved]
Equipment
   
50.530   Electrical code compliance
   
50.531   Village policy regarding underground service lines
   
50.532   Interference with equipment
   
50.533   Obstruction of equipment
   
50.534   Liability to village for damage
   
50.535   Removal of obstructions
   
50.536   Utility easements
   
50.537   Photocopy depiction of service lines
   
50.538   Liability of the village and maintenance responsibilities
   
50.539   Location of underground cables
   
50.540   Other requirements for customer connections
Electric Extension for New Residential Subdivisions
   
50.550   Definitions
   
50.551   Compliance with provisions required
   
50.552   Electric development fee
   
50.553   [Reserved]
   
50.554   Acceptance of development fee constitutes agreement by the village to
build electric system
   
50.555   [Reserved]
   
50.556   [Reserved]
   
50.557   Regulations subject to change or abolishment
Electric Rates
   
50.570   Establishment of rates
   
50.571   Senior citizen discount
 
   
50.999   Penalty
   
Appendix:   Cross-connection control regulations
UTILITY COLLECTION PROCEDURES
§ 50.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT/CUSTOMER. Includes any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or
other legal entity which is the user or consumer of village utility services or
which is legally responsible for payment of rates, charges, and penalties for
such utility service by statute or ordinance.
   CHECK. Shall have the same definition as defined in 810 ILCS 5/3-104,
Uniform Commercial Code. (810 ILCS 5/3-104).
   DISHONORED. A check is DISHONORED when a necessary presentment is duly made
to a financial institution and acceptance or payment thereof is refused for any
reason.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any bank, savings and loan, credit union, or other
institution lawfully able to honor and pay checks drawn upon it.
   MASTER-METERED APARTMENT BUILDING. Any structure consisting of two or more
dwelling units where any utility service is registered or recorded by a single
meter for all of the units contained in the building.
   NONRESIDENTIAL SERVICE. Any building or outbuilding that does not meet the
criteria for residential electric service will be considered nonresidential in
nature and be eligible only for nonresidential electric service rates which the
village refers to as commercial, industrial or government rates.
   RATES AND CHARGES. Includes penalties assessed for late or delinquent
payments for utility services.
   RESIDENTIAL SERVICE. In order to qualify for residential electric service, a
property must comprise one or more separately metered dwelling units, each of
which provides living accommodations that include a minimum of a kitchen,
bedroom and bathroom. Each property fitting this definition will be limited to
one residential electric meter per residential unit. Any additional service may
be billed at the residential electric rate.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 81-10, passed 5-26-81; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.002 COLLECTION.
   Rates and charges for utility services supplied by the village shall be as
established by ordinance. The provisions of this chapter apply to collection of
all rates and charges for utility services supplied by the village, including
but not limited to electric, water, and sewer services.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.003 DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Service deposit for residential service. 
      (1)   Customers including individuals who were previously listed on a
utility account such as former spouses or roommates who are re-applying for
residential service with the village who have had at least 12 continuous months
of service, during which no more than two late penalties were assessed and do
not owe any balance from previous service with the village are not required to
pay a service deposit. First-time applicants and applicants who have failed to
pay for previous service in a timely manner will be required to pay a service
deposit before service will be initiated.
      (2)   Existing customers with a good credit history reapplying for
service at a new location who have a deposit on file will have their deposit
transferred to their new service account for the remainder of the 18 months
holding period. Existing customers who do not have a good credit history and
have a past due balance on their existing utility account will be required to
pay their past due balance before the new service is established. The
customer's deposit will be transferred to their new service account and will be
held for a period of 18 months from the date the new service is connected.
      (3)   The amount of the residential service deposit is currently:
         (a)   $150 for property owners ($100 electric and $50 water); and
         (b)   $300 for rental property ($200 for electric and $100 for water).
This service deposit is adjusted periodically.
      (4)   Payment of the residential deposit must be made when the customer
signs up for service. Following 18 continuous months of service from the
village, the deposit will be returned in the form of a credit to the account.
If the customer terminates service before the deposit is credited, the deposit
will be applied to the account's final bill or transferred to the customer's
new service address within the village.
   (B)   Service deposit for nonresidential service.
      (1)   Previous nonresidential customers who are re-applying for service
under the same entity name will not be required to pay a service deposit if
their previous service lasted at least 12 months and either had no more than
two late penalties or, if they had more than two late penalties, the penalties
and past due balances were paid before the next bill was generated. First-time
nonresidential applicants and nonresidential applicants who have failed to pay
for previous service in a timely manner will be required to pay the service
deposit before service will be initiated. First- time nonresidential applicants
who have residential service on their owned, primary residence may avoid paying
the deposit for nonresidential service if:
         (a)   The nonresidential service is requested in the same name as the
residential service;
         (b)   The applicant applies for the nonresidential service in person;
         (c)   The applicant provides proof of ownership of his or her primary
residence;
         (d)   The applicant has no more than two late penalties on the
residential account; and
         (e)   The applicant agrees to the transfer of unpaid final bills to
any existing residential or nonresidential account.
      (2)   The amount of the nonresidential service deposit is currently $300
($200 electric and $100 water). This amount may be adjusted periodically.
However, a deposit may subsequently be required on the nonresidential account
if the customer fails to maintain payments on either the residential or
nonresidential account in a timely manner.
      (3)   After 18 months of service, the deposit maintained on account with
the village by a nonresidential customer will be credited to their account. If
the customer terminates service before the deposit is refunded, the deposit
will be applied to the account's final bill or transferred to the customer's
new service address within the village.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.004 DUE DATE AND MONTHLY SERVICE PAYMENTS.
   (A)   In most circumstances, charges for service will be rendered on or
about the same day each month based on the service address. Monthly bills for
service are due on the 15th of each month. In applying for electric or water
service from the Village of Chatham, the customer agrees to pay for services as
bills are rendered in accordance with the rates, rules and regulations in
effect at the time of delivery. The customer remains responsible for these
charges until the customer gives the utility notice of discontinuance and final
charges on said account have been paid. Past due final charges may be
transferred to any active residential or nonresidential account being
maintained by or for the use of said customer.
   (B)   The village collects sewer charges. These charges are based on the
amount of water the customer uses. Unless an affidavit stating otherwise has
been filed with the village, the utility will assume each property receiving
water service is connected to the village's sewer system and that the total
amount of water consumed by the customer eventually enters the sewer system.
The customer will be responsible for paying all applicable sewer and water
service charges for the property. Customers with sprinkler systems can avoid
paying sewer charges on water used by those systems if they pay for the
installation of a separate meter for the sprinkler system.
   (C)   The village allows residents with swimming pools to check out a deduct
meter from the utility office to record water usage related to filling their
swimming pools. Meters must be returned during business hours within three
days. If a meter is not returned at the end of the three day period then a
$5.00 late fee per day will be added to the customer's bill until the meter is
returned. An adjustment for sewer usage will be applied to the customer's
account based on the metered water usage recorded on the deduct meters.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.005 DELINQUENT CHARGES; DISCONTINUED SERVICE.
   If services are not paid in full by the due date on each monthly bill, a
five day grace period would be allowed before a penalty charge of 10% per month
will be imposed on the bill. Customers may be allowed a one-time penalty waiver
if there have been no late payments on the account. This one- time penalty
waiver will only be allowed once in a 12 month period.
   (A)   If any charges for utility service or penalties remain unpaid for 30
days after the billing date, such charges shall be deemed delinquent and
subject to a disconnect notice; service may be interrupted until all delinquent
amounts are paid in full. If service is interrupted due to delinquency, the
customer will be required to pay a reconnect charge of $50 before service will
be restored. The reconnect charges may be adjusted periodically.
   (B)   Upon determination that any customer's service is to be disconnected
due to a past due bill, the village shall send to the customer, owner, or any
other person required by law to receive notice, at the address at which the
service is provided, notice that the utility service shall be terminated no
sooner than seven days after the mailing of that notice. When the user is a
person other than the owner of the premises at which service is provided, a
copy of the notice shall also be sent to the owner at his address shown on an
application for service, or at the owner's last address then known to the
village.
      (1)   The notice shall include:
         (a)   The dollar amount owed;
         (b)   The date that payment must be received by to avoid
disconnection;
         (c)   The contact information for the Village of Chatham Utility
Office;
         (d)   That upon disconnection, service will not be reconnected until
all delinquent charges and reconnect charges are paid in full; and
         (e)   That prior to reconnection, the customer shall be required to
pay a reconnect service charge.
   (C)   Unless the disconnection or termination is completed within 21 days of
the date the notice was mailed, no disconnection or termination may be made
without issuance of a new notice of termination in the manner provided in (B)
above.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.006 DISCONTINUED SERVICE TO APARTMENTS OR RENTAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Landlord, owner and tenant responsibility for active service.
      (1)   All landlords/owners should advise the village when they purchase a
new property or relinquish ownership of a property receiving utility service
from the village.
      (2)   The owner of any lot, building, or premises and the occupant
thereof and the customer of the utility service of said system shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay for such utility service on said premises; and, the
service shall be furnished to the premises by the village only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and customer of the utility
service are jointly and severally liable.
      (3)   Landlords/property owners shall be responsible for paying for
active village utility services provided to their leased/rented properties when
a tenant does not apply or qualify for services. Landlords or owners shall have
the option of:
         (a)   Retaining service and paying all charges in their name during
the periods of time when an active tenant does not apply or qualify for service
from the village; or
         (b)   Having service disconnected when an active tenant does not apply
or qualify for service.
      (4)   If the landlord/owner directs a new tenant to provide proof that
village utility service has been placed in the tenant's name, the village will
provide the tenant with such confirmation.
   (B)   Master-metered and multi-area single-metered properties.
      (1)   Utility service in buildings with multiple dwelling units served by
one master meter (house meter) must be billed in the name of the landlord/owner
or his or her duly appointed agent. (Agents appointed to act in the name of the
landlord/ owner must be identified and authorized in writing to the village by
the landlord/owner.) Likewise, single meters that serve more than one tenant's
area must be billed in the name of the landlord/owner until each service is
exclusive to a single tenanted area. A facility charge will be billed for each
unit of the building.
      (2)   When disconnection for nonpayment of service is scheduled for a
master-metered property, notice shall be posted on the premises five days
before the disconnect date. All tenants would be sent notice in accordance with
the Rental Property Utility Service Act. Tenants may petition the circuit court
of Sangamon County for appointment of a receiver to collect the rent due and
remit a portion to the village for payment of village utility bills.
      (3)   Landlords/owners are responsible for clearly and permanently
identifying, by stencil or other means, the apartment, mobile home or area
served by each meter. Once meters have been installed and identified, the
landlord/owner is responsible for meeting with a village representative to
verify that each meter services the correct unit and is accurately, clearly and
permanently identified.
      (4)   When incorrect billing results from incorrectly identified meters,
the village is not responsible for credit adjustments to bills issued prior to
being notified the meters were incorrectly identified. Upon notification from
the landlord/owner of incorrectly identified meters, the village will correct
all future billing records to reflect the correct meter identification for the
units/areas they service.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.007 DISCONTINUED SERVICE OF RESIDENTIAL HEATING.
   Utility service which is the sole source of residential space heating or
which controls the space heating equipment of residential premises may not be
disconnected unless and until due notice is given to the customer and those
other persons as required by Article 11, Division 117 of the Municipal Code of
1961, as now or hereafter amended.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.008 RECONNECTION.
   When utility service has been disconnected under the provisions of this or
any other ordinance, the service may not be reconnected until all prior charges
of that customer or account have been paid; an application for service is made
requesting the service as provided by ordinance, and any deposit required has
been paid; and a service charge for the reconnection, if applicable, has been
paid.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.009 DISPUTE RESOLUTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Village billing personnel shall at all reasonable times be available
to receive and consider disputes of any customer, applicant, or user relative
to an account for utility service. The customer, applicant, or user shall be
advised of the customer’s right to have a hearing conducted by a committee
designated by the Board of Trustees, if such dispute cannot be resolved with
village personnel. The person making such dispute or claim must request review
of the matter, in writing, directed to the Village Clerk. The village shall not
disconnect the service of any person for non-payment during the pendency of the
dispute if:
      (1)   Written notice is given to the Village Clerk as herein provided;
and
      (2)   Payment of all undisputed portions of the bill is made; and
      (3)   All charges made during the pendency of the dispute are paid as
due; and
      (4)   The person making the complaint or dispute enters into a bona fide
effort to resolve the disputed matter with all due dispatch.
   (B)   Notice of a dispute shall be made in writing and contain the name,
address, and telephone number of the person making the complaint or disputing a
charge; the address at which utility service is received which is the subject
of the complaint or dispute; the specific grounds or reasons for which the
charges billed are disputed; and the specific relief requested.
   (C)   Upon filing of the notice, the corporate authorities may hear and
determine such dispute at their next ensuing meeting. The corporate authorities
shall give the complaining party no less than five days advance written notice
of the date of such hearing. The complaining party may, at such meeting or any
adjournment thereof present additional information or evidence in support of
the dispute, but no such information or evidence shall be received or
considered beyond the scope of the grounds set forth in the written notice
filed pursuant to division (B) above. The corporate authorities decision with
respect to the dispute shall be final.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 15-09, passed 3-10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.010 LIEN.
   (A)   Any charges for utility service that are delinquent shall constitute a
lien upon the premises served. The Village Administrator or his or her designee
shall file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This
statement shall contain a legal description of the premises served, the amount
of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount
as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill. A copy
of the statement of lien claim shall at the same time be mailed to the
customer, and if the Village Administrator or his or her designee has notice
that the customer is not the owner of the premises served, a copy of the
statement of lien claim shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if the
owner's address is then known to the Village Administrator or his or her
designee. The failure of the Village Administrator or his or her designee to
record the lien claim or to mail the notice, or the failure of the owner to
receive the notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid
bills.
   (B)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs therefor. The foreclosure shall be by action
brought in the name of the village pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-139-8 in the same
manner and with the same effect as in the foreclosure of mortgages on real
estate. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized to institute these
proceedings for the purpose of foreclosing the lien in the name of the village
in any court having jurisdiction over such matters and may recover other costs
and reasonable attorneys fees as may be incurred and as may be allowed by the
court.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.011 DISHONOR OF CHECK.
   (A)   If a check tendered to the village for payment of any village services
is returned by the bank for any reason other than error on the part of the
financial institution, a service charge will be imposed. The service charge,
which is adjusted periodically, is currently $25. The amount of the dishonored
check plus the $25 service charge will be added back to a customer's account
immediately. The customer will be required to reimburse the village in cash or
cash equivalent within seven working days.
   (B)   If a second check is tendered within 12 months to the village in
payment of any village services is returned by the bank for any reason other
than error on the part of the financial institution, that customer will be
required to pay all utility charges in cash or cash equivalent.
(Ord. 81-10, passed 5-26-81; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.012 PROSECUTION.
   The village may institute and prosecute in its name any suits or other
actions necessary or appropriate for the collection of any penalties or charges
imposed by this chapter or other ordinances; or for legal or equitable relief
to prevent the continuance of violations of provisions of this chapter or other
ordinances pertaining to the service of utilities; and for attorney’s fees
therefor to the extent that the remedies provided herein are not exclusive.
(Ord. 80-33, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.013 OUTSIDE COLLECTION SERVICES.
   The village submits past due accounts to either the Illinois State
Comptroller's Local Debt Recovery Program or a collection agency when the
customer no longer has an active utility account. Additional collection fees
may be applied. All collection balances must be paid before application for
utilities will be accepted.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
SERVICE
§ 50.020 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Application for residential service.  
      (1)   An applicant for village water or electric service must be at least
18 years of age or, if under 18, present proof of his or her emancipation or
marriage.
      (2)   Each applicant for residential service must complete a written
application for service, including:
         (a)   The location where service is to be provided (service address);
         (b)   The names of all adults who will be living full time at this
address;
         (c)   The applicant's employer; and
         (d)   The applicant's daytime and evening telephone numbers.
      (3)   The applicant must also provide a valid form of identification
which must bear a photograph of the holder (e.g., valid driver's license, state
ID card, FOID card, and passport).
      (4)   If the applicant is a tenant at the service address, he or she must
provide the lease agreement to the property showing the applicant as the
leasee, as well as the name, address and telephone number of the property
owner.
      (5)   If a representative of an applicant, acting under a power of
attorney, applies for service in the applicant's name, proof of the power of
attorney must be provided to the village. The village reserves the right to
verify any and all information provided by the applicant prior to initiating
service.
      (6)   Any applicant who has failed to pay for previous utility services
from village will be required to pay all past due amounts and a service deposit
before service will be initiated. If service is initiated and subsequently it
is determined that a customer has a prior past due balance, the prior past due
balance will be due immediately or current services will be subject to
disconnection.
      (7)   Once service has been granted, the customer is responsible for
informing the village customer service representatives of any changes in the
information supplied on the application for service.
   (B)   Application for nonresidential service.
      (1)   An applicant for village water or electric service must either be
at least 18 years of age or present proof of his or her emancipation or
marriage.
      (2)   Each applicant for nonresidential service must complete a written
application for service, including:
         (a)   The location where service is to be provided (service address);
         (b)   The legal name of the entity;
         (c)   Local and home office telephone numbers of the entity;
         (d)   The name, address and telephone number of the property owner, if
other than the applicant; and
         (e)   The signature of a principal of the entity.
      (3)   Existing nonresidential customers with a good credit history
reapplying for service at a new location who have a deposit on file will have
their deposit transferred to their new service account for the remainder of the
18 months holding period. Existing customers who do not have a good credit
history and have a past due balance on their existing utility account will be
required to pay their past due balance before the new service is established.
The customer's deposit will be transferred to their new service account and
will be held for a period of 18 months from the date the new service is
connected.
      (4)   If the applicant is not the owner of the service address, he or she
must provide the lease agreement to the property listing the applicant as the
leasee. If the applicant owns the service address, proof of ownership must be
provided. The village reserves the right to verify any and all information
provided by the applicant prior to initiating service. Any applicant who has
failed to pay for previous utility services from the village will be required
to pay all past due amounts and a service deposit before service will be
initiated.
      (5)   Once service has been granted, the customer is responsible for
informing village customer service representatives of any changes in the
information supplied on the application for service.
(Ord. 80-34, passed 12-16-80; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.021 PERMITTED USE OF WATER AND ELECTRIC SERVICES.
   No person shall take any water from any main, hydrant, or other portion of
the village’s water system, or electricity from any transmission line or other
portion of the village’s electrical plant, other than by the usual use of the
village’s public fountains and troughs, except upon application to the village
and the issuance by the village of a permit in accordance with the provisions
of ordinances, rules, or regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted by the
village.
(Ord. 72-8, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.022 APPLICATION.
   Each applicant for water or electrical supply or service shall file with the
village an application therefor, in writing, setting forth the name of the
applicant, the location of the premises for which such supply or service is
sought, the name of the owner of the premises, if other than the applicant, the
nature and size of such service or the extent of such supply and proposed use
thereof.
(Ord. 72-8, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.023 PERMIT.
   Upon receipt of an application, as provided in §
50.022, a permit may be issued by the village for the installation of water
service or electrical service or the supplying of water or electrical service
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance, rule, or
regulation heretofore or hereafter adopted by the village; provided, that no
permit shall be issued to any applicant while in default through nonpayment of
any past amount owning to the village for any water or electrical supply,
service, or installation theretofore rendered or made.
(Ord. 72-8, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.024 INTERFERENCE WITH EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any manner with any
water main, fire hydrant, service pipe, water meter, buffalo or shut-off box,
water pipe connected with the village water distribution system, or any
transmission line, transformer, or portion of the village electrical
distribution system without a permit therefor obtained as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 72-8, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.025 CONNECTION OF EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall, without the consent in writing from the village or a
designated village official, connect water pipes or power transmission lines or
conduct water or electricity to any two distinct premises or tenements, unless
separate and distinct; nor shall any such pipe or transmission line be allowed
to cross lots into adjoining premises.
(Ord. 72-8, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.026 METERS; TESTING.
   (A)   Any person or organization receiving electric, water, or other public
utility service furnished by the village, the use of which is measured by a
recording meter, may make application in writing to the Village Administrator,
or his or her designee, for such meter to be tested for accuracy. The
application shall be accompanied by payment of the applicable service charge
deposit hereinafter established.
   (B)   The service charge for meter testing shall be as follows:
      (1)   For testing of water meters by such meter testing organization
shall be the actual cost charged to the village by the testing organization.
      (2)   For testing conducted of electric meters on the premises by a
village employee during regular working hours shall cost $35.
(Ord. 81-15, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16; Am. Ord. 19-24,
passed 8-27-19)
§ 50.027 METER READING SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Customer water and electric meters are read on or about the same date
each month.
   (B)   Monthly bills occasionally might be estimated at the discretion of the
village when circumstances beyond its control, including but not limited to
constraints caused by weather, make it difficult or impossible to obtain an
actual meter reading.
   (C)   Monthly bills might also be estimated if village meter readers do not
have access to the water or electric meter when the meter is scheduled to be
read.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.028 ACCESS TO METERS.
   (A)   Village Code requires customers to provide safe and unimpeded access
to village equipment, including water and electric meters that are on or inside
their property. Failure to provide access will result in estimated utility
bills. Failure to provide access for six consecutive months could result in an
interruption of service until access to the meter has been facilitated. If
service has been interrupted due to failure to provide access, all past due
amounts must be paid before service will be restored.
   (B)   Pets, whether inside or outside, must be restrained in such a manner
that they cannot harass village personnel attempting to gain access to utility
equipment. For details on village access to easements refer to Ordinance 95-16
and 70-7.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.029 RELOCATING METERS.
   (A)   The village can move an indoor water meter to an external pit at any
time at their discretion.
   (B)   Indoor electric meters may also be relocated to the outdoors. The
customer must first have the meter base relocated by an independent, licensed
electrician. Contact the Utility Office to schedule an interruption of service
prior to moving the meter base. Once the meter base has been relocated, the
village will move the meter.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.030 IDENTIFYING METERS.
   (A)   Landlords/owners are responsible for clearly and permanently
identifying, by stencil or other means, the apartment, mobile home or area
served by each meter. Once meters have been installed and identified, the
landlord/owner is responsible for meeting with a village representative to
verify that each meter services the correct unit and is accurately, clearly and
permanently identified.
   (B)   When incorrect billing results from incorrectly identified meters, the
village is not responsible for credit adjustments to bills issued prior to
being notified the meters were incorrectly identified. Upon notification from
the landlord/owner of incorrectly identified meters, the village will correct
all future billing records to reflect the correct meter identification for the
units/areas they service.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.031 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Interruption without notice.
      (1)   If any village service has been tampered with, the service will be
disconnected and removed without notice. Service will not be reinstalled or
activated until all damages to village equipment, all consumption charges,
including those for estimated lost consumption; a service deposit; and a
reconnection charge(s) have all been paid in full.
      (2)   The village routinely reports tampering to the Village Police
Department and reserves the right to prosecute for tampering under the Illinois
Criminal Code 5/16-14, Unlawful Interference with Public Utility Services.
   (B)   Interruption with notice.
      (1)   The village may disconnect service with notice when a customer
fails to do any of the following;
         (a)   Pay a past-due bill owed to the village for service furnished at
the same or another location;
         (b)   Make payment in accordance with the terms of a Payment
Arrangement;
         (c)   Redeem a returned check within seven village business days;
         (d)   Comply with relevant Village of Chatham Code of Ordinances and/
or the conditions agreed to in the application for service;
         (e)   Repair a water leak(s) within a timely manner following notice
from the village;
         (f)   Provide village representatives with access to the customer's
meter(s); or
         (g)   Repair electric equipment hazards within a timely manner
following notice from the village.
      (2)   The customer will be notified of an impending disconnection either
by phone or by mail. The notification will include the date on which the
disconnection amount is due to avoid interruption of service. Disconnection can
occur up to 21 days after the notice is mailed.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.032 GUIDELINES FOR INTERRUPTION OF UTILITY SERVICE.
   (A)   Termination of electric utility service to all residential users,
including all tenants of master metered apartment buildings, for nonpayment of
bills, where electricity is used as the only source of space heating/cooling or
to control or operate the only space heating/cooling equipment at the residence
is prohibited:
      (1)   On any day when the National Weather Service forecast for the
following 24 hours covering the area of the utility in which the residence is
located includes a forecast that the temperature will be 32 degrees Fahrenheit
or below, or 95 degrees or above; or
      (2)   On any day preceding a holiday or a weekend when such a forecast
indicated that the temperature will be 32 degrees Fahrenheit or below, or 95
degrees or above during the holiday or weekend;
unless:
      (1)   Consumption occurs in the absence of an approved application for
service; or
      (2)   A hazardous condition was not repaired within the time limit
included in the written notice from the village.
   (B)   Termination of water utility service to all residential users may be
disconnected at any time.
   (C)   Anyone with a medical condition which is dependent upon utility
service who is living full- time at a residence scheduled for service
interruption can temporarily avoid disconnection by providing the village with
a medical certification form certifying the customer's health condition. Upon
receipt of this form, the village will delay service disconnection for 30 days,
providing the customer also contacts the Utility Office during this period to
make payment arrangements.
   (D)   By providing a second form, the customer may extend the disconnection
exemptions for an additional 30 days, providing a payment arrangement was
scheduled during the initial 30-day period. If a customer has failed to make or
has defaulted on a payment arrangement after 60 days from the initial receipt
of the medical certification, then legal counsel may be sought.
   (E)   The village reserves the right to verify any and all information
provided concerning a customer's illness.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.033 SERVICE DEPARTMENT APPOINTMENTS.
   When setting up an appointment for service appointments and disconnects,
please allow for a 48 hour notification unless it is an emergency situation.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.034 TEMPORARY ELECTRIC AND WATER SERVICE FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   When temporary electric or water hook ups are requested for a special event,
the Public Utilities Manager will prepare a cost estimate including materials
and labor to present to the person(s) or organization requesting the temporary
hook ups. Not-for-profit groups who are presented with a cost estimate may
request a waiver of fees. This waiver must be approved by a majority of the
Village Board prior to the start of the event.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
CUSTOMER BILLING
§ 50.050 MULTI-MONTH BILLINGS.
   (A)   There are some circumstances in which village customers might be
billed several months after the date of service for services or commodities
provided by the utility. Such billings may cover multiple months of service.
These circumstances can include, but are not limited to, the village’s
discovery that:
      (1)   A slow-running meter has been providing an inaccurate measure of
customer consumption;
      (2)   A meter has stopped, resulting in no registered usage;
      (3)   A customer who signed up for and received service was inadvertently
omitted from the monthly billing system; and
      (4)   Meter tampering has resulted in the utility's inability to properly
bill for service in a timely manner.
   (B)   Except where tampering has occurred, if the village has failed to bill
for services or commodities it has provided, the back billing will be limited
to 12 months for residential service and 24 months for nonresidential service.
   (C)   Except in circumstances involving meter tampering, any customer
receiving a multi-month bill for previously unbilled utility services will be
eligible to enter into a Promissory Payment Arrangement or Extended Payment
Plan with the village.
   (D)   If the village discovers that there has been tampering with any of its
equipment and the customer has enjoyed the benefits of such tampering, the
utility is not restricted to the above time limitations on unbilled services.
The customer will be responsible for all service usage during the period that
tampering occurred, including estimated consumption where unmetered usage
occurred. The village may bill a customer for diverted service not used by that
customer if that customer had knowledge of or consented to the diversion.
   (E)   If tampering (or any malicious act on the part of the customer)
results in damage to village equipment, the customer will also be responsible
for the cost of repairing or replacing that equipment. Service will be
interrupted until all such charges are paid in full.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.051 ERRORS IN BILLING.
   (A)   The village shall credit the customer's account for any amount
overcharged on a bill rendered by the utility within the period specified below
if it is discovered, following payment, that the customer was overcharged
because the village:
      (1)   Used the incorrect customer service rate; or
      (2)   Inaccurately measured the quantity or volume of service provided.
   (B)    For residential customers, credits will be limited to the 24-month
period immediately preceding discovery that an overcharge is occurring.
Nonresidential customers are limited to the preceding 24-month period. Any
reimbursement beyond 24 months may be petitioned to and granted by the Village
Board of Trustees if extenuating circumstances can be shown as determined by
the Village Board and sufficient records are produced to evidence the
overpayment.
   (C)   The village will back bill a customer for any amount undercharged on a
bill rendered by the utility if it is discovered, following payment, that the
customer was undercharged. For residential customers, back billing of the
charges will be limited to the 24-month period immediately preceding discovery
that an undercharge is occurring. Nonresidential customers are limited to the
preceding 24-month period.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16; Am. Ord. 18-47, passed 8-28-18)
§ 50.052 PAYMENT ARRANGEMENTS.
   (A)   The village may allow customers subject to disconnection for
previously billed past due amounts for their current active utility service to
enter into a Promissory Payment Arrangement. Customers who have twice failed to
make payment under such a plan during the preceding 12 months, as well as those
who have been involved in meter tampering incidents, will not be permitted to
enter into a Payment Arrangement.
   (B)   Under the terms of the Promissory Payment Arrangement:
      (1)   A customer with a past due amount must make a promissory payment
arrangement to pay the past due balance by the 15th of the month following the
disconnect date. The promissory arrangement will be entered into the comments
section of the customer's account in the Utility Billing Software.
      (2)   If a customer who enters into a Payment Arrangement makes payment
late or defaults in any way on the agreement, service may be interrupted and
will not be reinstated until all past due amounts, plus the corresponding
reconnect fee(s), are paid in full.
      (3)   An additional extension of time may be granted for a customer whose
payment arrangement is dependent upon the receipt of support from a local
community assistance organization. The extension will be subject to the receipt
of a confirmation from the organization that a payment will be issued on behalf
of the customer.
      (4)   A payment plan may not be established after utility service has
been disconnected.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.053 BUDGET BILLING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The village offers a budget billing program to residential customers
that have a 12 month history at their current location.
   (B)   This plan provides for payments in equal installments.
   (C)   To qualify for the Budget Billing Program, the customer must be a
customer in good standing with no more than two late payment penalties within
the last 12 months. Budget Billing accounts must have a zero balance before
their first Budget Billing statement,
   (D)   The village shall review the residential customer's monthly level
payment no less than every six months. However, the level payment may be
adjusted more frequently if the customer's consumption indicates a need for
such adjustment.
   (E)   The monthly level payment must be made each month in full by the due
date. Any customer that has two delinquent payments is not eligible for the
Budget Billing Program for a minimum period of 12 months and will be
automatically removed from the Budget Billing Program. Any payment less than
the budget amount will be subject to disconnection. Budget Billing accounts are
not eligible for time extensions or payment arrangements.
   (F)   Any customer who voluntarily withdraws from or defaults on any
conditions of the Budget Billing Program will be ineligible to enter into
another Budget Billing Program for one year from the date of withdrawal or
default. Any past due balance at the time of the withdrawal or default must be
paid in full.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.054 PAYMENT OPTIONS.
   (A)   Mail. Customers can make their bill payments by U.S. mail, using the
return envelope provided with their bill. (If a preprinted return envelope is
not available, mail the payment to: Village of Chatham, 116 E. Mulberry,
Chatham, IL 62629.) Mail payments may be made using a check (checks will be
processed using electronic check conversion) or money order.
   (B)   In-Person. In-person payments can be made at the Village of Chatham
drive-up window (on the east side of the Utility Office located at 116 E.
Mulberry, Chatham, IL) or the walk-up cashier's window in the Utility Office's
lobby on the north side of the building. Cash, checks (checks will be processed
using electronic check conversion), money orders, most debit and credit cards
are accepted.
   (C)   Online. Bill payments also can be made online at (www.chathamil.net)
using a credit card or debit card. Customers can also elect online to sign up
for monthly recurring payments.
   (D)   Direct Debit. The village offers bill payment by direct debit to the
customer's checking or savings account. Any customer who provides written
authorization and a voided blank check or savings account deposit form may have
his or her monthly bill or level payment amount submitted by the Village of
Chatham directly to his or her financial institution.
   (E)   24-hour Payment Drop-Off Box. The village has a 24-hour payment drop-
off box located in drive-through on the east side of the Utility office located
at 116 E. Mulberry St., Chatham, IL 62629. When using the drop-off box, be sure
to use the payment-return envelope provided with your bill and make your
payment using only a check or money order. Do not use cash.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWER SYSTEM
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.101 DECLARATION AS COMBINED SYSTEM.
   The village waterworks system in its entirety, together with all additions,
improvements, and extensions thereto that may hereafter be made and the village
sewerage system in its entirety, together with all additions, improvements, and
extensions thereto that may hereafter be made, of the village are declared to
be a combined system. Said combined waterworks and sewerage system shall be
maintained and operated as a single utility. A charge or rate shall be
established for the use of such combined system, which shall be reasonable and
commensurate with the service performed by said combined system, and shall be
sufficient to pay the cost of operation and maintenance of said system, to
provide an adequate depreciation fund and to pay the principal of and interest
upon all revenue bonds that are payable from the revenues of said combined
system.
(Ord. 78-28, passed 11-14-78; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.102 PROPERTY OF THE COMBINED SYSTEM.
   All property, real, personal, and mixed, comprising the village waterworks
system and the sewerage system, be and the same is found, determined, and
declared to constitute the properties of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system of the village.
(Ord. 78-28, passed 11-14-78; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.103 SYSTEM OWNED AND OPERATED BY VILLAGE.
   The waterworks system and the sanitary sewerage system shall be owned and
operated by the village as a combined utility, known as the combined waterworks
and sewerage system of the village, and all improvements and extensions to said
waterworks or sewerage system, either or both, shall be considered as
improvements and extensions to said combined utility. All the properties,
assets, obligations, and liabilities, of all kinds, of said waterworks system
and of said sewerage system, existing, outstanding, and accruing or to accrue,
shall be held, used, confessed, and acknowledged as the properties, assets,
obligations, and liabilities of said combined utility.
(Ord. 78-28, passed 11-14-78; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
2017 S-21
§ 50.104 DAMAGE TO SEWER WORKS UNLAWFUL.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.105 CONNECTION OF SEWERS TO STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS ON GORDON DRIVE
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect or
cause to be connected, any drain carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink,
basement, septic tank, cesspool, industrial water, or any fixture or device
discharging polluting substances, to any storm water drainage system in the
village, constructed as part of the improvement set forth in Ordinance 91-4.
   (B)   This section is intended to and shall be in addition to all other
ordinances, rules and regulations concerning sewers and shall not be construed
as repealing or rescinding any other ordinance or part of any ordinance, unless
in direct conflict therewith.
(Ord. 91-4, passed 3-12-91; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.106 PROHIBITING THE USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY BY THE
INSTALLATION OR USE OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY WELLS.
   (A)   Recitals. The foregoing recitals shall be and are hereby incorporated
into and made a part of this section as if fully set forth in this division
(A).
   (B)   Use of groundwater as a potable water supply prohibited. The use or
attempted use of groundwater as a potable water supply from within the area
shown on Exhibit A of Ord. 20-18 by the installation of wells or by any other
method, is hereby prohibited. This prohibition expressly applies to the Village
of Chatham. Exhibit B of Ord. 20-18 contains the corresponding parcel
identification numbers identified in Exhibit A.
   (C)   Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $250 or more than $500 for each
violation.
   (D)   Definitions. The following terms as used in this section shall have
the meanings, respectively, ascribed to them below:
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.
(Ord. 19-14, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-18, passed 6-23-20)
WATER REGULATIONS
§ 50.110 WATER DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby established an administrative department of the village to
be known as the Water Department. The head of the Water Department shall be an
employee of the village who shall be known as the Water Department Lead Worker.
The Water Department shall operate and maintain the combined waterworks and
sewer system of the village subject to all ordinances and resolutions adopted
by the President and Board of Trustees of the village. The Water Department
Lead Worker shall be supervised by the General Foreman.
(Ord. 70-7, passed 5-7-70; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.111 RESERVED.
§ 50.112 RESERVED.
§ 50.113 RESERVED.
§ 50.114 FAILURE OF METER.
   Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair, or for any cause,
fails to properly register the water passing through the same, the consumer
shall be charged at the rate shown for the corresponding time of the previous
year under like conditions. If no record of the previous year exists, then it
shall be the duty of the Utility Billing Personnel to estimate or determine so
far as he can the amount of water consumed during the time such meter fails to
operate, and the consumer shall pay the amount so estimated.
(Ord. 70-7, passed 5-7-70; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
Cross-reference:
   Testing of meters, see §
50.026
§ 50.115 CONNECTION OF EQUIPMENT.
   No owner or plumber shall be permitted to conduct water pipes into any two
distinct premises unless separate and distinct stopcocks shall be placed on the
outside of such premises along the sidewalk opposite the same, nor shall any
pipe be allowed to cross lots or buildings to adjoining premises, except at the
discretion of the Lead Worker of the Water Department.
(Ord. 70-7, passed 5-7-70; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.116 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   The corporate authorities may by resolution suspend the use of lawn
fountains and hoses for sprinkling lawns and gardens, and water for car washing
and similar uses, whenever in their opinion public exigencies require it.
(Ord. 70-7, passed 5-7-70; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.117 TAP REGULATION; FEE.
   (A)   For customers located within the corporate limits, a one-inch tap
shall be $1,150 for each connection made to the village water distribution
system. For extraterritorial customers the tap fee shall be $1,200 for a one-
inch tap. For taps other than one-inch, the fee shall be based on the current
cost of material and labor.
   (B)    For additional irrigation taps, customers may utilize either a dual
setter, single setter or an additional water tap at the fees set forth in this
division (B). A customer with a “dual setter” water meter pit installed on the
property, where the Water Department unlocks the second meter and installs an
HRE and ERT, shall pay an additional tap fee of $300. A customer with a “single
setter” water meter pit or a service line already installed on the property,
where the Water Department digs around the existing water meter pit and cuts in
another meter setter to the existing water service line, shall pay an
additional tap fee of $700. A customer that requires another water tap for the
irrigation meter installation shall pay the current village tap fee of $1,150.
   (C)   Water tap fees shall be paid at the time of application for a building
permit, except in the case of a new service to an existing building, in which
case fee shall be paid upon application for water service.
   (D)   If an application for building permit or water service is denied, the
fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. 73-11, passed 12-20-73; Am. Ord. 77-25, passed 9-27-77; Am. Ord. 06-16,
passed 4-25-06, Ord. 15-28, passed 6-23-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16; Am.
Ord. 16-22, passed 5-24-16; Am. Ord. 18-26, passed 5-22-18)
§ 50.118 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Authority is hereby vested in the Village Board of Trustees to set and
adjust established rates and charges for the use and service of water supplied
through the waterworks system of the village, payable monthly within 15 days
after the rendition of each bill.
   (B)   The rates may be adjusted annually based on the South Sangamon Water
Commission rate changes.
   (C)   The rates may be posted and made available for public inspection both
at the Village Hall and on the village website.
   (D)   Before any rate change goes into effect, the village will give notice
by posting the upcoming rate change on the consumer's bill at least 30 days
prior to implementation of the rate change. The proposed rate changes will also
be posted next to the current rates that are posted at the Village Halt and on
the village website at least 30 days prior to implementation of the rate
change.
   (E)   All rate changes must be approved by the Village Board of Trustees,
and a resolution outlining the new rates must be passed prior to raising or
lowering the current rates.
   (F)   Identified funds collected for penalties shall be deposited into a
separate account designated as the Water and Sewer Rate Stabilization Account.
Such monies shall be maintained in the account and its use shall be in the
Village Board's discretion. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the deposit of funds
into the rate stabilization account is not intended to restrict, in any manner,
the use of these funds.
   (G)   A separate charge shall be made for each apartment, place of business
or dwelling unit in all buildings containing two or more apartments, places of
business, or family units. A minimum facility charge shall be applied to all
water connections.
   (H)   In addition to the foregoing, the Village Board shall set and adjust
the rate to be charged to the Fire Protection District per year for each fire
hydrant connected to the waterworks system for fire protection.
(Ord. 70-7, passed 5-7-70; Am. Ord. 97-08, passed 4-8-97; Am. Ord. 99-06,
passed 2-9-99; Am. Ord. 00-29, passed 6-13-00; Am. Ord. 06-15, passed 4-25-06;
Am. Ord. 07-12, passed 4-24-07; Am. Ord. 07-21, passed 5-22-07; Am. Ord. 07-52,
passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 08-14, passed 4-22-08; Am. Ord. 09-18, passed 5-12-09;
Am. Ord. 10-20, passed 4-27-10; Am. Ord. 11-02, passed 1-25-11; Am. Ord. 13-29,
passed 9-10-13; Am. Ord. 15-28, passed 6-23-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.119 WATER LEAKS AND HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.
   (A)   To protect life and property, as well as to prevent the waste of our
resources, when the village discovers hazardous water service conditions or
water leaks, the utility requires these problems to be fixed in a timely
manner. Attempts will be made to alert the customer to the unacceptable
conditions.
   (B)   If the problem is not repaired, the utility has the right to
disconnect service with notice until the repairs have been made.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.120 BILL ADJUSTMENTS FOR WATER LEAKS.
   (A)   If a customer has a water leak that causes an increase in their
monthly bills, the village may provide an adjustment to the customer's bill as
long as the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The leak must have caused water usage to exceed twice the normal
seasonal usage used by the customer (taken as average usage of the last six
full usage readings of the respective season, extrapolated as necessary for
customers who have not resided in the location for the appropriate time frame;
and
      (2)   The leak must be repaired within 30 days of the earliest of either:
         (a)   Notification by the village of an excessive water usage, or
         (b)   Mailing date of utility billing first containing the excessive
usage.
      (3)   The customer has requested the leak adjustment, in the form
prescribed by the village, and has provided proof of repair or inspection in
the form of receipts, invoices, or sworn statement, confirmed by village meter
reading verification, and
      (4)   Except as set forth in division (B)(1)(c), the customer has not
received a water leak adjustment in the preceding three years.
   (B)   The following water leak adjustments are available:
      (1)   (a)   For indoor leaks or other leaks when the water has discharged
through the sanitary sewer system - 50% credit of charges for water usage in
excess of the seasonal average, with no credit for sanitary sewer charges.
         (b)   For underground, external or other leaks when the water has not
discharged through the sanitary sewer system -50% credit of charges for water
usage in excess of the seasonal average and up to 100% credit for sewer charges
in excess of the seasonal average, to the extent such credit is approved by the
Springfield Metro Sanitary District.
         (c)   A credit of up to 100% for sewer charges in excess of the
seasonal average usage may be available for all confirmed and repaired
underground/external leaks without regard to the three-year limit, to the
extent such credit is approved by the Springfield Metro Sanitary District.
      (2)   Water leak credits are limited to a maximum of two billing periods.
   (C)   Seasonal usage is computed based on the following demand periods:
      (1)   High-demand — Meter readings from April through September
      (2)   Low-demand — Meter readings from October through March
   (D)   A residential customer who has experienced increased usage but is
unable to identify a specific leak source, may still qualify for the relief
offered herein, provided the criteria in division (A) are otherwise met and
further provided that through meter readings, the village is able to confirm
the increase in consumption has ceased.
   (E)   The village may offer an Extended Payment Plan under the following
circumstances: a customer has been back billed for utility services, a customer
has a large balance remaining after an adjustment is granted under the water
leak adjustment policy, or for a large balance due for a water leak that was
not eligible for adjustment under the water leak adjustment policy. Customers
who have failed to make a payment under a previous Promissory Payment
Arrangement or a previous Extended Payment Plan within the last 12 months will
not be permitted to enter into an Extended Payment Plan.
   (F)   When the payment plan has been agreed upon between the customer and
the Utility Collections Specialist, the Utility Collections Specialist will
confirm each payment amount due and each due date with the customer. A payment
plan confirmation notice will also be mailed to the customer's billing address.
As long as the customer complies with the agreed upon Extended Payment Plan, no
penalties will be assessed to the account. With a signed payment agreement the
customer agrees to the following:
      (1)   The village may establish a monthly payment schedule over a period
not to exceed four months for amounts not eligible under the water leak
adjustment policy. The customer must pay one-fourth of the amount due at the
time the payment arrangement is entered into.
      (2)   The village may establish a monthly payment schedule for amounts
that are a result of back billed utility services. The payment period shall not
exceed the period of time for which the services are back billed.
      (3)   In addition to the monthly past due installment, the customer must
pay his or her current utility bills on time.
      (4)   If the customer defaults on any part of the payment arrangement,
the village will demand payment in full or their service will be disconnected.
(Ord. 15-04, passed 2-10-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.121 RESERVED.
§ 50.122 WATER SERVICE TO PREMISES LOCATED WITHIN OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   It is the policy of the village not to serve customers located within
the corporate limits of any other municipality which has a waterworks system.
   (B)   All customers of the village waterworks who annex to another
municipality with a waterworks system may, at the discretion of the village,
have their water service terminated with six months prior written notice, which
notice shall be provided after the date of annexation.
(Ord. 96-21, passed 2-27-96; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.123 LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.
   (A)   The owner of any lot, building or premises, the occupant thereof, and
the customer of the waterworks system shall be jointly and severally liable to
pay for water service on the premises; and the water services shall be
furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner
of the premises, occupant and customer of the water service are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the village.
   (B)   In the event an account has been established by a person other than
the owner of the property and has been disconnected due to delinquency, the
village may require that the account be transferred into the name of the owner
of the property as a condition of continued service.
(Ord. 15-28, passed 6-23-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 50.130 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
   As set forth in §
150.04, the village has adopted the State of Illinois Plumbing Code, 2014
edition, by reference. Pursuant to that code and pursuant to a mandate of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, the regulations appended to this
chapter as the Appendix are hereby adopted and shall govern the village's
cross-connection control program.
(Ord. 86-25, passed 11-25-86; Am. Ord. 98-49, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.131 NOTICE TO CUSTOMER; BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE INSTALLATION.
   If, in accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent of Water
shall give notice to the water customer to install an approved backflow
prevention device immediately. The water customer shall, at his or her own
expense, install the approved device at a location and in a manner in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code and all applicable local regulations
and shall have inspections and tests made of the approved devices upon
installation as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code and local regulations.
(Ord. 86-25, passed 11-25-86; Am. Ord. 98-49, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.132 APPROVAL OF WATER SUPPLY.
   No person shall establish or permit to be established, or maintain or permit
to be maintained, any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency
water supply other than the regular public water supply of the village may
enter the supply or distribution system of the village, unless the private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of the
supply shall have been approved by the Superintendent of Water and the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 86-25, passed 11-25-86; Am. Ord. 98-49, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.133 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   The Superintendent of Water shall cause surveys and investigations to be
made of industrial and other properties served by the public water supply to
determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may
exist. The surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record
and shall be repeated at least every two years or as often as the
Superintendent of Water deems necessary. Records of the surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years.
(Ord. 86-25, passed 11-25-86; Am. Ord. 98-49, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.134 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTOR.
   The Village Water Department shall hire a cross-connection control device
inspector or shall train an existing employee to perform such function. The
cross-connection control device inspector shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying the presence
or absence of cross-connections. The Superintendent of Water or his or her
authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water supply or distribution
system of the village for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the
customer regarding the required cross-connection control inspection. On demand,
the owner, lessee or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
Superintendent of Water any information which he may request regarding the
piping system or systems or water use on the property. The refusal of this
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent
of Water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 86-25, passed 11-25-86; Am. Ord. 98-49, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.135 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATION; RECONNECTION FEE.
   The Superintendent of Water of the village is authorized and directed to
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service
to any property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter is known to exist and to take other precautionary measures as he or
she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public
water supply distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be
restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter, and until a reconnection fee is paid to
the village. The Superintendent of Water may disconnect a customer on oral
notice if there is in the Superintendent's opinion an imminent danger of
harmful contamination of the public water supply system. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. There may be
immediate disconnection without notice to any party to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply; provided
that, in the reasonable opinion of the Superintendent of Water or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the
public water supply, the Superintendent of Water or its agents or assigns shall
be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may
result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the
terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without
notice.
(Ord. 86-25, passed 11-25-86; Am. Ord. 98-49, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.136 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COST OF CLEANUP.
   Any consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained, or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of
the potable water supply system.
(Ord. 86-25, passed 11-25-86; Am. Ord. 98-49, passed 9-22-98; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
BUILDING SEWERS
§ 50.150 CONNECTION OF BUILDING SEWER.
   (A)   When the public sewerage system of the village is not available under
the provisions of §
50.177, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal
system in compliance with the "Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act,"
effective July 1, 1974, as amended (225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.).
   (B)   When the public sewerage system of the village becomes available to
any person using a private sewage disposal system, the building sewer shall be
connected to the public sewer within 60 days of the date of such availability
and the private sewage disposal system shall be disconnected. A private sewage
disposal system shall not be abandoned in such a fashion as to create a health
or safety hazard or in violation of federal, state, or local environmental
control, health, or safety laws, rules, or regulations.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.151 COST OF BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION.
   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of a
building sewer shall be paid by the owner thereof. The owner shall indemnify
the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of a building sewer. The owner shall be
responsible for maintenance of the line, pipe, and service equipment of the
building sewer to the point at which such sewer is connected to the public
sewer, shall be deemed the owner thereof, and shall be responsible for all
costs or damages incurred by the village for failure to maintain or construct
the building sewer in accordance with this chapter, applicable local, state,
and federal law, and rules and regulations enacted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.152 INDEPENDENT BUILDING SEWER REQUIRED.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, provided however, that where one building stands at the rear of
another on an interior lot and no private sewer is otherwise permitted by this
chapter, or the public sewer cannot be constructed to the rear building through
an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front
building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one
building sewer.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.153 PRIOR CONSTRUCTED BUILDING SEWERS.
   Building sewers constructed prior to April 10, 1979 may be used in
connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test
by the village, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.154 BUILDING SEWER CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the size, slope,
alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be
used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the
trench, shall all conform to the current requirements of the Springfield
Sanitary District, or the current building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village. When no such ordinances,
codes, rules, or regulations are in effect, the materials and procedures set
forth in current specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials,
"Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9.", and current
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,
shall apply.
   (B)   The building sewer shall be a minimum diameter of four inches and
constructed of cast iron soil pipe, ASTM specifications (A74-72) or equivalent;
vitrified clay improved bell sewer pipe, ASTM specification (C-594-74);
Schedule 40 PVC-DWV pipe (ASTM D 2665-74); Schedule 40 ABS-DWV pipe (ASTM D
2661-74); or ABS solid wall (Sidewall Thickness to Diameter Ratio 23.5) (ASTM D
2751-73).
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.155 DRAIN CONNECTIONS.
   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.156 CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Springfield Sanitary District, the building
and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the village, or
the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society
of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice
No. 9," and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any
deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the
Sanitary District or the village before installation. No such connection shall
be made except by a person licensed under the provisions of "An Act in relation
to the licensing and regulation of plumbers, to repeal a certain Act therein
named, and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof.", approved July
13, 1953, as amended (I.R.S. Ch. 111, § 1101 et seq.); or by a person
authorized to perform such work by the Sanitary District.
   (B)   No connection of a building sewer to the public sewer shall be made,
nor shall any parts of the building sewer and its connection to the building
drain be covered until inspected for compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and approved by a duly authorized employee of the village.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.157 BUILDING SEWER EXCAVATION.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
SEWER USE AND DISCHARGE REGULATIONS
§ 50.170 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOD. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in
five days at 20° C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building to the public sewer of the
village including that part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the public sewer beginning five feet
(1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user of publicly owned treatment works:
      (1)   Identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972,
Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:
         (a)   Division A: Agriculture, Forestry, and Fishing.
         (b)   Division B: Mining.
         (c)   Division D: Manufacturing.
         (d)   Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services.
         (e)   Division I: Services.
      (2)   A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined
by the village or the Springfield Sanitary District that it will introduce
primarily segregated domestic waste or wastes from sanitary conveniences; or
discharge wastewater to the public sewer which contains toxic pollutants or
poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of the wastewater
treatment plant, or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
or which constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a public nuisance,
or creates any hazard in or has an adverse effect on the waters receiving any
discharge from the wastewater treatment works.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid, or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow, or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial,
or business establishment, or process or from the development, recovery, or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that has a flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day;
has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal system
receiving the waste; has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as
defined in standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act; or is found by
the permit issuance authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES
permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of effluent from that
treatment works.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent, being 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
   ppm. Parts per million by weight.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the sanitary sewer system of the village.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. The sanitary sewer of the village. It shall include sewers
within or outside the village boundaries that serve one or more persons and
ultimately discharge into the village sanitary sewer system, even though such
sewers may not have been constructed with village funds.
   RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL USER or NON-INDUSTRIAL. Any user of the public
sewer of the village not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an
industrial user as provided for in this section.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface, and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation, and pumping of sewage.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface, and groundwater drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. That portion of precipitation that is drained into the
sewers.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USER CLASS. The type of user either "residential or commercial" (non
industrial) or "industrial" as defined herein.
   WASTEWATER or SEWAGE. The spent water of a community, which may be a
combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial
buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater,
surface water, and stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
GENERAL SEWER PROVISIONS
§ 50.171 CONNECTION TO SYSTEM REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   The owner of any premises in the village is required, at the owner's
expense, to connect such premises to the village sewerage system as soon as it
is constructed and in operation.
   (B)   In addition to the payment of the construction costs and assessments,
if any, the owner of the premises shall pay the connection fees required by the
Springfield Sanitary District.
(Ord. 76-1, passed 2-10-76; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16) Penalty, see §
50.999.
§ 50.172 SEWERS IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS.
   Sanitary sewer mains shall be constructed throughout an entire subdivision
platted after the effective date of this chapter in such manner as to serve
adequately all lots and tracts with connection to the public sanitary sewerage
system. Such sewer mains shall be subject to the approval of the Village Board
of Trustees and the regulations of applicable state agencies.
(Ord. 76-1, passed 2-10-76; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.173 STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to connect
or cause to be connected, any drain carrying or to carry, any toilet, sink,
basement, septic tank, cesspool, industrial water, or any fixture or device
discharging polluting substances, to any storm water drain in the village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to knowingly
cause any storm water drainage system, surface water drainage ditch, or natural
drain in the village to be obstructed so as to impede its natural flow.
(Ord. 77-14, passed 5-24-77; Am. Ord. 77-20, passed 6-28-77; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16) Penalty, see §
50.999.
§ 50.174 OBJECTIONABLE WASTE DISPOSAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.175 UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or other
polluted waters.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.176 CONSTRUCTION OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITY UNLAWFUL.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.177 SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley, or right-of- way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the village, is
required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein
and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter within 60 days after date of official
notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the
property line.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.178 CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL STANDARDS.
   Any person required by law to install a sanitary sewer for connection to the
public sewer in the village shall use materials conforming to the standards of
this section:
   (A)   Public sewer materials shall be acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS)
plastic. Sewer pipe and fittings shall conform to currently dated standards of
the American Society for Testing Materials, American Standards Association,
American Water Works Association, or the General Services Administration
(federal specification) for the type of pipe suitable for the use intended.
   (B)   ABS Truss Pipe shall comply with D2680-75-Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-
Styrene Composite Sewer Pipe Type SC Joint.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 80-1, passed 1-22-80; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.179 PUBLIC SEWER PERMIT.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the village.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.180 PUBLIC SEWER DISPOSAL STANDARDS.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards, including, but not
limited to those of the Springfield Sanitary District.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.181 CAPACITY OF DOWNSTREAM SEWER FACILITIES.
   No building sewer connection shall be permitted unless the downstream
sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.182 RESTRICTIVE PROVISIONS; NOTICE.
   (A)   The issuance of any permit, notice or grant of authorization, or
conduct of any inspection by the Springfield Sanitary District shall be deemed
permit, notice or authorization, for such purposes as stated therein, or
adequate inspection when the requirements, regulations, or ordinances therefor
of the Sanitary District are as restrictive, or more restrictive than the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any notice or application required by the Sanitary District for
connection, inspection, service, for any other purpose shall be provided to the
village within such time as may be required by the Sanitary District. The
provisions of such notice or application to the village within the time
specified hereinbefore shall be deemed sufficient notice or application for
such purposes as may be required by this chapter.
   (C)   Compliance with any testing or inspection requirements imposed by the
Sanitary District pursuant to ordinance or regulation shall be deemed
compliance with testing or inspection requirements imposed herein provided that
such tests or inspections are conducted at least as frequently as required by
this chapter.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.183 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.
   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any storm water,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary or
public sewer.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.184 REGULATIONS CONCERNING USE OF STORM SEWERS AND SUMP PUMPS.
   The following regulations shall govern the use of village storm sewers
(defined as any underground storm sewer belonging to the village or public or
private aboveground structure, such as a swale or French drain, which flows
into an underground storm sewer belonging to the village) and the discharge of
sump pumps on public property and rights-of-ways.
   (A)   No sanitary sewage, solid waste or industrial waste shall be deposited
into any storm sewer or other place which is upstream of a storm sewer.
   (B)   No rainwater downspouts, surface drains, footing drains or sump pumps
shall be connected to a sanitary sewer. Rainwater downspouts, surface drains,
footing drains and/or sump pumps may be connected to storm sewers only when the
Village Engineer determines there is sufficient capacity to carry the
additional water.
   (C)   No sump pump effluent shall be discharged onto any public right-of-way
or other public property unless approved by the Village Engineer.
   (D)   No landscape waste (e.g., grass clippings, shrubbery, clippings,
leaves) shall be deposited into any storm sewer or inlet.
   (E)   No unauthorized person shall break, deface, destroy or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the village storm sewer
network.
   (F)   Sump pumps that were discharging onto public rights-of-way or property
as of June 1, 2012 are exempt from the requirement of division (C) if their
owners:
      (1)   Contact the Public Works Department and register such sump pumps on
or before September 1, 2012; and
      (2)   Consult with the Public Works Department regarding methods of
redirecting or minimizing sump pump effluent discharged to public rights-of-way
or property; and
      (3)   Implement remedial measures recommended by the Public Works
Department, so long as such remedial efforts cost the owner less than $50 per
sump pump.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 12-20, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.185 DISCHARGE OF PROHIBITED WASTES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of sewage works.
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, and paper dishes and cups, or milk containers, either
whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (B)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
discretion of the village that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65°
C).
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials, or
containing oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/1 or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F.
and 150° F.
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village.
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the village for such materials.
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations after treatment of the composite
sewage exceeding limits which may by established by the village as necessary to
meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/1 as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations.
      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/1 at any time except as
permitted by the village in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations.
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning sulfate);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters. The village will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relating to flows and velocities
in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage
treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.186 PROHIBITED WASTE DISPOSAL OPTIONS.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment
provided in Ch. 1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part
128 — Pretreatment Standards, "Federal Register" Volume 38, No. 215, and any
amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the village may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the village may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
   (B)   If the village permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the village, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.187 INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the village they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, any flammable wastes, or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the village and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.188 MAINTENANCE OF FLOW EQUALIZING FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at the owner's expense.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.189 CONTROL MANHOLE INSTALLATION.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.190 WASTE ANALYSIS; COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village, the Springfield Sanitary
District, or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year the owner must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such time and in such
manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the village. At such times as
deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.191 ANALYSIS STANDARDS.
   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect effects of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.205 CONNECTION FEE.
   (A)   No person shall be deemed authorized to uncover, make any connection
with, or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sanitary sewer of the
village or appurtenance thereof under §
50.179 without such person first paying the connection fee required by Section
5 of "An Ordinance of The Springfield Sanitary District, regulating
construction, connection and use of sewers and providing for collection of
connection fees and use charges and expenditure of the same for improvement to
and operation and maintenance of the District Collection System and Treatment
Works", dated May 1, 1975, as now or hereafter amended.
   (B)   The Treasurer of the village is hereby authorized to collect such fees
for sewer connection to lots and properties located in the Buckingham Place
Subdivisions of the village, and shall, as soon after receipt of such
connection fees as is practicable, notify The Springfield Sanitary District of
such receipt and shall remit such funds to the Treasurer of The Springfield
Sanitary District and receive a receipt therefor.
(Ord. 79-29, passed 8-14-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.206 MINIMUM CHARGE; BASIC USER RATE.
   (A)   Authority is hereby vested in the Village Board of Trustees to set and
adjust established rates and charges for the use and service of the combined
waterworks and sewer system, based on consuming water supplied through the
waterworks system of the village, payable monthly within 15 days after
rendition of each bill.
   (B)   The rates may be adjusted annually, based on the Springfield Metro
Sanitary District rate changes as presented each year.
   (C)   The rates shall be posted and made available for public inspection
both at the Village Hall and on the village website.
   (D)   Before any rate change goes into effect, the village will give notice
by posting the upcoming rate change on the consumer's bill at least 30 days
prior to implementation of the rate change. The proposed rate changes will also
be posted next to the current rates that are posted at the Village Hall and on
the village website at least 30 days prior to implementation of the rate
change.
   (E)   All rate changes must be approved by the Village Board of Trustees,
and a resolution outlining the new rates must be passed prior to raising or
lowering the current rates.
   (F)   Identified funds collected for penalties shall be deposited into a
separate account designated as the Water and Sewer Rate Stabilization Account.
Such monies shall be maintained in the account, and its use shall be in the
Village Board's discretion. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the deposit of funds
into the rate stabilization account is not intended to restrict, in any manner,
the use of these funds.
   (G)   A separate charge shall be made for each apartment, place of business,
or dwelling unit in all buildings containing two or more apartments, places of
business, or family units. A minimum facility charge shall be applied to all
sewer connections.
   (H)   The owner of any lot, building or premises, the occupant thereof, and
the customer of the sewer service of the system shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for such sewer service on the premises; and the service shall be
furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner
of the premises, occupant, and customer of the sewer service are jointly and
severally liable.
(Ord. 78-32, passed 11-28-78; Am. Ord. 09-19, passed 5-12-09; Am. Ord. 10-21,
passed 4-27-10; Am. Ord. 11-02, passed 1-25-11; Am, Ord. 15-27, passed 6-23-15;
Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.207 RESERVED.
§ 50.208 RESERVED.
§ 50.209 RESERVED.
§ 50.210 RESERVED.
§ 50.211 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized
representative shall have access to any books, documents, papers, and records
of the village which are applicable to the village system of user charges or
industrial cost recovery for the purpose of making audit, examination,
excerpts, and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance with the terms of the
special and general conditions to any state grant.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
SEWER INSPECTIONS; ENFORCEMENT
§ 50.225 INSPECTION NECESSARY FOR CONNECTION PERMIT.
   No person who has been authorized by and under the ordinances of the village
to lay, construct, install, or relay, reconstruct, or reinstall any sewer,
other than a building sewer, either within or without the village, which sewer
will or is designed to connect with any public sewer, including a public sewer
of the Springfield Sanitary District, within the jurisdiction of the village,
shall make any connection with or to such an existing public sewer until a
sewer connection permit first shall have been issued by the village authorizing
such connection. No such sewer connection permit shall be issued by the village
until such person first shall have made application to the corporate
authorities of the village for such connection and have such newly constructed,
laid, or installed sewer televised by an approved sewer television inspection
service and such televised inspection observed and approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works of the village or his designee to determine
whether such newly constructed, laid, or installed sewer meets the provisions
of this chapter relating to specifications and requirements for public sewers.
(Ord. 81-4, passed 2-24-81; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.226 INSPECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   The person making application for such sewer connection permit for a
sewer referred to in §
50.225 shall inform the Superintendent of Public Works of the date, time, and
place for a television inspection of the newly laid, installed, or constructed
sewer and pay to the Village Clerk a $20 inspection permit fee. The
Superintendent of Public Works or his agent designated by him shall appear and
observe such inspection. The Superintendent of Public Works or his agent who
observed such television inspection shall report in writing to the corporate
authorities of the village at its next meeting the results of such observation
of the television inspection, whether such sewer meets the provisions of this
chapter relating to specifications and requirements for public sewers, together
with his recommendations for acceptance or rejection of such sewer as part of
the public sewer system of the village based upon the specifications and
requirements of the village relating to public sewers within its system.
   (B)   No such application for sewer connection permit shall be approved and
no permit shall be issued by the village unless the Superintendent of Public
Works or his agent shall first have observed such television inspection and
shall have reported in writing to the corporate authorities of the village as
set forth in this section.
   (C)   The corporate authorities, by Resolution, shall accept or reject such
newly laid, installed, or constructed sewer as part of the public sewer system
of the village. If the corporate authorities accept such sewer, such acceptance
authorizes its connection with the existing public sewer system and issuance by
the Superintendent of Public Works a sewer connection permit. If the corporate
authorities reject such sewer, the corporate authorities, through the
Superintendent of Public Works, shall inform the applicant of the reason for
rejection. If such rejected sewer is relaid, reconstructed, and reinstalled,
additional applications for connection with the public sewer system of the
village may be made by such person, but only if additional television
inspections of such sewer are provided as above set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 81-4, passed 2-24-81; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.227 INSPECTION EXPENSES; AUTHORIZED INSPECTORS.
   (A)   All expenses incident to a sewer television inspection required shall
be borne by the person making application for connection with the public sewer
system of the village.
   (B)   The Village Engineer shall file with the Village Clerk, and update
from time to time, a list of persons or organizations which are approved to
provide sewer television inspection service.
(Ord. 81-4, passed 2-24-81; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.228 INSPECTOR POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Duly authorized employees of the village, the Springfield Sanitary
District, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and identification,
are authorized to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The village shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper,
or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment. Prior to the commencement of any inspection by the village
authorized under this section, the village shall serve or cause to be served
upon the owner and occupant of any parcel of real property subject to the
inspection a written notice of inspection which states the date and time the
inspection is to occur, For purposes of this section, service of the written
notice of inspection shall be made by mailing a copy of the notice of
inspection by certified mail to the owner and occupant or occupants of the real
property subject to the inspection. In the event service cannot be perfected
upon either the owner or the occupant or occupants of the real property by
certified mail, service may be perfected by posting a copy of the notice of
inspection in a visible and conspicuous location upon the real property subject
to the inspection at least four days prior to the date the inspection is to
occur.
   (B)   Should either the owner or any occupant of the real property subject
to the inspection deny access to the parcel of real property to any duly
authorized employee of the village to commit or cause to have committed any
acts which either prevent or frustrate an inspection authorized by this
section, the village shall be authorized to petition the Circuit Court for an
order to conduct an inspection to insure compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
   (C)   In conducting an inspection authorized by this section, village
personnel shall enter only upon that portion of a parcel of real property and
its improvements for which access is necessary in order to conduct an
inspection to determine compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.229 OBSERVANCE OF SAFETY RULES.
   While engaged in the performance of duties referred to in §
50.228, the duly authorized employees of the village shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the owner. The owner shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the village employees and the village
shall indemnify the owner against loss or damage to its property by village
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the owner and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the owner to maintain safe and accessible conditions.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.230 ADMITTANCE TO PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which
the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All
entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the
private property involved.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.231 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; HEARING.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, except as provided
in §
50.104, shall be served by the village with written notice of the violation
either by mailing a copy of the notice to the owner of the real property where
the violation occurred, by certified mail, or by posting the notice in a
visible and conspicuous place upon the real property where the violation
occurred. The notice shall state:
      (1)   The nature of the violation;
      (2)   The provision or provisions of this chapter violated;
      (3)   The date the notice was either posted or deposited in the United
States mails;
      (4)   The requirement that the violation be corrected within the time
period prescribed in division (D) of this section; and
      (5)   The right of the violator to a hearing before the Board of Trustees
in accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Any person served with a notice of violation may request a hearing
before the Board of Trustees to challenge the violation by serving a written
demand for a hearing upon the Village Clerk within ten days of the date the
notice of violation was either posted or deposited in the United States mails.
No later than 45 days following receipt of demand for a hearing, the village
shall hold a hearing on the violation. Written notice of the time and place of
the hearing shall be served by United States mails on the person requesting the
hearing.
   (C)   At the hearing, the person requesting the hearing may present any and
all evidence relevant to challenge the violation. The village shall present any
and all evidence in its possession which was the basis for serving the notice
of violation. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Board of Trustees shall
either rescind the notice of violation or affirm the violation.
   (D)   Any person served with a notice of violation of this chapter which is
not rescinded shall have 21 days from the date the notice of violation was
served, or, in the event a hearing is held, affirmed by the Board of Trustees
to come into compliance with the terms of this chapter. However, in no event
shall the provisions of this division preclude the village from petitioning the
Circuit Court for and obtaining legal or equitable relief against violators of
this chapter requiring the violators to comply with the provisions of this
chapter within a time period shorter than that prescribed by this division when
there is a compelling public interest to seek such relief.
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision for which violation is not
corrected within the period prescribed by division (D) of this section, shall
be liable to a penalty of not to exceed $500 per violation for each day beyond
the time period for correction prescribed in division (D) of this section in
which the violation continues.
   (F)   The village may institute and prosecute in its name any suits on other
actions necessary or appropriate for the collection of any penalties imposed by
this section, or for legal or equitable relief to prevent the continuance of
violations of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.232 LIABILITY TO VILLAGE FOR VIOLATION.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the village by reason of such violation in the amount of such damage
as may be incurred to the village sewage system and the cost of correction
thereof in addition to the penalties provided in §
50.231 above.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.233 DISCONNECTION.
   (A)   In addition to such other remedies available to the village for
violations of this chapter, the village, upon making a determination that a
building sewer is connected to a public sewer in a manner prohibited by the
terms of this chapter, may take or cause to be taken any steps necessary to
either plug or disconnect such a connection without giving notice to either the
owner or occupant of the real property affected by the plugging or
disconnection if a notice of violation was served upon the owner of the real
estate in the manner prescribed by §
50.231 and a hearing is not requested by the owner to challenge the notice of
violation within the prescribed period of time; or a compelling public interest
exists for making the plug or disconnection.
   (B)   Upon making a determination that a violation of §
50.177 or
50.150 has occurred and is continuing, may take or cause to be taken any steps
necessary to terminate or disconnect water service to the subject property
without further notice if the owner or occupant of the premises was served
written notice of violation under the provisions of §
50.231 and a hearing was not requested by the owner to challenge the notice of
violation within the prescribed time, or was served written notice to connect
within the 60 day period prescribed in either §
50.177 or §
50.150; or a compelling public interest exists for the termination or
disconnection of water service.
(Ord. 79-11, passed 4-10-79; Am. Ord. 80-3, passed 2-26-80; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
ELECTRIC SERVICE REGULATIONS
SERVICE
§ 50.501 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. A person who applies for electric utility service.
   CUSTOMER. A person who has agreed with the village to pay for electric
utility service.
   ELECTRIC SERVICE. Electric utility service provided to a customer at a
specific location.
   MASTER-METERED APARTMENT BUILDING. A building of two or more rental dwelling
units where any electric service is registered by a single meter for all the
units.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL SERVICE. Electric utility service rendered which is not
residential service.
   PERSON. Any person, firm or corporation.
   POINT OF DISTRIBUTION. The secondary lugs of a village-owned transformer or
the point of connection to the village overhead secondary distribution system.
   USER. A person who receives electric utility service.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Chatham, Illinois.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.502 ELECTRIC DEPARTMENT.
   There is hereby established an administrative department of the village to
be known as the Electric Department. The head of the Electric Department shall
be an employee of the village who shall be known as the Electrical Foreman. The
Electric Department shall operate and maintain the electric system of the
village subject to all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the President and
Board of Trustees of the village. The Electrical Foreman shall be supervised by
the General Foreman.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.503 RESERVED.
§ 50.504 RESERVED.
§ 50.505 TEMPORARY OR PERMANENT SERVICE; INSTALLATION CHARGES.
   Where no line extension or pole setting is required, the installation charge
for furnishing service for home or small commercial construction shall be $20
plus the cost of any material supplied. When it is necessary to extend lines or
poles, the customer shall pay the costs to install and remove such lines. If
the extension is more than 100 feet, the customer shall pay a deposit of 110%
of the estimated cost to install and remove such lines. After construction and
removal of the temporary services, the village shall refund to the applicant
any amount by which the deposit exceeds the actual cost.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 4-25-06; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.506 EXTENSION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation applying for the extension of the
village distribution system to provide electric service to a single-family
dwelling, commercial or business establishment, or trailer or mobile shall not
be granted such service by the village, unless and until such applicant shall
pay to the village the following fee plus actual cost of wire and equipment
required:
      (1)   Residential overhead service. Service will be installed from
masthead on structure to distribution line by village.
 
Service         Fee plus cost
100 Ampere      $80 plus actual costs
200 Ampere      $95 plus actual costs
Over 200 Ampere $95 plus actual costs plus difference in actual cost of service
                over 200 ampere service
 
      (2)   Residential underground service. Service will be installed from
meter base to distribution line by customer or property owner. The maintenance
of underground service from the meter base to distribution line is the
responsibility of the customer or property owner.
 
Service         Fee plus cost
100 Ampere      $80 plus actual costs
200 Ampere      $95 plus actual costs
Over 200 Ampere $95 plus actual costs plus difference in actual cost of service
                over 200 ampere service
 
      (3)   Trailer mobile home park service. The owner is to furnish and
install 200 ampere meter pedestals at a location designated by the village.
 
Service Fee plus cost
Per Lot $80 plus actual costs
 
   (B)   In the event that any extension of service requires expenditures by
the village for equipment, materials, labor, overhead, interest, taxes, or
engineering studies of an extraordinary nature, the applicant shall pay to the
village an additional amount to cover the actual costs of said items.
   (C)   In the event an extension of service entails construction of
distribution facilities which provide a public benefit beyond the benefit to
the applicant, the village may in its discretion elect to share the cost of the
service extension with the applicant. If such extension may provide benefit to
other future customers, an agreement may be entered into by the village and the
applicant for rebates of a portion of the construction costs from said future
customers to be collected by the village.
   (D)   Special rules apply for extension of service into new residential
subdivisions, and subdividers are entitled under proper circumstances to
partial rebates. The rules are set forth in §§
50.550 through
50.557 of this chapter.
   (E)   In the event the village annexes premises which are provided electric
service as of the date of annexation by another electric provider, then the
village shall either:
      (1)   Purchase the distribution system of such electric provider; or
      (2)   Construct sufficient distribution lines to duplicate the service
provided to the premises by such electric provider. Any such purchase or
construction of the village's primary distribution system shall be at the
village's expense. A customer transferring from another electric provider to
the village system shall pay the residential service fees set forth in division
(B) of this section; or
      (3)   By mutual agreement between the village and the present supplier,
the village may provide service to customers in such newly annexed premises
through the distribution system of the present supplier provided that the
village can arrange for delivery of energy to the present provider on behalf of
the village. Such arrangements may also apply to areas expected to be annexed
for which a pre-annexation agreement exists.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 06-16, passed 4-25-06; Am. Ord. 16-15,
passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.507 RESERVED.
§ 50.508 ADDITIONAL SERVICE AND OTHER CHARGES.
   Sales of electric service and other charges hereunder are subject to an
additional charge pursuant to 1 and 2 of "The Public Utilities Revenue Act", as
amended, levying a State of Illinois tax on the service rendered. Such
additional charge shall be added at 5% or such other rate as determined by law,
on the net amount of the bill as calculated according to the rates and charges
set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.509 SERVICE CONNECTION.
   The village will provide only one service connection to each separate
premise of a customer. Additional service may be provided upon written request
of a customer, application therefor, and payment of fees or charges therefor.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.510 RESERVED.
§ 50.511 RESERVED.
§ 50.512 COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL BILL ADJUSTMENT.
   If it is determined that a commercial or industrial customer has a power
factor of less than .95, the village shall charge $.027 per KVA hour reactive
load for the difference between the customer's power factor and .95. This
charge shall be added to the monthly bill.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.513 FUEL ADJUSTMENT COST.
   In addition to the rates and charges in §
50.570, the fuel adjustment cost charged to the village by its electric
supplier will be passed through to all customers.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.514 LIABILITY DISCLAIMED BY VILLAGE.
   The village will endeavor to maintain adequate and continuous electric
service to its customers, but does not guarantee that the supply of energy
will, at all times, be constant; and the village shall not be liable to
customers for any damages resulting from temporary cessation of service
occasioned by supply interruptions from the village's wholesale power supplier,
or from fire, explosion, flood, strike, insurrection, mob violence,
governmental interference, breakdown or injury to machinery or distribution
lines, weather, ice or other accidents or causes not reasonably within its
control.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.515 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   From time to time the village may enter into special contractual agreements
where the nature of the electric service requires it to do so.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.516 EXTRATERRITORIAL SERVICE.
   The village electric system is intended primarily to serve customers located
within the corporate limits of the village. Service to customers outside the
corporate limits of the village is the exception and not the rule. Electric
service to any new extraterritorial customer shall be expressly subject to the
condition that if the village requests the property owner and electors residing
thereon either individually or in conjunction with other property owners, to
file a petition for annexation to the village or to execute an annexation
agreement requiring the annexation of the property upon its becoming
contiguous, then the property owner shall do so.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.517 RESERVED.
EQUIPMENT
§ 50.530 ELECTRICAL CODE COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Electric service shall not be supplied, installed, or maintained at
any location where the installation of such service, or the load to which it is
connected or delivered is not in compliance with the Electrical Code adopted by
the Village of Chatham.
   (B)   The Electric Department shall comply with the American National
Standards Institutes National Electrical Safety Code, Code C-2, with respect to
installations of plant equipment.
   (C)   Every use of the electric plant and system of the village shall have a
metered connection to the system for each customer thereof, and no service of
the electric plant and system shall be provided to any person who shall not
comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.531 VILLAGE POLICY REGARDING UNDERGROUND SERVICE LINES.
   It is the policy of the village that all new electric distribution service
line construction and all replacement of existing electric service line
construction, shall be underground if circumstances reasonably permit. This
policy does not apply to primary distribution feeders to which multiple
subdivisions may be connected or to rural circuits. Exceptions to this policy
shall be made only upon a written request by the Village Administrator to the
standing committee of the Village Board having jurisdiction over the Electric
Department, and written approval by such standing committee.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.532 INTERFERENCE WITH EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with in any manner or in
any way deface, injure, remove, tamper with, or destroy any wires, wiring
poles, transformers or meters, including seals, or other property of the
village electric distribution system.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.533 OBSTRUCTION OF EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall obstruct, impede, hinder, annoy, or otherwise impair a
village employee in obtaining access to and examination of any meter or other
equipment of the village electric distribution system.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.534 LIABILITY TO VILLAGE FOR DAMAGE.
   Any person damaging any facilities of the village electric distribution
system as described in this chapter shall be liable to the village for all
damages which the village may sustain. The measure of liability shall be the
cost of repairing or replacing the facilities as damaged, including costs of
material and labor. Where an electrical meter has been altered or bypassed, the
measure of liability for damages shall also include estimated charges for
unmetered electric service.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.535 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS.
   The village shall have the power to remove or cause to be removed any trees
or branches on any street, avenue, or alley or easement in any way obstructing
or interfering with the installation of and any portion of the electrical
service system or its proper maintenance and operation. Customers of the
village have the obligation to remove or cause to be removed all such
obstructions interfering with lines between the Point of Distribution and the
customer's meter.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.536 UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   All electric transmission and distribution lines constructed within platted
subdivisions of the village shall be placed within the utility easements
established and reserved by such plat; or on easements for such purpose
acquired by grant from owners of the property traversed.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.537 PHOTOCOPY DEPICTION OF SERVICE LINES.
   At the time of installation, the location of all electric service lines
shall be depicted and identified on a photocopy of a plat of the portion of the
village in which the service line is installed, and a copy thereof shall be
maintained by the Village Electric Department for future reference by the
Electric Department, the Water Department, and any other utility company or
private owner who may wish to refer thereto for reasons of safety and to avoid
the nuisance and costs of interfering with an existing electric line in place
when excavating for other purposes.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.538 LIABILITY OF THE VILLAGE AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The village is the owner of all electric lines and equipment from the
village substation through and including the customer electric meters. The
village's liability and responsibility for maintenance of the system ends at
the customer's property line.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.539 LOCATION OF UNDERGROUND CABLES.
   Before performing any digging or excavation work in any area of the village
where there are underground cables, residents of the village shall contact the
Electric Department and the Electric Department shall, within one working day
of such contact, come to the premises where the digging or excavation is to
take place, and shall locate any underground cables for the resident free of
charge. Any person who damages an underground cable through digging or
excavation and has not complied with this section shall be liable to the
village for the cost of any repairs which the village has to make to its
underground cables.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.540 OTHER REQUIREMENTS FOR CUSTOMER CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Customers of the village electric system shall be responsible for
installing any necessary protective equipment to protect the village electric
system from interference and damage by customer equipment.
   (B)   No customer shall cause harmonics of 60 cycles per second to be
applied to the village's electric system which could adversely affect the
village's system or the equipment of other customers. The arithmetic sum of the
harmonics of 60 cycles per second in the voltage and current wave forms must be
less than 10%, with no single harmonic in excess of 5%.
   (C)   No customer shall install equipment for the generation of electric
power which can be operated in parallel with the village electric system
without prior express written approval of the Village Administrator. The
village may elect to have all plans, specifications, etc., for all such
generation and connecting devices submitted to a qualified expert for review
prior to installation thereof. All costs for such review shall be billed to the
customer.
   (D)   When a customer desires to install or use stand-by generating
facilities for the purpose of supplying customer's energy requirements in the
event of interruption of the village's normal supply, a written service
agreement shall be entered into before such facilities are installed or used.
To prevent parallel operation of customer's stand-by generating facilities with
the village's service, back feed to the village's distribution system and
damages to the customer's facilities, the customer shall be required to install
a non-fused, double throw switch, or when approved by the village, non-fused
double throw switches, acceptable to the village, for transferring the
customer's load from the village's normal source of supply to the customer's
stand-by generation.
   (E)   All grounding conductors for service shall be installed, owned and
maintained by the customer. All meter boxes and enclosures shall be permanently
grounded in accordance with the latest addition of the village Electrical Code.
Temporary services shall be grounded by a grounding rod of ten feet in length
driven two feet below the surface.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
ELECTRIC EXTENSION FOR NEW RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS
§ 50.550 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOND CONTRACTUAL ARRANGEMENTS. Refers to any contracts or undertakings of
the village in connection with any bond ordinance or bond issue of the village.
   DEVELOPER. Refers to persons, firms or corporations which own the land in a
New Residential Subdivision at the time of its final platting.
   ELECTRIC SYSTEM BOND ORDINANCE. Refers to "An Ordinance Authorizing and
Providing for the Issuing of $ 1,100,000 Electric System Revenue Bonds for the
Village of Chatham, Sangamon County, Illinois, for the Purpose of Defraying the
Cost of Purchasing an existing Electric Substation Site from Central Illinois
Light Company and for the Improvement of that Substation Facility in the
Village of Chatham, Illinois", Ordinance No. 86-9.
   NEW RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. Refers to a subdivision, at least 80% of the
land of which is zoned residential, the final plat for which is accepted by the
village on or after August 1, 1990.
   VILLAGE. Refers to the Village of Chatham, Illinois.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.551 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   Electric systems for all new residential subdivisions shall be constructed
by the village as set forth in these regulations, and developers shall be
eligible for partial rebates of the electric system costs for such
subdivisions, only by complying with these regulations.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.552 ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT FEE.
   (A)   The developer shall pay, within ten days of acceptance of the final
plat of a new residential subdivision, or such other time as may be agreed in
writing by developer and the village, the sum of $1,200 per platted lot. This
sum is an estimated per lot cost of developing an electric system and emergency
warning system as of the date of adoption of these regulations. This sum shall
be adjusted from time to time by the Utilities Manager to reflect the actual
cost of constructing the improvements. If the actual cost of constructing the
improvements is greater than $1,200 per lot, the developer shall be required to
pay a supplemental fee of the difference. If the actual cost is less than
$1,200 per lot, the village shall refund the difference. Actual cost shall be
computed using the actual cost of materials, engineering fees, easements, and
labor costs (including fringe benefits and payroll taxes), plus the fair market
value of the use of village equipment, plus the actual cost of any
subcontracts, plus any other out-of-pocket expenses, plus a reasonable amount
for overhead and administration (at least 15% but not more than 35%).
   (B)   This section shall apply to any final plat accepted after March 1,
2005.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 06-46, passed 8-22-06; Am. Ord. 09-37,
passed 7-28-09; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.553 RESERVED.
§ 50.554 ACCEPTANCE OF DEVELOPMENT FEE CONSTITUTES AGREEMENT BY THE VILLAGE TO
BUILD ELECTRIC SYSTEM.
   By accepting the development fee from the developer, the village thereby
agrees to build the electric system, both the street lighting system and the
residential electric system, up to and including the meters. The village shall
have full discretion in the design of the system and computation of costs. The
village may use subcontractors at its sole discretion.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.555 RESERVED.
§ 50.556 RESERVED.
§ 50.557 REGULATIONS SUBJECT TO CHANGE OR ABOLISHMENT.
   No developer shall have any vested right to any rebate. These regulations
may be changed or abolished in the sole discretion of the corporate authorities
of the village, and in such event, the village may retain all funds on deposit
with the village.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
ELECTRIC RATES
§ 50.570 ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES.
   (A)   Authority is hereby vested in the Village Board of Trustees to set and
adjust established rates and charges for the use and service of electricity for
light and power, based upon electricity consumed as recorded by electronic
meters based upon the type of premises served.
   (B)   The rates may be adjusted annually, based on the supply average
participant cost from the Illinois Municipal Electric Agency, as presented in
January of each year.
   (C)   The rates shall be posted and made available for public inspection
both at the Village Hall and on the village website.
   (D)   Before any rate change goes into effect, the village will give notice
by posting the upcoming rate change on the consumer's bill at least 30 days
prior to implementation of the rate change. The proposed rate changes will also
be posted next to the current rates that are posted at the Village Hall and on
the village website at least 30 days prior to implementation of the rate
change.
   (E)   All rate changes must be approved by the Village Board of Trustees,
and a resolution outlining the new rates must be passed prior to raising or
lowering the current rates.
   (F)   Identified funds collected for penalties shall be deposited into a
separate account designated as the Electric Rate Stabilization Account. Such
monies shall be maintained in the account, and its use shall be in the Village
Board's discretion. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the deposit of funds into
the rate stabilization account is not intended to restrict, in any manner, the
use of these funds.
   (G)   The owner of any lot, building or premises, the occupant thereof, and
the customer of the electric service of the system shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the electric service on the premises; and the
service shall be furnished to the premises by the village only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant, and customer of the
electric service are jointly and severally liable.
(Ord. 95-16, passed 3-28-95; Am. Ord. 99-33, passed 6-22-99; Am. Ord. 01-83,
passed 12-18-01; Am. Ord. 07-13, passed 4-24-07; Am. Ord. 07-22, passed 5-22-
07; Am. Ord. 08-13, passed 4-22-08; Am. Ord. 09-20, passed 5-12-09; Am. Ord.
09-63, passed 10-27-09; Am. Ord. 14-24, passed 5-13-14; Am. Ord. 15-26, passed
6-23-15; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.571 ESTABLISHMENT OF SENIOR CITIZEN DISCOUNT.
   (A)   The village offers a discount, currently 10% on the residential
electric consumption charge to qualifying senior citizens for their primary
residence. To qualify:
      (1)   The applicant must be 62 years of age or older;
      (2)   There is no one residing in the residence who is employed on a
full-time basis;
      (3)   The electric service must be in the senior applicant's name; and
   (B)   Initial application can occur at any time by contacting the Utility
Office. If the customer is currently on a Budget Billing Program, the discount
will be effective at the start of the next Budget Billing Cycle. From time to
time the village may require re-application. Contact the Utility Office for
more information.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise specifically set forth in a section of this Chapter 50, any
violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $750. Each day a violation of this chapter continues is deemed a
separate offense.
(Ord. 72-8, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 16-15, passed 4-26-16)
APPENDIX: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section
   
1.   Purpose, application and policy
   
2.   Definitions
   
3.   Water system
   
4.   Cross-connection prohibited
   
5.   Surveys and investigations
   
6.   Where protection is required
   
7.   Type of protection required
   
8.   Backflow prevention devices
   
9.   Inspection and maintenance
   
10.   Booster pumps
   
11.   Violations; penalty
§ 1 PURPOSE, APPLICATION AND POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
      (1)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      (2)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable
water system and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      (3)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   (B)    Application. These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the village. These
regulations are applicable to all water systems as long as such are physically
connected to the public potable water supply system of the village, regardless
of whether such system is actually in use. The consumer shall bear the ultimate
responsibility of ensuring compliance with this appendix.
(C)   Policy. The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or backsiphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the Water Department Foreman or his
authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Water Department Foreman
shall give notice to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention
device at each service connection to the premises. The consumer shall
immediately install such approved device or devices at his own expense;
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such
device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been installed. The
consumer shall retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair
as required in § 5(D)(4) of this appendix for a period of at least five years.
(Am. Ord. 19-01, passed 1-22-19)
§ 2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes or streams or process fluids or used water. These waters may be polluted
or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or system over
which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer's
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into another.
   (1)   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection formed when a water system
is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   (2) INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water tightness of each check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means
a hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.
   NON-POTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of Illinois Administrative Code 604.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of private
water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the
curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons
live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping
units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois
Administrative Code 604 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:
   (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
   (2)   Process waters;
   (3)   Used water originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
   (4)   Cooling waters;
   (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams or irrigation systems;
   (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and
   (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids used
in industrial or other processes or for fire fighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at
least 25 persons at least 50 days per year. A public water supply is either a
"community water supply" or a "non-community water supply."
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valve at less than the supply pressure.
The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the
device and each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
§ 3 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   (B)   The public water supply shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the potable water
system under the control of the Superintendent of Water up to the point where
the consumer's water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   (E)   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use.
§ 4 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the Agency.
   (C)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
§ 5 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection device inspector for the inspection of the presence
or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises and testing,
repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
   (B)   On request by the Water Department Foreman or his authorized
representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping
system or systems or water use within the customer’s premises. The consumer’s
premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Water Department Foreman
for the verification of information submitted by the inspection consumer to the
public water supply custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange annual
inspections through a licensed Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector
(“CCCDI”) of water use practices on his premises to determine whether there are
actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water system through which
contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her water system or the
public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing
inspections must be conducted in accordance with 225 ILCS 320/3 (1).
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   All cross-connections are removed or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and backsiphonage.
      (2)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      (3)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
      (4)   All inspection and maintenance requirements under this appendix are
met.
(Am. Ord. 19-01, passed 1-22-19)
§ 6 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections made
after the effective date of these regulations to the public water supply as
described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890; and the
Agency's regulations, 35 Illinois Administrative Code 680. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Water, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply
system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Water Department Foreman and
the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources of systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Water Department Foreman.
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Superintendent of Water and the Cross-Connection Control Device Inspector,
are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it
impractical to determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re- established.
   (C)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections to
the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois
Administrative Code 890; and the Agency’s regulations, 35 Illinois
Administrative Code 653. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device
shall be installed on each service line to a consumer’s water system serving,
but not necessarily limited to, the following types of facilities unless the
Water Department Foreman determines that no actual or potential hazard to the
public water supply system exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
      (2)   Laboratories.
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants.
      (6)   Chemical plants.
      (7)   Metal plating industries.
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      (10)   Car washes.
      (11)   Pesticide or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
      (12)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
(Am. Ord. 19-01, passed 1-22-19)
§ 7 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
6 of this appendix shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as
follows:
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard.
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a
pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under §
6(B)(4) of this appendix shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation
or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals.
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source.
      (3)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source, or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source.
      (4)   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to
the fire safety system.
§ 8 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by this appendix
shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of
the University of Southern California, American Water Works Association,
American Society of Sanitary Engineering or American National Standards
Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35
Illinois Administrative Code 653.802 and only as specified by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California or applicable industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended by
the manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance
manual shall be available on-site.
§ 9 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions. Beginning on February 1, 2019, the Village of
Chatham will provide or contract for services to coordinate, facilitate and
organize testing records for all cross-connection assemblies that are connected
to the Village of Chatham's water distribution system. The Village of Chatham
or its vendor will make the back-flow testing data available 24 hours a day,
seven days a week to Village of Chatham personnel, who in turn can produce and
submit required back-flow testing reports to the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency thereby closely following the established requirements
outlined in the IEPA's Illinois Cross-Connection Control Program. The annual
fee to the Village of Chatham for data collection and mailing service will be a
$495. There will also be will a charge $14.95 for each back-flow test submittal
by any accredited CCCDI tester licensed in the State of Illinois. It is also
required that any CCCDI licensed tester be registered with the Village of
Chatham at no additional charge for registration. Any homeowner or business
owner can access a list of certified CCCDI testers through the Environmental
Resources Training Center (ERTC) website at http://www.siue.edu/ertc/ or
Village of Chatham's website at www.chathamil.net.
      (2)   Each backflow testing company performing backflow testing within
the village shall set up an account in the online system, supplying and
maintaining required information pertaining to the testing company, testers,
test kits and licenses. Each testing company shall adhere to all procedural
policies and agree to all terms specified in the online system.
      (3)   For each backflow test report submitted by the backflow testing
company via the online system, the testing company will be required to pay a
filing fee due at the time of submittal. All backflow test reports must be
submitted electronically via the online system. The filing fee shall be paid
directly to the firm acting as the village's authorized online system provider.
The tester may elect to absorb the filing fee for competitive marketing
purposes or pass it along to the device owner when invoicing for the test.
      (4)   All test/maintenance reports must include the following
information:
         (a)   Administrative information.
            1.   Water customer or facility name;
            2.   Contact name and telephone number;
            3.   Complete service address (physical address);
            4.   Complete mailing address;
            5.   Physical location of backflow prevention assembly/device
within facility or on the property (room number, room name, landmarks);
            6.   Type of assembly/device (RP, RPDA, DCVA, DCDA, etc.);
            7.   Assembly make, model, size and serial number;
            8.   CCCDI printed name, signature, and CCCDI license number; and
            9.   Date and time of test.
         (b)   Test information.
            1.   Whether the valve passed or failed the test;
            2.   Gauge readings for each component tested (check valves, relief
valve opening point.air inlet opening point, etc.); and
            3.   Repair Information (any new parts used, components cleaned and
replaced, etc.).
         (c)   Other information.
            1.   Notations of any unsafe conditions or safety issues; and
            2.   Notations of any installation abnormalities or deficiencies.
      (5)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter.
      (6)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter and required service performed
within 15 days.
      (7)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer and required service performed within five
days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent of Water.
(Am. Ord. 19-01, passed 1-22-19; Am. Ord. 23-41, passed 11-14-23)
§ 10 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the
Superintendent of Water, at least once a year, that the device is operable.
§ 11 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Discontinuance of water service. The Water Department Foreman shall
deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the
water service, or shall ensure the auxiliary water system is disabed to any
premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by these regulations
is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the
Water Department Foreman or if it is found that the backflow prevention device
has been removed or bypassed or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on.
the premises or if a low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not
installed and maintained in working order.
   (B)   Correction of prohibited conditions. Water service to such premises
shall not be restored until the consumer has corrected or eliminated such
conditions or defects in conformance with these regulations and to the
satisfaction of the Water Department Foreman and the required reconnection fee
is paid.
(Am. Ord. 19-01, passed 1-22-19)
CHAPTER 51: [RESERVED]
Editor’s note: For provisions regarding combined waterworks and sewer system,
see §§
50.101 et seq.
CHAPTER 52: [RESERVED]
Editor’s note: For provisions regarding electric service regulations, see §§
50.501 et seq.
CHAPTER 53: SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL
Section
Licensing Provisions
   
53.001   License required for engaging in the business of solid waste hauling
and disposal
   
53.002   Information required to obtain license
   
53.003   Procedures for granting or denying license; appeals
   
53.004   Conditions of licensure
   
53.005   Duration of license; fee; contractual obligations
   
53.006   Records
Regulations for Operation
   
53.015   Rate structures
   
53.016   Procedures in the event of unmarketability of recyclables
   
53.017   Unlicensed waste collection prohibited
   
53.018   Collection of over-sized solid waste
   
53.019   Customer’s responsibilities
Administration and Enforcement
   
53.030   Enforcement of provisions
   
53.031   Revocation of license for noncompliance of provisions
   
53.032   More stringent law to apply
   
53.033   Effective date; publication
Village Green Program
   
53.045   Definitions
   
53.046   Green program
   
53.047   Green program service charge
Residential and Commercial Yard Waste Collection and Disposal System
   
53.060   Establishment of system
   
53.061   Definitions
   
53.062   Yard waste collection
Solid Waste (Garbage) Responsibility
   
53.075   Responsibility of owners and occupiers of land to remove solid waste
(garbage)
Tree Waste Collection and Disposal System
   
53.090   Definitions
   
53.091   Limb and branch collection
Village Burn Pile
   
53.105   Definitions
   
53.106   Hours of operation
   
53.107   Burn pile regulations
   
53.108   Signage
   
53.109   Burning
   
53.110   Additional regulations pertaining to commercial operators
   
53.999   Penalty
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR ENGAGING IN THE BUSINESS OF SOLID WASTE HAULING
AND DISPOSAL.
   After the effective date of this chapter and subject to §
53.018, no person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of solid
waste hauling or disposal within the corporate limits of the village unless
licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.002 INFORMATION REQUIRED TO OBTAIN LICENSE.
   Any person, firm or corporation may obtain a license to collect solid waste
within the village by submitting an application for license to the Village
Clerk and paying an annual license fee as set forth in §
53.005. The applications shall be on forms prescribed by the Village
Administrator, and shall contain the following information about and agreements
of the waste hauler:
   (A)   The name, business address, and telephone number of the person, firm
or corporation;
   (B)   If the waste hauler is a corporation, the corporation shall provide a
certificate of good standing and the name, address and telephone number of the
corporation’s president and of its registered agent.
   (C)   If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall provide the
names, addresses and phone numbers of all partners holding greater than a 5%
interest.
   (D)   If the applicant is doing business under an assumed name, the
applicant shall provide a copy of the assumed name certificate filed with the
County Clerk, if a natural person, and of the assumed name certificate filed
with the Secretary of State, if a corporation.
   (E)   The applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance in the amount
of $1 million per occurrence, including insurance for each vehicle, and shall
agree to keep such insurance in force during the term of the license.
   (F)   The applicant shall provide proof of workers’ compensation insurance
covering its employees in the statutory amount, and shall agree to keep such
insurance in force during the term of its license.
   (G)   The applicant shall attach a schedule of rates which it will charge
upon the license being granted, and shall agree to provide the village with
written notice of any rate changes at least 30 days in advance of rate changes.
   (H)   The applicant shall agree to observe all provisions and conditions of
this chapter during the term of its license.
   (I)   If in accordance with §
53.016, the applicant proposes not to recycle a class of recyclable materials
due to the unavailability of markets, the applicant shall include with the
application, or may submit under separate cover, proof of the unavailability of
the market.
   (J)   The application shall be signed by the applicant or a responsible
officer of the applicant.
   (K)   The applicant shall agree to clearly mark each vehicle used for solid
waste collection with the applicant’s name.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.003 PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE; APPEALS.
   (A)   Applications for solid waste hauling licenses shall be submitted to
the Village Clerk, who shall give the applications to the Village Administrator
for processing. The Village Administrator shall, within seven working days of
receipt of the application by the Clerk, grant or deny the license. If the
license is denied, the Village Administrator shall state the reasons for the
denial in writing. Thereupon, the applicant may appeal in accordance with
division (B) of this section; or may within ten days resubmit a license
application curing any deficiencies, without having to pay an additional
license fee. The Village Administrator shall grant the license or render a
final decision denying the license, within seven working days of resubmission.
   (B)   In the event a license is denied, the applicant may appeal the denial
of the application to the administrative committee of the Village Board within
seven working days of the final denial, and may request a hearing before the
Administrative Committee, which will be held within seven working days of the
request. The administrative committee’s determination shall be reviewable in
accordance with state statutes pertaining to administrative review.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.004 CONDITIONS OF LICENSURE.
   A licensee under this chapter shall, as a condition of licensure do the
following things:
   (A)   The licensee shall pick up and segregate by class the following
classes of solid waste:
      (1)   Unseparated solid waste, which shall consist of solid waste of all
descriptions other than yard waste, including recyclable materials that have
not been segregated by the customer.
      (2)   Recyclable materials, which shall include aluminum cans; steel
cans; tin-coated cans; bi-metal cans; glass bottles and jars of all colors; No.
1 plastic; No. 2 plastic; and newspapers, when such recyclable materials are
separated by the customer from other classes of solid waste and placed in
separate marked bins, or in the case of newspapers, placed in paper bags or
baled with twine; or, in the case of plastic bottles, tied together with twine.
The village reserves the right to expand the definition of recyclable materials
due to changing market conditions, without affecting the validity of the
license.
      (3)   Yard waste, which shall include leaves, grass clippings, wood
chips, twigs, and garden waste such as weeds and stalks, when segregated and
bagged in accordance with the regulations of the facility which accepts such
yard waste from the solid waste hauler.
   (B)   The licensee shall transport and dispose of unseparated solid waste in
landfills or by any other method permitted by state and federal law.
   (C)   The licensee shall transport and dispose of recyclable materials by
selling or giving such materials to dealers in recyclable materials.
   (D)   The licensee shall transport yard waste to composting centers or other
facilities which accept yard waste only.
   (E)   Each licensee shall be responsible for handling the recyclable
materials and yard waste of its own customers; however, licensees may agree
among themselves to handle the recyclable materials and yard waste of another
licensee.
   (F)   The licensee shall comply with this chapter and all other ordinances
of the village and with state, county and federal laws and regulations
pertaining to solid waste management.
   (G)   On or before the 15th day of each month the licensee shall provide the
village with data regarding the volume of solid waste, broken down by
categories, disposed of or sold in the previous month, and shall provide any
other data the village may reasonably require.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91) Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.005 DURATION OF LICENSE; FEE; CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS.
   (A)   The annual license fee shall be $ 250. A license shall be effective
from August 1 of any year through and including July 31 of the following year.
The license fee for applications received after August 1 of any year or before
July 31 of any year will not be prorated.
   (B)   A license granted hereunder shall constitute a contract pursuant to
Section 11-19-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code for the duration of the license.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 91-27, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.006 RECORDS.
   The Village Administrator shall design and obtain license and data
collection forms for issuance to each licensee hereunder and shall maintain
records of all licenses granted and denied hereunder. The licenses granted
hereunder shall be serial numbered. All license applications and records
pertaining to grants and denials of licenses shall be subject to disclosure to
the public under the Freedom of Information Act and village policies
implementing that Act.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
REGULATIONS FOR OPERATION
§ 53.015 RATE STRUCTURES.
   A licensee may set its own rates, subject only to the following
restrictions:
   (A)   The licensee shall set volume-based rates for commercial and
industrial customers for collection of unseparated solid waste, and shall
dispose of recyclable materials from such customers free of charge. The
licensee may agree with such customers on any frequency of pickup of solid
waste, provided that all waste is picked up at least once per week. Because the
needs of commercial and industrial customers vary so greatly from customer to
customer, the licensee need not announce a rate of general applicability, and
is free, subject to state and federal law, to discriminate among commercial and
industrial customers in the matter of rates.
   (B)   For residential customers, each licensee shall charge a basic fee,
which will entitle each customer to a once weekly pickup and disposal of one
32-gallon garbage can or a 33-gallon bag of unseparated solid waste, not to
exceed 60 pounds. For unseparated solid waste in excess of the basic service,
the licensee shall charge a per 32-gallon can or 33-gallon bag fee. The
customer shall purchase stickers for such additional cans and bags from the
licensee, and shall affix a sticker to each additional can or bag to be picked
up in addition to the basic service. The rates for residential customers shall
be of general applicability, and there shall be no discrimination among
residential customers as to rates; however, senior citizen discounts are
permissible.
   (C)   Recyclable materials shall be picked up from residential customers
free of charge.
   (D)   Rates for disposal of yard waste shall be volume-based. The licensee
shall charge separately for each 32-gallon can or 33-gallon bag of yard waste.
The customer shall purchase stickers from the licensees and shall affix a
sticker to each can or bag of yard waste. A yard waste sticker shall cost no
less than a sticker for unseparated solid waste.
   (E)   A licensee may change its rates from time to time in its discretion.
The licensee shall provide the Village Administrator with a copy of any rate
change for residential customers at least 30 days in advance of the rate
change, and shall inform each residential customer of the rate change in
writing at least 30 days in advance of its effective date. Notice to customers
may, in the discretion of the licensee, be made by an insert in the monthly
bill. No rate change shall be effective unless these notice provisions are
complied with.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.016 PROCEDURES IN THE EVENT OF UNMARKETABILITY OF RECYCLABLES.
   A licensee may relieve itself of the obligation to pick up and dispose of
any class of recyclable materials by submitting to the Village Administrator
proof of the lack of a reasonable market for such recyclable material. Proof
shall consist of a written statement detailing the efforts the licensee has
made to seek a market for that class of recyclable material and any other
written material the licensee may have in its possession regarding market
trends. Upon receipt of such material, the Village Administrator shall have 15
working days in which to verify the validity of the licensee’s statement and to
seek a market for the class of recyclable materials. If the Village
Administrator finds the licensee’s statement is correct and is unable to find a
market, the licensee may upon 14 calendar days notice to its customers, require
the customers to place the unmarketable class of recyclable material with the
unseparated solid waste for pickup. With any subsequent license application,
the licensee shall submit written information substantiating the continued
unavailability of a market for that class of recyclable materials.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.017 UNLICENSED WASTE COLLECTION PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation not licensed hereunder may collect or
transport solid waste within the corporate limits of the village. No person
other than a licensee hereunder may remove recyclable materials from any
premises located within the corporate limits of the village. This section shall
not be a limitation on the right of any bona fide nonprofit, religious,
charitable or educational organization to collect recyclable materials on the
premises of such organization, or on the right of any person to give recyclable
materials to such organizations or to sell or give his own recyclable materials
to a recyclable dealer.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.018 COLLECTION OF OVER-SIZED SOLID WASTE.
   A licensee under this chapter shall have no obligation to collect, but may
collect for a fee set forth in the licensee’s rate structure, solid waste
materials, including but not limited to appliances, furniture, carpets, trees,
and the like, which do not fit into a 32-gallon container or 33-gallon bag or
weigh in excess of 60 pounds per item. From time to time, the Village
Administrator shall make arrangements for the pickup, disposal, and where
appropriate, recycling, of such materials. Residents of and commercial and
industrial establishments in the village may themselves remove and dispose of
such materials or contract with non-licensees hereunder for the removal of such
materials.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.019 CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   No residential customer of a license shall:
      (1)   Place unseparated and unbagged solid waste or yard waste for
collection in any can larger than 32 gallons, or place unseparated solid waste
or yard waste in any bag larger than 33 gallons;
      (2)   Place more than 60 pounds of unseparated solid waste or yard waste
in any 32-gallon can or 33-gallon bag;
      (3)   Place a can of solid waste for collection which is not firmly
covered with a lid, or a bag which is not tied.
   (B)   No licensee is required to pick up any can or bag of solid waste which
is in violation of this section.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91) Penalty, see §
53.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 53.030 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   The Village Police Department, Public Works Department and Village
Administrator are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.031 REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR NONCOMPLIANCE OF PROVISIONS.
   The Village Administrator may revoke the license of any licensee who fails
to comply with the conditions of licensure set forth in §
53.004. The Administrator shall, before revoking a license, order a licensee to
show cause why the license should not be revoked, and shall specify the
deficiencies which the Administrator believes exist. The licensee shall, within
ten days of the date of the notice, provide the Administrator with written
reasons and evidence why the license should not be revoked. Within five days of
receipt of such evidence, the Administrator shall render a decision, which may
be appealed by the licensee in the same manner as denial of licenses in
accordance with §
53.003(B).
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.032 MORE STRINGENT LAW TO APPLY.
   If state, federal or county law changes to mandate conditions of licensure
more stringent than those set forth in this chapter, such changes shall be
deemed incorporated in this chapter and in all licenses granted hereunder.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91)
§ 53.033 EFFECTIVE DATE; PUBLICATION.
   This chapter is effective August 1, 1991; the Administrator shall begin
accepting and processing license applications on July 1, 1991. The Clerk shall
forthwith publish this chapter in pamphlet form and in the Chatham Clarion, and
shall mail a copy to all waste haulers known to the Clerk to be doing business
in the village.
(Ord. 91-26, passed 6-11-91; Am. Ord. 91-27, passed 6-11-91)
VILLAGE GREEN PROGRAM
§ 53.045 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT (RDV). A residential unit shall include a single-
family dwelling, multi-family dwelling unit, and mobile home not in a mobile
home park whether on public or private streets. A dwelling in a residential
area which contains a "home-type" business enterprise, such as a small beauty
parlor, etc., shall be considered a dwelling unit and receive collection
service.
   UTILITY CUSTOMER. Any resident of any household which has an electric, water
or sewer utility account with the village, or any authorized agent of any
person, firm or corporation having a nonresidential electric, water or sewer
utility account with the village.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
§ 53.046 GREEN PROGRAM.
   The Village Green program shall refer to collection and disposal of
residential and commercial solid waste, yard waste and the collection of tree
limbs and branches and activities necessary to keep streets and alleyways clear
of yard waste and debris. It shall be the responsibility of each residential
dwelling unit and commercial property, at the unit's sole cost and expense, to
contract with a licensed waste hauler for the collection of solid waste. The
village shall contract for the at least semi-annual pick up of yard waste and
the monthly collection of tree limbs and branches. The cost of the semi-annual
yard waste and collection of tree limbs and branches, as set forth herein,
shall be covered by the green program service charge set forth in §
53.047. The Green Program shall also include the annual village clean-up and
other green/recycling projects, including necessary equipment purchases for
street sweeping and other Green Program projects as may be approved by the
corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19; Ord. 22-38, passed 8-9-22)
§ 53.047 GREEN PROGRAM SERVICE CHARGE.
   Each utility customer in the village shall be assessed a monthly service
charge of $5 for each month of the year to defray the cost of collection and
disposal of yard waste pursuant to §
53.062, authorized tree waste pursuant to §
53.091, the annual village clean-up program and other recycling/clean-up
projects of the village and related equipment for street cleaning/clearing. The
service charge shall be charged and collected along with the monthly utility
bill to each customer. The service charges shall be placed in a special fund in
the village treasury and used only to defray the cost of the above described
services in §
53.046.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19; Am. Ord. 23-36, passed 10-24-23)
RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL YARD WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM
§ 53.060 ESTABLISHMENT OF SYSTEM.
   The village hereby establishes a yard waste collection and disposal system.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
§ 53.061 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL YARD WASTE. Locally generated yard material such as grass
clippings, garden debris, leaves, shrubbery or brush or tree trimmings less
than four inches in length and two inches in diameter at commercial properties.
Each commercial property must place this material in a separate identifiable
container or compost yard waste bags or bundled.
   COMPOST YARD WASTE BAGS. Biodegradable sacks designed to store yard waste
with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted. Bags
must be easily identified and distinguishable from regular solid waste
containers.
   RESIDENTIAL YARD WASTE. Household generated yard material such as grass
clippings, garden debris, leaves, shrubbery or brush or tree trimmings less
than four feet in length and two inches in diameter. Each household must place
this material in a separate, identifiable container or compost yard waste bags
or bundled.
   YARD WASTE CONTAINER. Households and commercial properties must provide
their own separate yard waste container or compost yard waste paper bags. Yard
waste containers must be prominently market so that they may be identified by a
passing truck and must be placed at the curb. Containers may not exceed 90-
gallon bins and cannot exceed 50 lbs. in weight.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19; Ord. 22-38, passed 8-9-22)
§ 53.062 YARD WASTE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Collection of yard waste will be for each residential dwelling unit
and commercial property and shall be performed by the village or its contractor
a total of four times, twice per year for a duration of five weeks (spring and
fall) with two trips through the village per five-week period. Collection of
the yard waste outside these designated collection periods must be performed by
each residential dwelling unit's designated waste hauler with appropriate
stickers affixed to bags or containers as required.
   (B)   Containers for yard waste may be either a reusable container clearly
marked “Yard Waste” or a paper or other biodegradable bag with a capacity not
to exceed 30 gallons.
   (C)   The Village's Contractor will pick up an unlimited-number containers
at curbsides. For curbside pickup, all containers shall be placed near the
street in front of the residential unit or in an alley adjacent to the
property. It shall be the responsibility of each resident to see the container
are placed curbside or as close as practicable to collection vehicle routes by
6:00 a.m. on the designated collection day. Curbside refers to that portion of
the right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled roadways (including alleys).
   (D)   Nothing herein shall limit residents of the village from disposing of
yard waste at their own expense in accordance with their respective waste
haulers' rates and procedures.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19; Ord. 22-38, passed 8-9-22)
SOLID WASTE (GARBAGE) RESPONSIBILITY
§ 53.075 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND OCCUPIERS OF LAND TO REMOVE SOLID WASTE
(GARBAGE).
   (A)   All owners and occupiers of land within the village shall remove or
cause to be removed by a licensed solid waste hauler all solid waste (garbage)
other than yard waste, as defined in this chapter, produced or otherwise
accumulated on any premises in the village, at least once weekly.
   (B)   The accumulation of solid waste (garbage) on a premises in violation
of division (A) of this section is hereby declared a nuisance.
   (C)   All leases of real property in the village shall specify, as between
the landlord and the tenant, who is responsible for waste removal from the
premises. However, the failure of the party responsible to remove the waste
pursuant to the lease shall not be a defense for the other party in the event
the village brings an action to enforce division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
TREE WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SYSTEM
§ 53.090 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LIMB AND BRANCHES. Shrubbery or brush or tree trimmings less than four feet
in length and eight inches in diameter generated at the property. Each property
must place this material at the curb for pickup.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19; Ord. 22-38, passed 8-9-22)
§ 53.091 LIMB AND BRANCH COLLECTION.
   (A)   Collection of limb and branches will be for each residential dwelling
unit and each commercial property and shall be performed 12 times per year with
one trip thru the village per month.
   (B)   For pickup, all branches and limbs shall be placed near the street in
front of the property. It shall be the responsibility of each resident to see
the branches and limbs are placed curbside or as close as practicable to
collection vehicle routes by 6:00 a.m. on the designated collection day.
Curbside refers to that portion of the right-of-way adjacent to paved or
traveled roadways.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19; Ord. 22-38, passed 8-9-22)
VILLAGE BURN PILE
§ 53.105 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED TREE WASTE. Tree limbs, branches and trimmings, and leaves
attached thereto, and discarded Christmas trees and wreaths, generated within
the corporate limits of the village.
   AUTHORIZED TREE WASTE. Does not include RESIDENTIAL YARD WASTE as defined in
§
53.061, nor any material generated outside the corporate limits of the village.
   BURN PILE. A village-owned and operated facility for disposing of authorized
tree waste by burning. The burn pile shall be located at 9507 South Main
Street, Chatham, Illinois.
   COMMERCIAL OPERATOR. Any person, firm or corporation which for a
consideration, generates or disposes of authorized tree waste, including but
not limited to persons in the businesses of landscaping, tree removal, tree
surgery and general hauling.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
§ 53.106 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The days and hours of operation of the burn pile shall be 8:00 a.m. through
3:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. However, the Village Manager, Manager of
Public Utilities, or the Manager of Public Works may in their sole discretion
open or close the burn pile at any time and for any reason and without notice.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
§ 53.107 BURN PILE REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall govern the burn pile:
   (A)   No person shall deposit any materials other than authorized tree waste
at the burn pile and shall display a valid permit.
   (B)   All authorized tree waste deposited at the burn pile shall be placed
inside the areas specifically identified by signage erected by the village. No
person shall deposit any materials at the burn pile outside the designated
areas.
   (C)   Residents of the village may deposit authorized tree waste at no
charge after obtaining a free permit, valid for seven days, from the Village's
Utility Office.
   (D)   Commercial operators may not deposit any tree waste at the burn pile.
   (E)   Residents depositing authorized tree waste shall provide evidence of
residency upon request.
   (F)   No person shall be found in or shall deposit any materials in the burn
pile at times other than the hours set forth in §
53.107, or when the burn pile is closed. Any person violating this rule is
deemed a trespasser.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
§ 53.108 SIGNAGE.
   The Village Manager shall cause signage to be erected at the burn pile
indicating:
   (A)   The days and hours of operation; and
   (B)   A summary of the rules as set forth in §
53.107.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
§ 53.109 BURNING.
   From time to time and in accordance with applicable EPA regulations, the
Manager of Utilities or the Manger of Public Works shall arrange for the
burning of materials deposited in the burn pile.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
§ 53.110 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO COMMERCIAL OPERATORS.
   All tree waste generated by a commercial operator shall be removed from the
corporate limits of the village and disposed of by the commercial operator.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a monetary fine not less than $100 nor to
exceed $750. Each and every day that a violation continues shall be considered
a separate offense.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty as prescribed in division (A) of this
section, the village may apply to the court for equitable relief compelling an
owner or occupier of land to abate a nuisance created by violation of §
53.075 of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-16, passed 6-25-19)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
72.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
73.   ADMINISTRATIVE TOWING FEES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Parking
   
70.02   Vehicle weight limits
   
70.03   School zones
   
70.04   Handicapped parking
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Ambulance driver traffic regulations, see §
112.06
§ 70.01 PARKING.
   Whenever the following terms are used in this section, they shall have the
meanings ascribed to them set forth in this section:
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Streets in the Business District consisting of Mulberry
Street between Church Street and Arch Street, Chestnut Street between Church
Street and the Illinois Central Gulf Railroad tracks, Church Street between
Chestnut Street and Walnut Street, and Market Street between Chestnut Street
and Walnut Street.
   CROSSWALK. That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or extension of curb and property lines at intersections or any
other portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways, which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   PARK OR PARKING. The standing of a vehicle whether, occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in the loading or
unloading of merchandise or passengers.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street between the property line and the roadway
not used for sidewalks.
   PROPERTY LINE. The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots
or property abutting thereon.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curb lines or, on streets on which curbs have not been constructed,
that part of a street improved and intended to be used for vehicular travel.
   STAND OR STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public,
as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any vehicle to stand at
any time in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a
policeman or traffic-control device:
      (1)   In any intersection.
      (2)   In a crosswalk.
      (3)   Within 30 feet of a traffic signal or sign on the approaching side.
      (4)   Within 20 feet of any intersection or crosswalk.
      (5)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (6)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
      (7)   On any sidewalk or parkway.
      (8)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle at any time in any of the
following places except in compliance with the direction of a police officer:
      (1)   In any intersection.
      (2)   In a crosswalk.
      (3)   On any sidewalk or parkway.
      (4)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
      (5)   Within 40 feet of a traffic signal or sign on the approaching side.
      (6)   Within 30 feet of any intersection or crosswalk
      (7)   Within 25 feet of a fire hydrant.
      (8)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
      (10)   Any vehicle at any time on either side of Illinois State Route 4,
also known as Main Street, or on Walnut Street, formerly known as County
Highway 40.
   (D)   Either side, both sides, or any portion of any street may be
designated as a restricted parking district by the Village Board and any such
restrictions shall be effective for the time as may be designated by
appropriate signs designating the effective time of day of the parking
restriction, as well as the duration of time that parking is allowed. The
designation shall be evidenced by signs or legends or notices on or near the
curbing of the streets or portions thereof where such restriction is to be
effective.
   (E)   No vehicle shall be parked for any period of time in excess of the
time posted on the officially erected sign or legend or notice effective for
the parking space for which it is erected during the effective time thereof.
   (F)   (1)   No person shall park a truck, except those licensed by the State
of Illinois with a B license classification (8,000 lbs or less), a bus having a
rated seating capacity of 12 or more passengers, farm equipment, construction
equipment, trailers or semitrailers on any public street within the village,
for a period of four consecutive hours or more.
      (2)   No person shall park a utility trailer, recreational vehicles or
trailers, boats or boat trailers on any public street within the village, for a
period of four consecutive hours or more.
      (3)   No person, firm or corporation shall place a roll-off dumpster of
any cubic dimension within the roadway right-of-way boundaries of any street
within the corporate limits of the village.
   (G)   No person shall park a motor vehicle on private property without the
consent of the owner of the private property.
   (H)   Except for those streets in the business district where provision for
diagonal or angle parking has been made, no vehicle shall be parked along any
street other than parallel with the street or curb and headed in the direction
of traffic, with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within six inches of the
edge of the roadway. In no event shall a vehicle be parked headed against the
direction of traffic.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the
purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any street from
which vehicle merchandise is peddled.
   (J)   In addition to the general restrictions, limitations, and requirements
of this section pertaining to all of the streets and thoroughfares of the
village, the parking of vehicles may be prohibited at all times, or between
certain hours, on any street or portion of any street when such parking may
impede the free flow of traffic on such street or create a hazardous condition.
In such case appropriate signs shall be erected and maintained giving notice of
such parking prohibition. No person shall park a vehicle during the time
prohibited at places so indicated by official signs.
   (K)   No vehicle shall be parked for any period of time in excess of the
time posted on the officially erected sign or legend or notice effective for
the parking space for which it is erected during the effective time thereof.
   (L)   The Police Department is hereby authorized to remove and tow away or
cause to have removed and towed away by any commercial towing service any
vehicle unlawfully parked in any place where such parked vehicle creates or
constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of fee hydrant or obstructs the
movement of any emergency vehicle, or any vehicle which has been parked in any
public street or any public place in violation of any provision of this
section. Vehicles towed shall either be removed to the municipal building lot
or to the place of business of the commercial towing company, which shall be
known as the vehicle pound. In addition to any fine provided herein, the owner
of any vehicle so towed shall pay the costs of towing and storage upon
retrieval of his or her vehicle.
   (M)   In all cases of parking violations, the registered owner of the
vehicle at the time of the violation, as well as the vehicle itself and the
actual operator thereof, shall be presumed to be a violator.
   (N)   A vehicle parked or occupying any portion of any street or
thoroughfare in violation of the terms of this section is hereby declared to be
a nuisance which shall be abated by any police officer by impounding such
vehicle, either by placing a traffic violation notice or citation thereon which
shall indicate the nature of the violation, or by placing such notice thereon
and removing and conveying such vehicle to a vehicle pound. A vehicle pound is
declared to be any suitable place designated by the Police Department as a
vehicle pound.
   (O)   Every police office issuing a traffic violation notice or citation
shall, by appropriate mark or symbol, identify himself or herself on such
notice as the officer issuing the same, and shall retain and cause to be filed
in the office of the Clerk or of the Village Administrator, a duplicate of such
traffic violation notice. The traffic violation notice or citation itself shall
be left with the owner or operator of the vehicle if known, or placed in or
affixed to the vehicle if the owner or operator is not present.
   (P)   The owner or authorized operator of any impounded vehicle may have the
vehicle removed from impoundment by paying the penalties imposed by this
section. If for such violation as an impounding fee plus all costs and expenses
that have been incurred for the towage and storage of such vehicle, plus all
impounding fees, towage and storage charges which have theretofore accrued
against such vehicle during the time of his or her ownership thereof.
   (Q)   The owner or driver of any vehicle issued a traffic notice, or
citation for violating any of the provisions of this section may avoid
prosecution for such violation by paying within seven days of the time of the
issuance of such notice or citation at the Village Hall the sum of $15 in
addition to any towage, storage, or impounding fees or charges, if any, and by
surrendering to the Village Clerk or his or her designee the traffic violation
notice or citation delivered to him or her or placed upon such vehicle, after
indicating thereon his or her name, street address, and place of residence. If
such owner or driver fails to pay the designated amount within seven days of
such violation, he or she may thereafter avoid prosecution of the violation
only by paying the sum of $30.
   (R)   The Village Clerk or his or her designee, upon receipt of the payment
of any sum of money by a violator charged with violating any provision of this
section, shall issue to such person a receipt therefore, on an official receipt
form of the village, bearing the signature of the person receiving the fine on
behalf of the village, and the date of its payment. A duplicate receipt,
together with the money paid to village shall be delivered to the village
treasurer who shall credit the funds to the appropriate fund of the village.
   (S)   The owner or driver of any vehicle charged with violating any term of
this section who shall fail to pay the provided hereinabove to avoid
prosecution for his offense when a traffic violation or citation has been
issued, shall be prosecuted for violating this section, and shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $200 for a single offense.
(Ord. 71-5, passed 10-21-71; Ord. 97-04, passed 3-11-97; Am. Ord. 99-20, passed
5-11-99; Am. Ord. 21-5, passed 2-9-21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated or caused to enter the streets of the
village in violation of the limits herein established.
   (B)   The word LOAD , when used in this section means the weight transmitted
to the road by the wheels of a vehicle being the weight of such vehicle plus
the weight of its contents, if any.
   (C)   The maximum gross weight of a vehicle on the road surface through any
two wheels on the same axle of any vehicle shall not exceed 16,000 pounds, nor
shall the gross weight exceed 800 pounds per inch in width of tire upon such
wheels; provided further, that the gross weight, including the weight of the
vehicle and maximum load, shall not exceed 24,000 pounds.
   (D)   Any peace officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and its load is in excess of the limits allowed by this section is
authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the same,
either by means of a portable or stationary scale. The officer may require that
such vehicle be driven to the nearest scale. Whenever an officer, upon weighing
a vehicle and load, determines that the weight is in excess of the limits
prescribed by this section, the officer shall require that the driver of the
vehicle stop the vehicle in a suitable place and that the vehicle remain
standing until such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to
effect compliance with the limits established by this section. Any vehicle so
unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle at the sole
risk of the owner or operator.
   (E)   No vehicle shall be operated at any time over or upon the streets of
the village if such vehicle has the periphery of any of the road wheels any
block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, lug or any projection of metal or wood
radially beyond the tread or traffic surface of the tire. However, this section
shall not be construed to prohibit the use of tire chains during the months of
December, January, February, or March.
   (G)   The Village Administrator shall erect, or cause to be erected and
maintained, signs designating the weight limitations at each end of that
portion of any street affected by this section.
   (H)   The Superintendent of Village Operations, in his discretion, may issue
a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle of a size, weight or load exceeding the limits established by this
section. When such permit is sought for overweight, the application shall
describe the load to be moved and the vehicle to be used therefor, and shall
state with reasonable specificity, the reason why the load cannot be moved in
compliance within the limits of this section. The Superintendent of Village
Operations is authorized to limit the number of trips and specific streets on
which the load and vehicle or vehicles may be transported and may otherwise
prescribe the limits of operation of the vehicle when necessary to insure
against damage to the street, foundations, surfaces, or structures. The
Superintendent of Village Operations may require a bond, undertaking, or other
security as may be necessary to compensates the village for injury or damage to
any street or road structure.
   (I)   The weight limits established by this section shall be in effect at
all times; provided, however, that any vehicle exceeding 16,000 pounds gross
weight required to make a delivery or pick-up at a place of residence or
business along said streets may do so, but said vehicle shall move along the
streets from the nearest point of entry to the place of pick-up or delivery and
shall leave said street at the nearest intersecting street to said point of
delivery or pick-up. The load limitations herein prescribed shall not pertain
to public passenger vehicles or common carriers.
   (J)   Any person driving any vehicle, object, or contrivance upon any
streets of the village shall be liable for all damages which the street or
structure may sustain as a result of any violation of this section.
      (1)   Whenever the operator or driver of the vehicle is not the owner
thereof, but is driving or moving the same with the express or implied
permission of the owner, the owner and driver or operator shall be jointly and
severally liable for any damages.
      (2)   Damages may be recovered in a civil action brought by the village.
(Ord. 79-30, passed 10-9-79) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   Certain streets or parts thereof are designated by the village as
school zones and public thoroughfares on or which children pass along, to and
from school during school days when school children are present.
   (B)   The maximum speed limit of 20 miles per hour is established as the
speed limit in school zones within the village during school days when school
children are present.
   (C)   The Village President is authorized and directed to post appropriate
signs giving proper due warning that a school zone is being approached,
indicating the school zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school
days when school children are present.
(Ord. 81-14, passed 7-14-81) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   For specific school zone locations, see
Ch. 71, Schedule III
§ 70.04 HANDICAPPED PARKING.
   (A)   All signs erected and used to designate the reservation of parking
facilities for handicapped persons shall be in a form and manner prescribed by
state law and all parking spaces reserved for the handicapped, except those
reserving on-street parking areas, shall be at least 16 feet wide.
nonconforming signs or spaces in use prior to July 1, 1988 shall not constitute
a violation during their useful lives, which shall not be extended by means
other than normal maintenance. Signs adopted by the Illinois Department of
Transportation to designate the reservation of parking facilities for the
handicapped shall also exhibit, in a manner determined by the Department, the
words, $ 100 fine.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle bearing registration plates or a special decal or
device specified by state law or such devices as local authority deem proper as
evidence the vehicle is operated by or for a handicapped person or disabled
veteran may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking place
specifically reserved for such vehicles by the posting of an official sign as
provided under division (A) of this section. Parking privileges granted by this
section are strictly limited to the person to whom these special registration
plates, special decals or devices were issued and to qualified operators acting
under his express direction while the disabled person is present.
   (C)   Such parking privileges as are recognized by this section are also
extended to motor vehicles of not-for-profit organizations used for the
transportation of handicapped persons when such motor vehicles display the
decal or device issued under state law.
   (D)   No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle
pursuant to state law or village ordinance where an official sign controlling
such area expressly prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
   (E)   Pursuant to state law, the village may issue a decal or device
prescribed by the Secretary of State which shall be used by a handicapped
person or not-for-profit organization which transports handicapped individuals.
Such a decal or device shall become the property of such handicapped individual
or organization and may be used by that person or organization to designate and
identify a vehicle not owned or displaying a registration plate as otherwise
provided by state law. Such decal or device shall entitle the vehicle to enjoy
all the privileges that would be afforded a vehicle to which is attached
handicapped registration plates by state law. The Village Police Department
will recognize and honor handicapped decals or devices issued by any local
authority of the state as prescribed by state law.
   (F)   The village will issue such a decal or device only upon a showing by
adequate documentation that the person for whose benefit the decal or device is
to be used has a Class 1A or 2A disability under the provisions of Section 4(a)
of the Illinois Identification Card Act. An Illinois Disabled Person
Identification Card issued pursuant to that Act shall be deemed adequate
documentation of such disability.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the village from issuing such a
decal or device to a person with a temporary disability, provided that such
decal or device is valid for no more than 90 days, subject to renewal for like
periods, based upon continued disability, and further provided that such decal
or device clearly sets forth the date that the decal or device expires. A
certificate by a licensed medical doctor shall be required to obtain a decal or
device based upon temporary disability.
   (H)   Such decal or device shall be placed on the dashboard of the vehicle
where it is readily visible through the windshield. The village shall collect a
$ 2 fee for each such decal or device issued.
   (I)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle not bearing
registration plates or decals issued to a handicapped person or to a disabled
person under state law, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a
handicapped person or disabled veteran, in any parking place, including any
private or public off-street parking facility, specifically reserved by the
posting of an official sign, as set forth in division (A) of this section for
motor vehicles bearing such registration plates.
   (J)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or
private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the Village Police
Department, may remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other
place of safety, any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by
handicapped persons, which does not display handicapped registration plates or
a special decal or device as required by this section.
   (K)   The village shall impose fines as established in §
70.99, for vehicles parked in spaces for the handicapped, that do not display
the registration plates or the special decal or device issued pursuant to state
law.
   (L)   The village shall recognize reciprocal agreements entered into between
the Illinois Secretary of State and other jurisdictions to grant the same
parking privileges which are granted to disabled residents of this state to any
nonresident whose motor vehicle is licensed in another state or foreign
country, if such vehicle displays the international wheelchair plates or the
distinguishing insignia placard, issued in accordance of the laws of the
nonresident's state or foreign country.
   (M)   The Chief of Police, any police officer, or other village employee
designated by the Chief of Police, who shall receive the payment of any sum of
money by a violator charged with violating the provision of this section, shall
issue such person a receipt therefore, on an official receipt form of the
village, bearing the signature of the person receiving the fine on behalf of
the village, and the date of its payment. A duplicate receipt, together with
the money paid to such officer or other designated person, shall be delivered
to the Village Treasurer who shall credit the funds to the appropriate fund of
the village.
   (N)   In the event state law permits greater or lesser parking privileges or
a greater or lesser fine to be imposed for noncompliance with state-prescribed
handicapped parking privileges, those provisions of state law will be
automatically adopted for application upon their effective date within the
village by virtue of this section.
(Ord. 89-2, passed 1-18-89)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A) Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no penalty
is otherwise provided shall be fined $ 250 for each offense.
   (B) Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of §
70.01 shall be punished by a fine of $50 per day per offense. (Ord. 71-5,
passed 10-21-71)
   (C) The owner or operator of any vehicle who knowingly operates or permits
the operation of any vehicle in violation of §
70.02 shall, upon conviction thereof, for the first offense to be fined $ 150,
and for the second offense within a period of one year shall be fined $ 250,
and for the third offense within a period of one year after date of such first
offense, shall be fined $ 350. (Ord. 79-30, passed 10-9-79)
   (D)   Any person found guilty of violating §
70.04 shall be fined $ 100 in addition to any costs or charges connected with
the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under §
70.04.
   (E)   Any person or corporation found guilty of violating §
70.01(F)(3) shall be fined $250 per day that the violation exists.
(Ord. 89-2, passed 1-18-89; Am. Ord. 21-08, passed 2-23-21)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
 I. Stop intersections
   
II. One-way streets
   
III. Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle into the intersections of the
following named streets without bringing the vehicle to a full stop and waiting
for the traffic to clear on the street with the right-of-way. Appropriate stop
signs shall be posted at all affected intersections.
Street Which Stops Direction of Travel Stop at Entrance to Ord. No. Date Passed
Street Which Stops Direction of Travel Stop at Entrance to Ord. No. Date Passed
Arch Street        South               Chestnut Street     89-1     1-10-89
Arch Street        North               Chestnut Street     89-1     1-10-89
Arch Street        North               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Augusta            West                Savannah            94-40    8-9-94
Bens Drive         South               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Bitterroot         North               Green Trail Drive   89-1     1-10-89
Bonniebrook        South               Glenwood            94-40    8-9-94
Bonniebrook        North               Glenwood            94-40    8-9-94
Breckenridge Road  North               Walnut              94-40    8-9-94
Buckingham         South               County Road         94-40    8-9-94
Buckingham         East                Churchill           94-40    8-9-94
Candi Court        East                Meander Pike        89-1     1-10-89
Carefree Drive     South               Meander Pike/       89-1     1-10-89
                                       Carefree Drive
Carolina           North               Teal                94-40    8-9-94
Charleston         West                Savannah            94-40    8-9-94
Cherry Street      South               Mulberry Street     89-1     1-10-89
Cheryl Avenue      East                South Main          94-40    8-9-94
Chestnut Street    West                Church              94-40    8-9-94
Chestnut Street    East                Church              94-40    8-9-94
Chestnut Street    West                College             94-40    8-9-94
Chestnut Street    East                College             94-40    8-9-94
Chestnut Street    West                Downing             94-40    8-9-94
Chestnut Street    East                East Street         89-1     1-10-89
Chestnut Street    West                East Street         89-1     1-10-89
Chestnut Street    East                Taylor              94-40    8-9-94
Chestnut Street    West                Taylor              94-40    8-9-94
Chukar             North               Grouse              94-40    8-9-94
Chukar             South               Grouse              94-40    8-9-94
Chukar             South               Mallard             94-40    8-9-94
Chukar             North               Teal                94-40    8-9-94
Church             South               Chestnut            94-40    8-9-94
Church             North               Chestnut            94-40    8-9-94
Church             North               Mulberry            94-40    8-9-94
Church             South               Mulberry            94-40    8-9-94
Churchill          South               County Road         94-40    8-9-94
Churchill          East                Downing             94-40    8-9-94
College Street     North               Mulberry            94-40    8-9-94
College Street     South               Mulberry            94-40    8-9-94
College Street     North               South Grand         89-1     1-10-89
College Street     North               Spruce              76-4     2-10-76
College Street     South               Spruce              76-4     2-10-76
Cumberland         West                Savannah            94-40    8-9-94
Cypress            West                Park                94-40    8-9-94
Cypress            East                Park                94-40    8-9-94
Deerfield          West                Gordon Drive        94-40    8-9-94
Deerfield          East                Gordon Drive        94-40    8-9-94
Deerfield Road     East                Park Avenue         76-4     2-10-76
Deerfield Road     West                Park Avenue         76-4     2-10-76
Deerfield Road     West                Woodland Drive      89-1     1-10-89
Diane Drive        North               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Downing            South               Churchill           94-40    8-9-94
Downing            North               Churchill           94-40    8-9-94
Downing            South               County Road         94-40    8-9-94
East Street        South               Spruce              76-4     2-10-76
East Street        North               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
East Street        South               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Evergreen Drive    East                Park Avenue         76-4     2-10-76
Evergreen          West                Park                94-40    8-9-94
Evergreen Drive    West                Woodland Drive      89-1     1-10-89
Francis Street     East                Bens Drive          89-1     1-10-89
Freedom Court      North               Meander Pike        89-1     1-10-89
Gatlinburg         West                Savannah            94-40    8-9-94
Glenwood           East                Bonniebrook         94-40    8-9-94
Glenwood           West                Bonniebrook         94-40    8-9-94
Goldenrod          West                South Main          94-40    8-9-94
Goldenrod Drive    East and West       Dewberry Trail      07-07    3-27-07
Gordon Drive       North               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Gordon Drive       South               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Green Trail Drive  North               Knotts Road         89-1     1-10-89
Greentrail         South               Knotts              94-40    8-9-94
Grouse             East                Chukar              94-40    8-9-94
Grouse             West                Chukar              94-40    8-9-94
Hackberry Street   East                Park Avenue         76-4     2-10-76
Hackberry Street   West                Park                94-40    8-9-94
Hackberry Street   West                Woodland Drive      89-1     1-10-89
Hazel Street       North               Chestnut Street     89-1     1-10-89
Hazel Street       South               Spruce Street       76-4     2-10-76
Holly Drive        South               Walnut Street North 89-1     1-10-89
Holly Drive        North               White Oak Drive     89-1     1-10-89
Honeysuckle Drive  East                County Road 1W      89-1     1-10-89
Hurstbourne        East                Gilreath Road (1W)  94-40    8-9-94
Ivy Glen           East                1 West              94-40    8-9-94
Ivy Glen Drive     West                Green Trail Drive   89-1     1-10-89
Karen Avenue       East                South Main          94-40    8-9-94
Knollcrest Lane    North               Cottonwood Drive    89-1     1-10-89
Knotts             West                Axline              94-40    8-9-94
Knotts             East                Greentrail          94-40    8-9-94
Leisure Lane       East                Meander Pike        89-1     1-10-89
Lexington          West                Savannah            94-40    8-9-94
Locust Street      East                Ball Street         76-4     2-10-76
Locust             East                Church              94-40    8-9-94
Locust             West                Church              94-40    8-9-94
Locust Street      East                East Street         89-1     1-10-89
Locust Street      West                East Street         89-1     1-10-89
Magnolia Street    West                Park Avenue         94-40    8-9-94
Magnolia Street    East                Park Avenue         94-40    8-9-94
Magnolia Street    West                Woodland Drive      94-40    8-9-94
Main Plaza, south
exit entering on   South               Walnut Street       89-1     1-10-89
Walnut
Mallard            East                Pheasant Run        94-40    8-9-94
Mallard            West                Savannah            94-40    8-9-94
Maple Street       North               Chestnut Street     89-1     1-10-89
Maple Street       South               Spruce Street       76-4     2-10-76
Market             North               Chestnut            94-40    8-9-94
Market             South               Chestnut            94-40    8-9-94
Market             North               Mulberry            94-40    8-9-94
Market             South               Mulberry            94-40    8-9-94
Martin Avenue      East                Main Street         76-4     2-10-76
Martin Avenue      West                Main Street         76-4     2-10-76
Mayfield           West                Gordon Drive        94-40    8-9-94
Meadowview         South               Ramblewood          94-40    8-9-94
Meadowview         North               Ramblewood          94-40    8-9-94
Meadowview         North               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Mulberry Street    East                Ball Street         76-4     2-10-76
Mulberry Street    East                Market              94-40    8-9-94
Mulberry Street    West                Market              94-40    8-9-94
Mulberry Street    East                Taylor              94-40    8-9-94
Mulberry Street    West                Taylor              94-40    8-9-94
Nevermind          West                Carefree            94-40    8-9-94
North Walnut       South               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Nottingham         North               Buckingham          94-40    8-9-94
Nottingham         South               County Road         94-40    8-9-94
Oak Drive          North               Chestnut Street     89-1     1-10-89
Oxford             East                Downing             94-40    8-9-94
Park Avenue        South               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Park Avenue        North               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Parkview Street    East                Knollcrest Lane     89-1     1-10-89
Partridge          South               Mallard             94-40    8-9-94
Pheasant Run       North               Mallard             94-40    8-9-94
Pheasant Run       South               Mallard             94-40    8-9-94
Poplar Street      North               Chestnut Street     89-1     1-10-89
Poplar Street      South               Spruce Street       76-4     2-10-76
Ptarmigan          4-Way Stop          Newcombe Lane       07-66    11-13-07
Ramblewood Drive   East                Gordon Drive        76-4     2-10-76
Ramblewood Drive   East                Meadowview Lane     89-1     1-10-89
Ramblewood Drive   West                Meadowview Lane     89-1     1-10-89
Richmond           West                Savannah            94-40    8-9-94
Sherry             North               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
South Grand        West                College             94-40    8-9-94
South Grand        East                College             94-40    8-9-94
South Grand        East                Church              94-40    8-9-94
South Grand        West                Churchill           94-40    8-9-94
South Grand Avenue East                Downing Drive       94-40    8-9-94
South Grand Avenue West                Downing Drive       94-40    8-9-94
South Grand        West                Taylor              94-40    8-9-94
South Grand        East                Taylor              94-40    8-9-94
South Main         South               Spruce              94-40    8-9-94
South Main         North               South Main          94-40    8-9-94
South Main         South               11 South            94-40    8-9-94
Spruce Street      East                Ball Street         76-4     2-10-76
Spruce Street      West                South Main          94-40    8-9-94
Spruce             East                State               94-40    8-9-94
Spruce             West                State               94-40    8-9-94
State Street       North               Mulberry Street     76-4     2-10-76
State Street       South               Mulberry Street     76-4     2-10-76
State Street       North               Spruce Street       94-40    8-9-94
State Street       South               Spruce Street       94-40    8-9-94
State Street       North               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Stoney Creek       East                Carefree            94-40    8-9-94
Taylor             South               Mulberry            94-40    8-9-94
Taylor             North               Mulberry            94-40    8-9-94
Taylor             North               Chestnut            94-40    8-9-94
Taylor             South               Chestnut            94-40    8-9-94
Teal               West                Chukar              94-40    8-9-94
Teal               East                Chukar              94-40    8-9-94
Teal               West                Savannah            94-40    8-9-94
Timberhill Drive   East                Park                94-40    8-9-94
Timberhill Drive   West                Park                94-40    8-9-94
Timberhill Drive   West                Woodland Drive      89-1     1-10-89
Trailer Court      East                South Main          94-40    8-9-94
Virginia           South               Mallard             94-40    8-9-94
Wagon Wheel        South               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Westminster        North               Buckingham          94-40    8-9-94
Westminster        South               County Road         94-40    8-9-94
White Oak Drive    East                Park Avenue         76-4     2-10-76
Willow Glen        South               Walnut Street       94-40    8-9-94
Wintergreen        West                South Main          94-40    8-9-94
Each of three
drives in Chatham
Villa Trailer      East                Main Street         76-4     2-10-76
Court near south
boundary of
village
Each of two drives
in Southgate
Trailer Court near East                Main Street         76-4     2-10-76
south boundary of
village
Unnamed street
from Kings Point   West                Gordon Drive        89-1     1-10-89
(Mayfield)
 
   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of failing to stop at a stop sign
as required by this schedule shall be punished by a fine of not less than $ 5
nor more than $ 200.
(Ord. 76-4, passed 2-10-76; Am. Ord. 89-1, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ord. 94-40,
passed 8-9-94)
SCHEDULE II. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   The following is designated as a one-way street and all vehicles shall
be moved only in the direction indicated.
 
Street          Location                     Direction Ord. No. Date Passed
Mulberry Street Between Illinois Route 4 and Eastbound 78-6     2-28-78
                State Street
 
   (B)   Violation of this schedule is a petty offense for which a fine of not
less than $ 25 nor more than $ 75 may be imposed.
(Ord, 78-6, passed 2-28-78)
SCHEDULE III. SPEED LIMITS.
   Speed limits as indicated shall be in force in the following locations.
 
Street       Location                 Speed Limit (m.p.h.) Ord. No. Date Passed
             From its intersection
County Road  with Buckingham Street   20 (school zone)     81-14    7-14-81
             to its intersection with
             Route 4
             From its intersection
Mansion Road with Route 4 west to the 45                   08-07    2-12-08
             corporate limits
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I. Parking prohibited at all times
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
   (A)   Parking is prohibited in the following locations. Violators shall be
fined $ 10 and costs.
 
Street                         Location                   Ord. No. Date Passed
Alley No. 1 (does not apply to
service and maintenance                                   13       10-2-62
vehicles)
Ash Street                     North side through B2 zone 08-05    1-22-08
 
   (B)   Parking is prohibited in the following locations. Violators shall be
subject to the penalty provided in §
70.99.
 
Street                         Location Ord. No. Date Passed
Gordon Drive                            91-3     3-12-91
Illinois Route 4 (Main Street)          77-15    5-24-77
 
CHAPTER 73: ADMINISTRATIVE TOWING FEES
Section
   
73.01   General
   
73.02   Offenses for which fees are imposed
   
73.03   Provisions governing fees
   
73.04   Opportunity for hearing
   
73.05   Notice
   
73.06   Notice of hearing
   
73.07   Administrative hearing requirements
   
73.08   Acquittal of charges
§ 73.01 GENERAL.
   The Village of Chatham (“village”) hereby institutes procedures for the
release of properly impounded vehicles and provides for the imposition of a
reasonable administrative fee related to its administrative and processing
costs associated with the investigation, arrest, and detention of an offender,
or the removal, impoundment, storage, and release of the vehicle. The
administrative fee imposed by the village is in addition to any fees charged
for the towing and storage of an impounded vehicle. The administrative fee
shall be waived by the village upon verifiable proof that the vehicle was
stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 5-8-12)
§ 73.02 OFFENSES FOR WHICH FEES ARE IMPOSED.
   The Police Department may impound vehicles and cause vehicles to be towed,
and an administrative fee in the amount of $250 is hereby imposed for the
release of properly impounded vehicles, for the following violations:
   (A)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
§ 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
   (B)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act;
   (C)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act;
   (D)   Driving while a driver’s license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to § 6-303 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or
due to failure to comply with emission testing:
   (E)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act:
   (F)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver’s license or permit, in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver’s
license or permit due to a person’s age;
   (G)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated § 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code;
   (H)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any felony offense in violation of the Criminal Code of 1961
or the Criminal Code of 2012.
   (I)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to § 36-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012;
   (J)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of § 24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1 of the
Criminal Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012;
   (K)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license,
in violation of § 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, if the period of
expiration is greater than one year;
   (L)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of Article 16 or 16A of the Criminal
Code of 1961 or the Criminal Code of 2012.
   (M)   (1)   A motor vehicle involved in an unlawful attempt to flee or elude
a police officer in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-204.1 of the Illinois Motor
Vehicle Code which is not immediately stopped by the police but is located
within 120 hours upon public property or a parking lot open to the general
public within the Village of Chatham. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if such an
offense was committed, the owner of record shall be liable to the village for a
penalty of $500 for the first offense and $1,000 for every subsequent offense,
in addition to the fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle;
      (2)   A motor vehicle involved in an unlawful attempt to flee or elude a
police officer in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-204 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle
Code which is not immediately stopped but is located within 120 hours upon
public property or a parking lot open to the general public within the Village
of Chatham, provided an arrest is made for which the person driving or in
control of the vehicle is required by law to appear a proper magistrate without
unnecessary delay. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if such an offense was
committed, the owner of record of such vehicle shall be liable to the village
for a penalty of $500 for the first offense and $1,000 for every subsequent
offense, in addition to the fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle;
      (3)   When a vehicle is towed pursuant to division (M)(1) or (M)(2)
above, the police officer shall notify the registered owner of the vehicle at
the time of the alleged violation, personally or by certified mail, of the fact
of the seizure and of the vehicle's owner's right to request a preliminary
hearing to be conducted in accordance with village ordinances.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 5-8-12; Am. Ord. 17-18, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 22-01, passed
1-25-22)
§ 73.03 PROVISIONS GOVERNING FEES.
   The following shall apply to the fees imposed pursuant to §
73.02:
   (A)   All administrative fees and towing and storage charges shall be
imposed on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of that
owner.
   (B)   The fees shall be in addition to:
      (1)   Any other penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the
underlying violations; and
      (2)   Any towing or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company.
   (C)   The fees shall be collected by and paid to the Village Treasurer at
the Village Utility Office.
   (D)   The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid to
the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 5-8-12)
§ 73.04 OPPORTUNITY FOR HEARING.
   The registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of that owner shall
have the opportunity for a hearing pursuant to § 11-208.3(b)(4) of the Motor
Vehicle Code. Hearings under this section shall be conducted by a Hearing
Officer of the Code Hearing Department.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 5-8-12)
§ 73.05 NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor vehicle is
subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle
to a facility authorized by the village.
   (B)   At the time the vehicle is towed, the village shall notify or make a
reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee or person identifying himself or
herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to be
in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of
the seizure, and of the vehicle owner’s or lessee’s right to an administrative
hearing.
   (C)   The village shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will
remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative hearing, unless
the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder either:
      (1)   Pays the administrative fee in full with all towing and storage
charges; or
      (2)   Posts with the village a bond equal to the administrative fee and
all towing and storage charges.
   (D)   The person paying the administrative fee may waive in writing the
right to administrative hearing at the time the administrative fee is paid.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 5-8-12)
§ 73.06 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Unless waived in writing at the time the administrative towing fee is paid,
the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder of record
shall be provided with a notice of hearing. The notice shall:
   (A)   Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record either
by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party’s address as
registered with the Secretary of State;
   (B)   Be served upon interested parties within ten days after a vehicle is
impounded by the village; and
   (C)   Contain the date, time and location of the administrative hearing. An
initial hearing shall be convened no later than 45 days after the date of the
mailing of the notice of hearing.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 5-8-12)
§ 73.07 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Administrative hearings shall be conducted by the Hearing Officer
generally in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 39 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the Hearing Officer
shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment based on a determination of whether the officer had probable cause
to impound the vehicle.
   (C)   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the Hearing
Officer, any administrative fee bond posted to secure the release of the
vehicle shall be forfeited to the village.
   (D)   All final decisions of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to review
under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law.
   (E)   Unless the Hearing Officer overturns the basis for the vehicle
impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or lienholder
of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage charges are
paid.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 5-8-12)
§ 73.08 ACQUITTAL OF CHARGES.
   If the person whose arrest formed the basis for the administrative tow is
acquitted of all charges, the administrative fee shall be returned to the
person upon presentation by such person to the Chief of Police of evidence of
acquittal, such as a judgment or finding or verdict of "Not Guilty." Upon
presentation of such evidence, the Chief of Police shall notify the Treasurer,
who shall return the funds.
(Ord. 12-14, passed 5-8-12; Am. Ord. 17-18, passed 5-9-17)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   CEMETERIES
      
92.   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER OPERATIONS
      
93.   HEALTH, SAFETY, AND SANITATION
      
94.   PARKS AND RECREATION; ZOOS
      
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
96.   TREES
      
97.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
98.   RAFFLES
      
99.   INOPERABLE AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
100.   SOLICITATION AND OTHER DOOR-TO-DOOR ACTIVITIES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Exercise of certain powers
   
90.03   Keeping of certain animals prohibited
   
90.04   Inoculation of dogs; inoculation tag affixed to collars
   
90.05   Inoculation to be performed by licensed veterinarian; issuance of
certificate
   
90.06   Duration of inoculation
   
90.07   Exhibition of certificate on request
   
90.08   Restraint of dogs and other animals
   
90.09   Animals as nuisances
   
90.10   Keeping animals
   
90.11   Biting animals
   
90.12   Confinement; warning of dangerous animals
   
90.13   Killing or attacking animals
   
90.14   Cruelty to animals
   
90.15   Cock fighting; dog fighting
   
90.16   Dead animals
   
90.17   Injured animals; animals found dead on public way
   
90.18   Interference with enforcement
   
90.19   Authority to impound animals and enter onto private property
   
90.20   Impoundment of dogs or other animals which have bitten persons
   
90.21   Notice to owners or keepers of impoundment and violation
   
90.22   Redemption of impounded animals
   
90.23   Vicious dog (animals)
   
90.24   Dangerous dog (animal) determination
   
90.25   Dangerous dog; leash
   
90.26   Dangerous dog; appeal
   
90.27   Disposition of animals
   
90.99   Penalties and enforcement
   
Appendix A: Notice of impoundment of animal
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, all terms have the same meaning as in the
Animal Control Act, 510 ILCS 5/1 et seq. The following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. A veterinarian licensed by the state and appointed by the
county animal control, or, in the event a veterinarian cannot be found and
appointed, a non-veterinarian may serve as Administrator under this chapter. In
the event the Administrator is not a veterinarian, the Administrator shall
defer to a veterinarian regarding all medical decisions.
   ANIMAL. Every living creature, other than man, which may be affected by
rabies.
   ANIMAL CONTROL WARDEN. Any person appointed by the Administrator to perform
the duties set forth in this chapter, and those designated by the Chief of
Police whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   AT LARGE. Any animal not under restraint as defined herein.
   BITE. To seize with the teeth or jaws so that the person or animal seized
has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further includes contact of
saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
   CAT. All members of the family Felidae.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The chief of the village police department.
   CONFINED. Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner, or his of her
agent, to an escape-proof building, house, or other enclosure away from other
animals and the public.
   COUNTY. Sangamon County, Illinois.
   COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL PERSONNEL. Personnel who are employed by the county to
take up domestic animals and transport them to the county pound, or take up
wild animals and dispose of them in accordance with the procedures of the
county animal control department.
   COUNTY POUND. The animal pound operated by the county animal control
department.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog when unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended
by its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person
would believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious
physical injury or death to a person or a companion animal in a public place.
   DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE. The Department of Agriculture of the state.
   DOG. All members of the family Canidae.
   FIGHT. A prearranged conflict between or among two or more animals but does
not include a conflict that is unorganized or accidental.
   ENCLOSURE. A fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures that may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of the vicious dog within
the enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top, and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a room within a
residence, the dog must be locked. A vicious dog may be allowed to move about
freely within the entire residence if it is muzzled at all time.
   FERAL CAT. A cat that is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or
feral cat and is not socialized or that is a formerly owned cat that has been
abandoned and is no longer socialized or lives on a farm.
   IMPOUNDED. Taken into the custody of the public animal control facility in
the city, town, or county where the animal is found.
   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection, subcutaneously or otherwise, as
approved by the Department of Agriculture of the canine anti-rabies vaccine
approved by the Department.
   LEASH. A cord, chain, rope, strap, or other such physical restraint having a
tensile strength of not less than 300 pounds.
   LIVESTOCK. Cattle, cows, horses, sheep, swine, goats, chickens, ducks,
turkeys, geese, and any other animals commonly recognized as livestock.
   MUZZLE. A device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal muzzle,
made in a manner which will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its
vision or respiration but will prevent the dog from biting any person or
animal.
   NIP. To pinch or squeeze with teeth with no breaking of skin or tissue.
   OWNER OR KEEPER. A person having a right of property in an animal, who keeps
or harbors such animal, who cares for or who acts as its custodian, or who
knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by such
person.
   POLICE ANIMAL. An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department or
agency in the course of the department or agency’s work.
   POLICE OFFICER. The Chief of Police of the village, or any police officer
employed by the village, or any police officer from another jurisdiction
operating in the village under a mutual aid agreement or under the direction of
the Chief of Police of the village.
   POUND or ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY. May be used interchangeably and mean any
facility approved by the Administrator for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or
unwanted dogs or other animals.
   PUBLIC ENTRANCE. The entranceway of a residence or other building closest to
the public street or sidewalk or one which would be reasonably perceived by the
public to be the entrance to the dwelling available for public use.
   REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE. A printed form prescribed by the Department for
the purpose of recording pertinent information as required by the Department
under this Act.
   RESTRAINT.
      (1)   An animal is under restraint if it is:
         (a)   Attached to a leash held by a responsible person;
         (b)   Attached to a structure or fixture in such a manner that it is
unable to reach beyond the limits of the owner’s or keeper’s property and is
unable to reach or molest service persons or casual visitors to the owner’s or
keeper’s property using the public entrance or persons placing mail in the
mailbox or delivering newspapers at the request of the owners; or
         (c)   Enclosed in a fenced yard from which it is unable to escape
without assistance from a person; or
         (d)   On the property of its owner or keeper authorized by the owner
and under voice command.
      (2)   Herding of animals and tethering of animals for grazing purposes is
not UNDER RESTRAINT as defined herein.
   VICIOUS DOG. A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes
serious physical injury or death, or any individual dog that has been found to
be a DANGEROUS DOG upon three separate occasions.
   WORKING DAY. Any day when the office or public entity referred to was open
for the transaction of business.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.02 EXERCISE OF CERTAIN POWERS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, police officers, and the Village President shall
have the exclusive power to request county animal control personnel to take up
and transport animals in accordance with this chapter and in accordance with
contractual arrangements with the county.
   (B)   Police officers on duty shall have the additional authority to take up
and temporarily detain vicious animals and animals running at large pending the
arrival of county animal control personnel.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.03 KEEPING OF CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The keeping of livestock within the corporate limits of the village is
prohibited, except in areas in the village zoned agricultural.
   (B)   The keeping of undomesticated animals within the village is
prohibited.
   (C)   The keeping of more than four dogs or four cats on one zoning lot
within the village is prohibited, provided that this subsection does not apply
to a litter of pups or kittens less than five months of age.
   (D)   Except as specifically permitted by the Zoning Chapter of this Code,
the keeping or harboring of any wild animal or fowl, poultry (including but not
limited to chickens, ducks, geese, pheasants, peacocks, quail and turkeys, and
whether kept for eggs, as pets or otherwise) rodents (except hamsters, guinea
pigs, mice, and other rodents commonly kept as pets), and livestock (including
but not limited to swine, sheep, cattle, ponies, goats, horses, asses and
mules, and including such animals kept as pets) within the corporate limits of
the village is prohibited and is hereby declared a nuisance.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05; Am. Ord. 11-50, passed 11-8-11; Am. Ord. 21-28,
passed 9-28-21) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 INOCULATION OF DOGS; INOCULATION TAG AFFIXED TO COLLARS.
   Each calendar year, or at such intervals as may hereafter be promulgated by
the Department of Agriculture, every owner or keeper of a dog which is four
months of age or older shall cause such dog to be inoculated against rabies.
Such owner or keeper of such dog shall cause a serially numbered tag evidencing
such inoculation to be attached to a collar or harness worn by the dog at all
times.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 INOCULATION TO BE PERFORMED BY LICENSED VETERINARIAN; ISSUANCE OF
CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The inoculation of dogs required by this chapter shall be performed by
a veterinarian, duly licensed to practice in this state or in the state where
the inoculation occurred. On performing such inoculation, the veterinarian
shall issue to the owner or keeper a certificate of such fact.
   (B)   Each owner or keeper is responsible for obtaining annually from the
County Clerk a metallic tag suitable for attaching to the collar of the dog,
which tag shall also certify to the fact of inoculation against rabies. The tag
shall be in such form as shall be determined by the Department of Agriculture
and adopted for use by the County Clerk.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 DURATION OF INOCULATION.
   The inoculation performed under the provisions of §
90.04 shall be effective until the expiration of a calendar year in which the
vaccination was performed or the expiration of such period of time as may be
promulgated by the Department of Agriculture.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.07 EXHIBITION OF CERTIFICATE ON REQUEST.
   At any reasonable time on request of any member of the police department or
animal control officer, the owner or keeper of any dog shall exhibit any
current, valid certificate, required under the provisions of this code,
certifying the inoculation against rabies of any dog owned or kept by him or
her.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
   Owners and keepers of dogs and other animals shall keep the dogs and other
animals under restraint at all times and shall not permit such dogs and other
animals to be at large. Any animal found running at large contrary to
provisions of this chapter may be apprehended and impounded.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 ANIMALS AS NUISANCES.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of an animal shall not suffer or permit the animal
to bark, howl, cry, or make other distressing or loud or unusual noise or to
disturb the peace or quiet of any place, neighborhood, family, or person in the
village. The disturbing of any neighborhood or persons by any such animal is
declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall suffer or permit any such
nuisance to exist.
   (B)   In addition to the general restrictions of division (A) of this
section, for the purpose of this Section, an owner or keeper is in violation of
this section if he or she permits a dog to bark in a substantially continuous
manner between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. for a period of more than
15 minutes, or who allows such animal to bark, howl, or cry for numerous
periods of time, regardless of duration, so as to disturb the quiet of the
neighborhood or of particular neighbors.
   (C)   In case any animal shall repeatedly disturb the peace or quiet of any
place or neighborhood or become a nuisance as defined in this code, the village
police department may contact animal control to remove the animal for placement
in the county animal pound.
   (D)   The owner may redeem the animal from the county animal pound pursuant
to §
90.22. Failure to redeem the animal will result in its disposition pursuant to
§
90.23.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.10 KEEPING ANIMALS.
   No person shall house or keep animals in any pen, stable, yard, confinement
structure, or any other place in such a manner that associated debris or odors
are unreasonably offensive to persons residing in the vicinity or passing along
any nearby street or alley or constitute a hazard to the health of persons
residing nearby. Any pen, stable, yard, confinement structure or other place
where animals are housed or kept in violation of this section is declared to be
a nuisance.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.11 BITING ANIMALS.
   No owner or keeper of an animal shall suffer, permit, or fail to prevent an
animal from biting or attacking a person or another animal resulting in injury
to the person or animal attacked, provided that such an attack on a person who
is or reasonably appears to be in the commission of a criminal act is not
prohibited if the animal is acting in the defense of the owner or keeper of his
or her family or premises, and the animal remains on its premises. For purposes
of this section, it is not necessary that the person bitten or attacked be
arrested or convicted of a criminal offense.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.12 CONFINEMENT; WARNING OF DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   No person shall own, keep, or harbor within the village an animal known to
be dangerous or vicious, unless such person shall keep such animal safely and
securely confined so as to protect from injury any child or other person who
may come on the premises in the vicinity where such animal may be located.
Adequate warning by sign, or otherwise, shall be given to all persons coming on
the premises in the vicinity of any such vicious or dangerous animal.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.13 KILLING OR ATTACKING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall kill or wound or attempt to kill or wound by the use
of firearms, sling shot, bow and arrow, BB gun, air rifle, or any other
dangerous weapon, any animal within the village limits, provided that this
section shall not prohibit a person from defending himself or another from
attack by an animal. This section does not prohibit the use of a weapon by a
police officer to destroy animals which are seriously injured to avoid
unnecessary suffering or in self-defense or defense of others.
   (B)   Any owner seeing his or her livestock, poultry, or equidae being
injured, wounded, or killed by a dog not accompanied by or not under the
supervision of its owner may kill such dog.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.14 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall commit acts of cruelty to animals.
   (B)   The following acts shall be deemed to be examples of cruelty to
animals and are not intended to be a complete list of acts which may constitute
cruelty.
      (1)   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating, or killing any animal or causing or knowingly allowing
the same to be done.
      (2)   Cruelly working any old, maimed, injured, sick, or disabled animal
or causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done.
      (3)   Failing to provide any animal in one’s charge or custody, as owner
or keeper, with proper food, drink, shelter, air, sanitation, or medical care.
      (4)   Abandoning any animal without making provisions for its care and
feeding.
   (C)   Doctors or veterinary medicine, in the performance of their
profession, are not subject to the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.15 COCK FIGHTING; DOG FIGHTING.
   No person shall use or keep animals or be in any way connected with the
management of any place kept or used for the purpose of fighting or baiting any
dogs, cocks, or other animals or permit such place to be kept or used on
premises owned or controlled by such persons.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.16 DEAD ANIMALS.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of an animal shall be responsible for the disposal
of such animal’s remains upon its death, from whatever cause, and regardless of
the location of the remains of such animals.
   (B)   Animals remains shall be disposed of:
      (1)   By burial beneath at least 18 inches of compacted soil on the
property of the animal’s owner or keeper or any other location with the express
permission of the owner of the property;
      (2)   By or through the county animal pound;
      (3)   By or through a licensed veterinarian; or
      (4)   By action of the police department.
   (C)   The police department may issue a written notice to any owner or
keeper who has failed to properly dispose of the remains of an animal as
prescribed herein. Such person shall have 24 hours from receipt of such notice
to properly dispose of such remains. The notice shall be served on the violator
personally or by leaving such notice at this usual place of abode with some
person of the family, of the age of 13 years or upwards, and informing that
person of the contents thereof.
   (D)   The village may dispose of any animal’s remains without notice to the
owner or keeper when:
      (1)   Such remains are located on a public roadway;
      (2)   The remains are located on the property of a person other than the
owner or keeper; or
      (3)   Service of a notice on the owner or keeper is refused or not
readily possible within a short time;
   (E)   In any case where a disposal notice is required, in accordance with
division (C) above, on failure of a person served a notice to properly dispose
of such remains within the time allowed, the remains may be disposed of by
employees of the village, and all costs of such removal shall be paid by the
owner or keeper of the dead animal to the village.
   (F)   A minimum charge of $50 for each hour or part of an hour spent by
police officers or other village employees in disposing of the remains shall be
levied against the owner or keeper when the village disposes of the remains.
The village may institute legal proceedings to collect any amount owing by the
owner or keeper, provided that such suit is filed within two years of the
issuance of the notice or disposal of the remains if no notice is required.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 INJURED ANIMALS; ANIMALS FOUND DEAD ON PUBLIC WAY.
   (A)   Any animal discovered injured on a public way shall be impounded or
picked up by the county animal control personnel at the direction of a police
officer and processed in accordance with the procedures of the county pound.
   (B)   When a domestic animal is discovered dead on a public way, the police
officer on duty shall attempt to ascertain its owner and shall request that the
owner dispose of the remains. If a wild animal is discovered dead on the public
way, or the officer cannot ascertain the owner of a dead domestic animal, the
officer shall notify the Street Department of the animal, and the Street
Department shall dispose of the remains.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.18 INTERFERENCE WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   No person shall, in any way, interfere with any person who is known to such
person to be or who identifies himself to be and is, in fact, a village or
county employee or other officer enforcing the provisions of this chapter or
engaged in catching or impounding any animal under the authority of this
chapter.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.19 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND ANIMALS AND ENTER ONTO PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of police officers to request the county animal
control personnel to take up and impound in the county animal pound any animal
found at large or any dog found in the village without inoculation tags
contrary to any of the provisions of this chapter or statutes of the state.
   (B)   Police officers and county animal control personnel are authorized to
go on private property in order to enforce this chapter or to take up any
animal which is believed to be at large or take up any dog found without
required inoculation tags; however, such persons may not enter a private
dwelling house for this purpose without a valid warrant or the consent of the
occupant. Nor shall such persons remove an animal believed to be at large
without reasonably attempting to ascertain whether the property on which the
animal is found is owned by the owner or the authorized keeper of the animal.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.20 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS.
   (A)   Any dog, whether under restraint or not, which shall have bitten or
otherwise injured any persons so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be
immediately taken by the police department or county animal control personnel,
impounded at the county pound, and kept separated from other animals for 10
days. The Chief of Police and county animal control personnel may reduce such
period of confinement. The victim of such bite shall notify the police
department of the bite within 24 hours. If during that period such animal
develops symptoms of illness, a veterinarian shall diagnose its condition. If
the symptoms disclose or are such as to indicate the presence of rabies, the
animal shall be destroyed in such manner, however, as to preserve intact the
head, which shall be detached and immediately sent to the diagnostic laboratory
of the Department of Agriculture. In case the animal cannot be safely taken up
and impounded, it may be killed, care being taken to preserve the head intact,
which shall be detached and immediately delivered to the diagnostic laboratory
of the Department of Agriculture.
   (B)   If at the expiration of the period of 10 days, no symptoms of rabies
have developed in such animal so impounded, the same may be redeemed by the
owner or keeper on payment of the redemption fees and charges specified by this
code.
   (C)   After having been notified that his or her animal has bitten or
otherwise injured any person, the owner or keeper thereof shall not, under any
circumstances, permit such animal to be outside of his or her premises, except
on a leash with a responsible adult until the procedures prescribed in
divisions (A) and (B) of this section have been completed. An owner who has
knowledge that his or her animal has bitten or otherwise injured any person and
knows that the police department or county animal control center is
investigating a claim shall not under any circumstances trade, sell, or give
away the animal until such investigation is complete.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 NOTICE TO OWNERS OR KEEPERS OF IMPOUNDMENT AND VIOLATION.
   The police department shall make best efforts to notify the owners or
keepers of animals impounded pursuant to this chapter, if known to them, of the
fact of impoundment and the procedures for redemption of the impounded animal.
Such notification shall be independent of any citation for ordinance violation
but may be served together with a citation for ordinance violation. Notice
shall be sufficient if substantially in the form attached to this chapter as
Appendix A. Notice shall be given within 24 hours of impoundment, either by
personal service, or if the owner is not at home when service is made, by
taping the notice to the front door of the residence of the owner, if known.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.22 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   (A)   An animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter, except an
animal that may have bitten any person, shall, unless sooner redeemed, be held
until it may be disposed of pursuant to §
90.27 in order to afford opportunity to the owner or keeper thereof to redeem
the same. Any owner or keeper desiring to redeem an impounded animal shall pay
an impounding fee of $50 per animal payable to the county animal control center
in the form of cash, cashier’s check, or money order in addition to the fees
set forth in division (B) of this section. Prior to disposition, animals shall
be held for a minimum of three calendar days, if the owner is not known, and
for a minimum of seven calendar days, if the owner is known, in order to give
the owner an opportunity to redeem the animal. Animals which have bitten
persons are subject to an impoundment of at least 10 days in the county pound.
   (B)   Pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement with the village, the
county will remit the impounding fee to the village. Any owner or keeper
desiring to redeem an impounded animal shall, as a condition of release:
      (1)   Show proof of inoculation or pay the requisite deposit as set forth
in division (D); and
      (2)   Pay to the county animal control officer, or reimburse the village,
for all fees charged by the county pound or to be charged by the county pound
for responding to any and all calls with respect to the animal, picking up the
animal, and boarding the animal. The county animal control’s hourly charges and
boarding fees for impounded animals are established by the county and are
outside the village’s control.
   (C)   If the animal is in the county pound, it may be released only upon the
owner’s showing of proof of inoculation, or by payment by the owner of the
county pound’s charges for inoculation. If the owner cannot show proof of
inoculation, then in addition to all other charges, the owner shall pay the
county animal control the amount of money required for inoculation, which fee
is established by the county.
   (D)   The owner of an impounded animal shall pay the county animal control
center directly for all impoundment fees, costs, and services rendered. In the
event that the village is billed for the fees, costs, and services rendered,
the village will be entitled to collect costs from the owner in the amount of
$80 per hour for each call, with a minimum one hour charge and boarding fees
for impounded animals of $10 per day.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.23 VICIOUS DOG (ANIMALS).
   (A)   In order to have an animal deemed “vicious,” an animal control
officer, Chief of Police, or the Village Attorney, must give notice of the
infraction that is the basis of the investigation to the owner. The police
department shall conduct a thorough investigation, interview any witnesses,
including the owner, gather any existing medical records, veterinary medical
records, or behavioral evidence, and make a detailed report recommending a
finding that the animal is a vicious animal, and give the report to the State’s
Attorney’s office and the owner. The State’s Attorney, or Village Attorney, or
animal control officer may file a complaint in the circuit court to deem a dog
to be a vicious dog. Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board-
certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant
to the court’s determination of whether the dog’s behavior was justified. The
petitioner must prove the dog is a vicious dog by clear and convincing
evidence. The county animal control shall determine where the animal shall be
confined during the pendency of the case. The provisions and appeal rights of
this section shall be carried out pursuant to § 15 of the Animal Control Act,
510 ILCS 5/15.
   (B)   If the dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog shall be spayed or
neutered within 10 days of the finding at the expense of its owner and
microchipped, and subject to enclosure. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall
not be released to the owner until the animal control warden or Chief of Police
approves the enclosure. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give
away the dog without court approval. Whenever an owner of a vicious dog
relocates, he or she shall notify both the administrator of county animal
control where he or she has relocated and the administrator of county animal
control where he or she formerly resided.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which
has been found to be a vicious dog unless the dog is kept in an enclosure. The
only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the enclosure are (1) if it
is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care for the dog, (2)
in the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog’s life is
threatened, or (3) to comply with the order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a
leash not exceeding six feet in length and that it shall be under the direct
control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog or muzzled in its
residence.
   (D)   Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which is not
confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the administrator, an animal
control warden, or the law enforcement authority having jurisdiction in such
area.
   (E)   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the
circuit court in the county in which the animal was impounded within 15 working
days, the dog may be euthanized.
   (F)   Upon filing notice of appeal, the order of euthanasia shall be
automatically stayed pending the outcome of the appeal. The owner shall bear
the burden of timely notification to animal control in writing.
   (G)   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police-owned dogs are exempt from
this section, provided that an attack or injury to a person occurs while the
dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this
section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in
accordance with §
90.04 . It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the
administrator of changes of address. In the case of a sentry or guard dog, the
owner shall keep the administrator advised of the location where such dog will
be stationed. The administrator shall provide police and fire departments with
a categorized list of such exempted dogs and shall promptly notify such
departments of any address changes reported to him or her.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.24 DANGEROUS DOG (ANIMAL) DETERMINATION.
   (A)   After a thorough investigation—including sending, within three days of
the Chief of Police or animal control officer becoming aware of the alleged
infraction, notifications to the owner of the alleged infractions, the fact of
the initiation of an investigation, and affording the owner an opportunity to
meet with the Chief of Police or animal control officer prior to the making of
a determination; gathering of any medical or veterinary evidence; interviewing
witnesses; and making a detailed written report—an animal control warden or
Chief of Police may ask the administrator of the county animal control, or his
or her designee, to deem a dog to be “dangerous.” No dog shall be deemed a
“dangerous dog” without clear and convincing evidence. The owner shall be sent
immediate notification of the determination by registered or certified mail
that includes a complete description of the appeal process.
   (B)   A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the administrator, his or her
designee, or the director determines the conduct of the dog was justified
because:
      (1)   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing
an offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog;
      (2)   The threatened person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or
physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
      (3)   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking
or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
      (4)   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself,
its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
   (C)   Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board-certified
veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant to the
determination of whether the dog’s behavior was justified pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
   (D)   If deemed dangerous, the administrator, or his or her designee, or the
director shall order the dog to be spayed or neutered within 14 days at the
owner’s expense and microchipped, if not already, and one or more of the
following as deemed appropriate under the circumstances and necessary for the
protection of the public:
      (1)   Evaluation of the dog by a certified applied behaviorist, a board-
certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert in the field and
completion of training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert.
The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associated with
evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; or
      (2)   Direct supervision by an adult 18 years of age or older whenever
the animal is on public premises.
   (E)   The administrator or Chief of Police may order a dangerous dog to be
muzzled whenever it is on public premises in a manner that will prevent it from
biting any person or animal, but that shall not injure the dog or interfere
with its vision or respiration.
   (F)   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police-owned dogs are exempt from
this section, provided that an attack or injury to a person occurs while the
dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this
section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies and
performing duties as expected. It shall be the duty of the owner of the
exempted dog to notify the administrator of changes of address. In the case of
a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the administrator advised of the
location where such dog will be stationed. The administrator shall provide
police and fire departments with a categorized list of the exempted dogs and
shall promptly notify the departments of any address changes reported to him or
her.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.25 DANGEROUS DOG; LEASH.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any
dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when not under control by
leash or other recognized control methods.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.26 DANGEROUS DOG; APPEAL.
   (A)   The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this
chapter by an administrator may file a complaint against the administrator in
the circuit court within 35 days of receipt of notification of the
determination, for a de novo hearing on the determination pursuant to § 15.3 of
the Animal Control Act (510 ILCS 5/15.3).
   (B)   The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this
chapter by the director may, within 14 days of receipt of notification of the
determination, request an administrative hearing to appeal the determination
pursuant to the Department of Agriculture’s rules applicable to formal
administrative proceedings (8 Ill. Adm. Code Part 1, Subparts A and B).
   (C)   Until the order has been reviewed and at all times during the appeal
process, the owner shall comply with the requirements set forth by the
administrator, the court, or the director.
   (D)   At any time after a final order has been entered, the owner may
petition the circuit court to reverse the designation of dangerous dog.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.27 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   Any dog or other animal, which has not been redeemed within the time
specified in §
90.22 shall be humanely destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the director of
the county animal pound.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05)
§ 90.99 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Citations in ordinance violation cases.
      (1)   For violations of this chapter other than violations relating to
dangerous, vicious, and biting dogs and other animals, village police officers
are authorized to issue citations. Citations shall be issued on forms approved
by the Chief of Police and shall be served personally on the violator, left
with a responsible family member of at least 13 years of age at the home of the
violator, or mailed to the residence of the violator.
      (2)   On receipt of any citation alleging violation of any section of
this chapter, the violator may pay the minimum fine provided in this chapter at
the village hall within 30 working days of issuance of the citation, and in
such event, the village will not prosecute the ordinance violation.
   (B)   Prosecution of violations.
      (1)   The village may by its attorney file a complaint and prosecute any
alleged violation of this chapter:
         (a)   Where a citation has been issued, after 30 working days have
elapsed from the date of issuance of a citation;
         (b)   Where no citation has been issued, at any time.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, the village
may pursue any and all other remedies available under state law, including but
not limited to bringing actions to abate nuisances and seeking the destruction
of dangerous or vicious animals.
   (C)   Fines and penalties. Any person found to have violated this chapter
shall, in addition to boarding costs and impoundment fees required herein, be
fined as follows:
      (1)   For any violation of any section of this chapter other than those
pertaining to vicious, dangerous, or biting animals, penalties shall be as
follows:
         (a)   One hundred dollars for the first offense;
         (b)   One hundred fifty dollars for the second and subsequent offense.
      (2)   For violation of any section of this chapter pertaining to vicious,
dangerous, or biting animals penalties shall be as follows:
         (a)   Two hundred fifty dollars for the first offense;
         (b)   Five hundred dollars for the second and subsequent offense.
      (3)   Each day an offense continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05; Am. Ord. 24-24, passed 6-25-24)
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMAL
To:   
   (Name and address of person believed to be animal’s owner)
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the following animal has been captured and impounded:
 
  Type of     [https://export.amlegal.com/media/  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
 Animal:     605a957cb9d14bc352add1a8046c187b1f98605a957cb9d14bc352add1a8046c187b1f98d6cb/ 605a957cb9d14bc352add1a8046c187b1f98d6cb/ _____________________________
              IMAGES/0-0-0-1934.bmp] Dog          IMAGES/0-0-0-1934.bmp] Cat                IMAGES/0-0-0-1934.bmp]Other
 Breed: ________________________________________________________________________
 Color: ________________________________________________________________________
 Tag No., if ___________________________________________________________
  applicable:
  Other
 identifying      __________________________________________________
  characteristics:
 _________________________________________________________________________________
 
   The animal was found running at large at  , Chatham, IL, on
                                         , 20     , at
                          a.m./p.m. and was therefore captured and impounded in
accordance with animal control provisions of the Village of Chatham Code of
Ordinances.
   The Village of Chatham believes that you may be the owner of the animal. The
animal may be redeemed at the Sangamon County Animal Control Center, 2100 Shale
Road, Springfield, IL, 62703, after payment of impoundment fees, costs, and all
applicable County charges to the Sangamon County Animal Control Center. You
should pay all fees directly to the Sangamon County Animal Control Center.
Please note that the Sangamon County Animal Control Center will require cash,
certified check, or cashier’s check.
   Dated this                 day of
                                                                 , 20        
                                 
                                 Police Officer
   Also, please take notice of the following:
   1.   As set forth in §
90.22 of the Village of Chatham Code of Ordinances, the Village of Chatham’s
impoundment fee is $100. Any other violations of this ordinance other than
those pertaining to vicious, dangerous, or biting animals shall be fined at
$100 for the first offense and $250 for a second and subsequent offense
pursuant to § 90.99.
   2.   Impoundment checks should be paid directly to the Sangamon County
Animal Control Center.
(Ord. 05-31, passed 7-26-05; Am. Ord. 24-24, passed 6-25-24)
CHAPTER 91: CEMETERIES
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Board of Trustees; Cemetery Department
   
91.02   Designation of village cemetery
   
91.03   Non-sectarian policy
   
91.04   Burial purposes only
   
91.05   Human burial only
   
91.06   Holidays and Sundays
   
91.07   Standards of procedure; maintenance
   
91.08   Fees and charges
   
91.09   Cemetery account
   
91.10   Care and Improvement Fund
   
91.11   Markers and monuments
   
91.12   Alterations
   
91.13   Easements
   
91.14   Cemetery regulations
Burial Procedures
   
91.20   Proof of heirship
   
91.21   Crypt or vault required
   
91.22   Grave construction
   
91.23   Permit of disposition
   
91.24   Cremated remains
   
91.25   Opening of graves
   
91.26   Disinterment
Lots
   
91.40   Plat
   
91.41   Applications for purchase; deeds
   
91.42   Transfer of lots
   
91.43   Private lots
   
91.44   Change of address
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 BOARD OF TRUSTEES; CEMETERY DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees is authorized to adopt, modify, amend, repeal,
and provide for the enforcement of rules for carrying out the provisions of
this chapter. The President and the Board of Trustees may delegate to an
officer or employee of the village any administrative duty or power imposed by
this chapter.
(Ord. 80-17, passed 6-24-80)
   (B)   There is hereby established an executive department of the village to
be known as the Cemetery Department and the President and Board of Trustees are
hereby authorized to regulate and operate the cemetery and to appoint all
necessary employees.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall act as secretary of the Board and the
secretary shall keep a faithful record of the proceedings and shall carefully
file and preserve all papers, vouchers, and records pertaining to the
transactions of the Board.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.02 DESIGNATION OF VILLAGE CEMETERY.
   The lands and grounds now under the control, charge, and supervision of the
Board of Trustees are hereby dedicated and forever set apart for the burial of
the dead, and the same, together with any additions as may hereafter from time
to time be made thereto, shall constitute and be known as the Chatham Cemetery.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.03 NON-SECTARIAN POLICY.
   The cemetery shall be non-sectarian and shall be operated without
discrimination as to race, creed, sex, or national origin.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.04 BURIAL PURPOSES ONLY.
   Graves in the cemetery are conveyed by special deed for burial purposes only
and subject at all times to the statutes of the State of Illinois and to the
laws, ordinances, and regulations of the village and all other municipal
authorities having jurisdiction over the cemetery.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.05 HUMAN BURIAL ONLY.
   No interment of any body other than that of a human being will be permitted
in the cemetery.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.06 HOLIDAYS AND SUNDAYS.
   No grave shall be opened or funerals conducted on holidays or Sundays,
except in case of contagious disease and when immediate burial is required by
law, and then only at the direction of the Health Department.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.07 STANDARDS OF PROCEDURE; MAINTENANCE.
   The employees of the Cemetery Department shall cause all graves to be
opened, filled, trimmed, kept, and preserved in good order. The depth of each
grave shall be in accordance with currently accepted practice and standards
generally in use in recognized, reputable cemeteries and as required by law.
(Ord. 80-17, passed 6-24-80)
§ 91.08 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The following schedule of fees and charges is established with respect
to acquisition of burial plots from and with respect to grave openings and
closings by the village in Chatham Memorial and Chatham Community Cemetery:
      (1)   Effective upon the passage of this section, the “phase-in” schedule
of fees for the purchase of a burial plot in issuance of a deed will be as
follows:
         (a)   $ 25 if purchased on or before July 19, 1990.
         (b)   $ 100 if purchased on or after July 20, 1990 and on or before
August 19, 1990.
         (c)   $ 200 if purchased on or after August 20, 1990 and on or before
October 19, 1990.
         (d)   If purchased on or after October 20, 1990 the sum of $ 400 per
burial plot (grave).
      (2)   For a grave opening or closing there shall be charged the sum of
$650, including weekends and holidays.
      (3)   Opening and closing for a cremation, there shall be a charge of
$125, including weekends and holidays.
      (4)   For each set of corner stones, there shall be a charge of $60.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall keep a cemetery account into which all
money received or paid out on account of Chatham Memorial and Chatham Cemetery
shall be credited or charged. The Treasurer shall report such receipts and
expenditures to the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Upon receipt of funds for the purchase of a burial plot in the Chatham
Memorial or the Chatham Community Cemetery, the Treasurer shall deposit such
funds into the perpetual care fund heretofore established for the continuing
maintenance and care of the two cemeteries.
   (D)   Upon receipt of funds for a grave opening and closing, the Treasurer
shall deposit the proceeds received into the operating account of the General
Fund. Payment of the ordinary expenses in connection with the operation of the
Chatham Memorial and the Chatham Community Cemetery shall be paid from the
General Fund.
(Ord. 90-20, passed 6-19-90; Am. Ord. 01-13, passed 3-27-01; Am. Ord. 05-54,
passed 10-25-05; Am. Ord. 09-06, passed 2-24-09 Am. Ord. 12-08, passed 2-28-12;
Am. Ord. 18-38, passed 7-10-18; Am. Ord. 19-24, passed 8-27-19)
§ 91.09 CEMETERY ACCOUNT.
   (A)   The Treasurer of the village shall keep a cemetery account into which
all money received or paid out on account of the cemetery shall be credited or
charged. The Treasurer shall report such receipts and expenditures to the Board
of Trustees.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall make appropriations from the cemetery
account for the care, maintenance, and operation of the cemetery and the graves
therein, and to the extent that the cemetery account may be insufficient
therefor, may, pursuant to appropriation, expend any other general funds for
those purposes that are not otherwise appropriated.
(Ord. 80-17, passed 6-24-80)
§ 91.10 CARE AND IMPROVEMENT FUND; CEMETERY ACCOUNT.
   All funds received for the purpose of income care shall be set apart by the
Board of Trustees as the lot and grave owners care and improvement fund. Money
in this fund shall, as soon as practical, be invested in interest bearing bonds
and securities as determined by the Board of Trustees. The bond shall be
plainly endorsed “Care and Improvement Fund of Chatham Cemetery,” and shall be
placed in the custody of the Treasurer who shall account for same and upon
retiring from office shall deliver the same to his successor together with all
moneys on hand not invested.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.11 MARKERS AND MONUMENTS.
   No markers or monuments shall be permitted which exceed six feet in length.
(Ord. passed - - ) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.12 ALTERATIONS.
   The Cemetery Department reserves to itself the right to alter or change any
walk, entrance, fence, drive, street, alley, grade, drain, lake, or unsold
vacant lot.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.13 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   No easement or right of interment is granted to any lot owner in any
road, drive, alley, or walk within the cemetery, but such road, drive, alley,
or walk may be used as a means of access to the cemetery, or to private lots or
buildings as long as the management devotes it to that purpose.
   (B)   The Cemetery Department reserves to itself and to those lawfully
entitled thereto, a perpetual right of ingress and egress over all lots for the
purpose of passage to and from other lots.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.14 CEMETERY REGULATIONS.
   Regulations governing the operation of the Village Cemetery shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Cemetery shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m.
   (B)   Picnic parties and refreshments will not be allowed in the cemetery.
The consumption of alcohol in the cemetery is prohibited.
   (C)   Military funerals held in the cemetery are authorized to use firearms.
   (D)   Automobiles must follow directional signs.
   (E)   The gates may be open or closed at the discretion of the village.
   (F)   Except as specifically provided in division (K) below, all mowing and
trimming of grass, trees, and shrubs will be performed by the village.
   (G)   Base stones must be square on the side in contact with the foundation.
The foundation must be four inches longer and four inches wider than the stone
to be set thereon, and must be level with surrounding grade and extend not less
than 35 inches below grade. An eight-inch diameter pier footing may be used for
head and foot stones not larger than 16 inches by 12 inches. Pier will have
foundation cap not less than six-inch thickness. Pier and foundation cap to be
connected by two 3/8- inch reinforcing bars. The foundation for monuments
greater than four feet above grade require prior village approval.
   (H)   No mounds shall be raised above the general level of the lot. The
village receives the right to remove at any time any unsightly mounds and to
reseed the grave at the general level of lot.
   (I)   Vehicles causing damage to the roadway or any portion of the cemetery,
shall not be permitted. persons causing damage shall be responsible.
   (J)   The village, or its officials, employees and agents, shall not be
responsible for loss of or damage to any headstone, marker, bench, rock garden
or other property in the cemetery, caused by vandalism, theft or other acts
outside the control of the village. Nor are they responsible for any loss or
damage caused by the removal of any item as authorized by these regulations.
   (K)   Restrictions on placing certain items in cemetery.
      (1)   Boxes, shells, toys, metal designs, frames, ornaments, chairs,
settees, wood and iron cases, and glass items (“prohibited items”) shall not be
placed or left upon lots or elsewhere in the cemetery. Prohibited items are
subject to removal by the village without notice.
      (2)   Items other than prohibited items may placed on new gravesites for
a period of 21 days after burial, after which they are subject to removal by
the village without notice.
      (3)   Items other than prohibited articles may be placed on and may be
affixed to gravestones. Items placed on gravestones but not affixed may be
placed for a period of ten days, after which they are subject to removal by the
village without notice. Items affixed to gravestones which, in the judgment of
the Public Works Director are unsightly, dangerous, or interfere with
maintenance to the cemetery grounds, are subject to removal by the village
without notice.
      (4)   Floral designs, flowers, plants other than trees and shrubs, and
ground cover are permitted in the cemetery. However, any such items are subject
to removal by the village, which in the judgment of the Public Works Director,
are unsightly, dangerous, detrimental, or diseased, or which interfere with
maintenance of the cemetery grounds.
      (5)   All flower baskets suspended on shepherd hooks or monument brackets
hangers may remain throughout the year. Hooks and hangers must be placed for
accessibility of maintenance.
      (6)   No new trees or shrubs shall be permitted in the cemetery except
those installed by the village in its sole discretion.
      (7)   Benches may be placed in the cemetery subject to the following
regulations, which shall be acknowledged by the lot owner in writing before a
bench is placed:
         (a)   Benches shall be constructed of granite or concrete and shall be
sufficiently heavy so as not to be dislodged by wind.
         (b)   Benches shall be no more than 48 inches in length.
         (c)   Benches shall be placed within the confines of a lot or group of
lots owned or controlled by the person or family installing the bench.
         (d)   Benches shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition,
and the person or family installing the bench shall be responsible for mowing
and trimming within two feet of the bench in all directions.
         (e)   Benches shall remain the property of the cemetery lot owner, but
may be used by any visitor to the cemetery.
         (f)   Benches not placed or maintained in conformance with these
regulations may be removed seven days after notice from the village to the lot
owner at the lot owner’s last known address. A bench that has been removed may
be retrieved by the owner within 14 days after its removal, after which it may
be disposed of by the village without further notice.
         (g)   Benches in the cemetery as of February 14, 2012 that do not
conform to the provisions of this division (K)(7) shall be removed or brought
into conformance on or before September 1, 2012. The village shall use
reasonable efforts to notify the owners of nonconforming benches of this
requirement.
      (8)   Rock gardens may be installed in the cemetery subject to the
following regulations, which shall be acknowledged by the lot owner in writing
before the rock garden is installed:
         (a)   Rock gardens shall contain rock and may contain two other items
which, in the judgment of the Public Works Director, are not unsightly or
dangerous, and do not interfere with maintenance to the cemetery grounds.
         (b)   Rock gardens shall be contained by landscape edging with a
minimum height of three inches above the ground.
         (c)   Rock gardens shall be placed within the confines of a lot or
group of lots owned or controlled by the person or family creating the rock
garden.
         (d)   Rock gardens shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition, and the person or family creating the rock garden shall be
responsible for mowing and trimming within two feet of the rock garden in all
directions.
         (e)   Rock gardens not placed or maintained in conformance with the
provisions of these regulations may be removed seven days after notice from the
village to the lot owner at the lot owner’s last known address.
   (L)   These regulations shall be prominently displayed in the cemetery and
on the website of the village. An undated copy of these regulations shall be
given to all local funeral homes and monument services.
   (M)   Persons purchasing a cemetery deed or requesting a burial permit shall
sign an acknowledgment of receipt of the cemetery regulations and shall provide
the village with an address for notices, which the purchaser or applicant may
change from time to time. However, the failure of the village to provide a copy
of these regulations shall not excuse any violation of these regulations.
(Ord. 93-58, passed 12-14-93; Am. Ord. 12-03, passed 2-14-12)
BURIAL PROCEDURES
§ 91.20 PROOF OF HEIRSHIP.
   The village will be in no way responsible for damages or delays in making
interments where satisfactory proof of heirship has not been established.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.21 CRYPT OR VAULT REQUIRED.
   All interments must be made in sectional concrete crypts or vaults of
concrete or metal. The use of wooden interment boxes is not permitted.
(Ord. passed - - ) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 GRAVE CONSTRUCTION.
   All graves shall be constructed and filled so that the top thereof shall be
flat and even with the surrounding terrain.
(Ord. passed - - ) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.23 PERMIT OF DISPOSITION.
   No body shall be interred in or disinterred from the cemetery unless a
permit for disposition of dead human body in the form and manner prescribed by
the State Registrar of Vital Records pursuant to the Illinois “Vital Records
Act” is filed with the village.
(Ord. 80-17, passed 6-24-80)
§ 91.24 CREMATED REMAINS.
   The Cemetery Department upon request may permit the burial of cremated
remains in the same grave with another body. Separate grave markers will not be
allowed in such cases.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.25 OPENING OF GRAVES.
   (A)   Notice of opening a grave must be given to the Cemetery Department in
sufficient time to allow eight hours of daylight for the work. Owners desiring
graves opened or other work done may be required to exhibit the deed to the
grave or give other satisfactory evidence of ownership.
   (B)   When instructions for opening a grave are indefinite or, for any
reason, the grave cannot be opened in the location specified, the
superintendent may order it opened at the location in the lot as may seem best,
under the circumstances. The Cemetery Department will not be responsible for
any mistakes occurring in orders for the opening of a grave, or, similar work,
unless order is made in writing over the signature of the lot owner.
   (C)   The Cemetery Department will not be responsible for any mistakes
occurring where orders are given by telephone. In the absence of contrary
instructions to the Cemetery Department it is understood that undertakers are
acting in the capacity of agents for the lot owner and with full authority in
placing orders with the Cemetery Department for interments.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.26 DISINTERMENT.
   (A)   No disinterment will be allowed without permission from the Cemetery
Department, and then only upon signature of the lot owner and the next of kin
of the person whose body is to be removed.
   (B)   The removal, by the heirs, of the bodies of the deceased lot owner and
his family for profit to themselves, or change in the expressed or implied wish
of the original owner, is repugnant to the ordinary sense of decency and is
absolutely forbidden.
   (C)   The Cemetery Department will exercise the utmost care in making a
removal but assumes no liability for damage to any burial case of any nature
whatsoever in making the removal.
(Ord. passed - - )
LOTS
§ 91.40 PLAT.
   (A)   The plat of the cemetery heretofore made, subdividing the cemetery
grounds into blocks and lots designated and numbered thereon, having been
approved by the Board of Trustees and recorded in the County Recorder's Office
is hereby declared to be the lawful plat of the cemetery. The same shall not be
changed except by vote of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 80-17, passed 6-24-80)
   (B)   The Village Clerk shall keep an accurate plat of the cemetery grounds,
and also a record in numerical order of the blocks, squares, lots and graves
therein, with separate columns, ruled therein for the entry of the amount of
the established price for the grave or graves, and for income care, the name of
the purchaser, the amount sold for as to the grave or graves, the amount sold
for as to income care and the date of sale. When any block, square, lot, or
grave shall be sold, the Clerk shall make an entry of the name of the
purchaser, the amount sold for as to the lot or grave, the amount sold for as
to income care and the date of sale opposite the number of the block, square,
lot or grave on the record and shall also designate the block, square, lot, or
grave sold by indicating the same on the plat.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.41 APPLICATIONS FOR PURCHASE; DEEDS.
   (A)   All applications for the purchase of lots shall be made at the Village
Hall. Upon payment being made, the purchaser shall be issued a deed signed by
the President of the Board of Trustees and attested by the Village Clerk under
the corporate seal.
   (B)   The deed shall be in substantially the following form:
   THE VILLAGE OF CHATHAM
   A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION
   OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS
   In consideration of              Dollars paid to the Village of Chatham, a
municipal corporation of the State of Illinois, by                     in
conformity with the provisions of the ordinance of the said Village, the said
Village hereby sells and conveys unto the said            Lot No.            in
Block No.         , in               Addition, in Chatham Cemetery, as platted
and recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County,
Illinois, and in the office of the Village Clerk of said Village.
   To Have And to Hold the same, with its appurtenances, unto the said
             , (his)(her) (their respective) heirs and assigns, forever, for a
place of burial, and for no other use or purpose whatever; conditioned,
nevertheless, that no transfer or assignment of any square or lot, or any
interest therein, shall be valid until approved by the Board of Trustees of
said Village, and subject, also, to such ordinances, general rules and
regulations as said Board may from time to time establish; and the Village of
Chatham hereby covenants with the said                 , (his)(her) (their
respective) heirs and assigns, that Chatham Cemetery, as platted and recorded
as aforesaid shall forever be kept and preserved as a place of burial for the
dead.
   In Witness Whereof the said Village of Chatham has caused its corporate seal
to be hereto affixed and has caused its name to be signed to these presents by
the President of the Board of Trustees thereof, and attested by the Village
Clerk on this           day of         , 19  .
                        VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, a municipal
                        corporation of the State of
                        Illinois,
                        By                          
                         President of the Board of
                         Trustees of the Village of
                         Chatham
ATTEST:
Village Clerk of the
Village of Chatham
(Ord. 80-17, passed 6-24-80)
§ 91.42 TRANSFER OF LOTS.
   The transfer of a lot is a privilege which may be extended in special cases,
but no grave or lot owner has the right to transfer his grave or lot. No
transfer or assignment of a lot or grave shall be valid unless in writing and
with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.43 PRIVATE LOTS.
   (A)   All interments on a private lot are subject to the consent of the
original owner, if living. Where there are two or more owners, the permission
of one owner is sufficient.
   (B)   Subject to consent of the original owner, if living, the following
persons only are entitled to burial:
      (1)   The lot owner and spouse, and direct descendants of both or either,
including spouses of such descendants.
      (2)   Parents and grandparents of original owner or original owner's
spouse.
      (3)   Any person for whose burial the lot is bought, or who may be
specified at the time of purchase of the lot.
   (C)   Owners by descent, grant, or inheritance from the original owner may
bury only direct descendants of the original owner or of themselves including
spouses.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.44 CHANGE OF ADDRESS.
   It is the duty of each lot owner to notify the Cemetery Department of any
change in his post office address. Notice sent to a lot or grave owner at the
last address on file in the cemetery will be considered sufficient and proper
legal notification.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than
$ 500 for each offense.
CHAPTER 92: EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER OPERATIONS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Limitations
   
92.03   Establishment
   
92.04   Director
   
92.05   Functions
   
92.06   Local disaster emergencies
   
92.07   Purchasing and expenditures
   
92.08   Oath
   
92.09   Testing of disaster warning devices
   
92.10   Authority to accept services, gifts, grants or loans
   
92.11   Immunity
   
92.12   Compensation
   
92.13   Injuries to persons and property
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR.  The staff assistant to the President of the Village of Chatham
with the duty of carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
   DISASTER.  An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury or
loss of life or property resulting from any natural, man-made or technological
cause, including but not limited to fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm,
hazardous materials spill or other water contamination requiring emergency
action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, extended
periods of severe and inclement weather, drought, infestation, critical
shortages of essential fuels and energy, explosion, riot, or hostile military
or paramilitary action.
   DISASTER OPERATIONS.  The functions created in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter to be performed by the village and other political
subdivisions to alleviate the effects of disasters.
   EMERGENCY SERVICES.  The coordination of functions by the state and its
political subdivision, other than functions for which military forces are
primarily responsible, as may be necessary or proper to prevent, minimize,
mitigate, repair, recover from and alleviate injury and damage resulting from
any natural, man-made or technological causes. These functions include, without
limitation, fire-fighting services, police services, emergency aviation
services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services,
communications, radiological, chemical and other special weapons defense,
evacuation of persons from stricken or threatened areas, emergency assigned
functions of plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services
and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other
activities necessary of incidental to protecting life or property.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION.  Any county, city, village or incorporated town.
   UNITED STATES.  The several states, the District of Columbia, and the
possessions thereof.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.02 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
   (A)   Interfere with the course or conduct of a private labor dispute,
except that action otherwise authorized by this ordinance or other laws may be
taken when necessary to forestall or mitigate imminent or existing danger to
public health or safety;
   (B)   Interfere with the dissemination of news or comment of public affairs;
but any communications facility or organization (including but not limited to
radio and television stations, and newspapers) may be requested to transmit or
print public service messages furnishing information or instructions in
connection with a disaster or emergency;
   (C)   Affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of police forces, fire
fighting forces, units of the armed forces of the United States, or any
personnel thereof, when on active duty; but the Village of Chatham Emergency
Preparedness Plan shall place reliance upon such forces available for
performance of functions related to disaster emergencies;
   (D)   Limit, modify, or abridge the authority of the Village President or
the Board of Trustees vested in them under the Constitution, statutes, or
common law of this state or village, independent of or in conjunction with any
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.03 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created an agency of the village to be known as the
Chatham Emergency Management Agency (“CEMA” or “Chatham EMA”) to prevent,
minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused
by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or a man-
made disaster, in accordance with the Illinois Emergency Management Act. CEMA
is an “Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, as defined in the Illinois
Emergency Management Act.
   (B)   CEMA created pursuant to this chapter supersedes the agency formerly
known as the Chatham Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, or Chatham
E.S.D.A., the powers, functions, personnel and assets of which are hereby
transferred to CEMA created hereby.
   (C)   CEMA shall consist of the Director and other such technical, clerical,
and other administrative personnel as may be selected by the Director with the
approval of the Village President or Village Administrator, and may make such
expenditures within their appropriation therefore as may be necessary to carry
out the purpose of this chapter.
   (D)   CEMA shall have jurisdiction over and serve the entire village,
village property not located within the corporate limits of the village, and
with the approval of the Village Board of Trustees, any other area which may
decide to contract with the village for emergency services and disaster
assistance.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.04 DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director of CEMA shall be appointed by the President of the
village with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. The Director
shall have a term of office of four years and until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified.
   (B)   The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training of appropriate Village personnel and/or Volunteers and
operation of CEMA as prescribed in the Village of Chatham Emergency Operations
Plan subject to the direction and control of the Village President. He shall
coordinate the activities of all organizations for emergency service and
disaster operations within the area served by CEMA and shall maintain liaison
and cooperate with the Office of Emergency Management of the County of
Sangamon. Unless the Director is made an employee of the village and covered by
the village’s insurance carrier, the Director shall be required to carry
liability insurance in the amount of $2,000,000, as well as an errors and
omissions policy in the amount of $1,000,000. The village shall be named as an
additional insured on said insurance policies which must also contain a waiver
of subrogation.
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve
of the Director, the President of the Village of Chatham, or his or her
designee, shall be and act as Director until a new appointment is made as
provided in the ordinance.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14; Am. Ord. 18-25, passed 5-22-18; Am. Ord. 18-43,
passed 7-24-18)
§ 92.05 FUNCTIONS.
   The Chatham EMA shall:
   (A)   Prepare and keep current an Emergency Operations Plan and Continuity
of Government Plan.
   (B)   Interrelate with business, labor, industry, agriculture, civic and
volunteer organizations and community leaders in the development of such plan.
   (C)   Prepare and distribute to all appropriate officials in written form a
clear and complete statement of the emergency responsibilities of all local
departments and offices and of the disaster chain of command.
   (D)   Cooperate with all other emergency management agencies and emergency
services and disaster agencies.
   (E)   Establish, train and maintain such communications unit(s) as may be
deemed proper by the Village Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Establish, train and maintain such other volunteer EMA units as may be
deemed proper by the Director or Village President to place the village in a
position to promptly and efficiently respond to and recover from disaster.
   (G)   Prepare, for issuance by the Village President or Board of Trustees,
resolutions, proclamations, and regulations as necessary or appropriate in
coping with disaster.
   (H)   Cooperate with the federal, state and county government and any public
or private agency or entity in achieving any purpose of this chapter and in
implementing programs for disaster prevention, preparation, response, and
recovery.
   (I)   Do all other things necessary, incidental or appropriate for the
implementation of this chapter.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.06 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   (1)   A local disaster emergency may only be declared by the Village
President or his or her Interim Successor as defined in the Emergency Interim
Executive Succession Act, 5 ILCS 275/1. For purposes of such Act, the interim
successors are hereby designated as follows:
         (a)   First, the Village Trustee with the most seniority on the
Village Board;
         (b)   Second, the Village Trustee with the next most seniority on the
Village Board;
         (c)   Third, the Village Trustee with the third most seniority on the
Village Board.
      (2)   In case two trustees have equal seniority on the Village Board, the
identity of the interim successor shall be decided by agreement, or if no
agreement can be reached, by lot.
   (B)   A local disaster emergency shall not continue for a period in excess
of seven days except by or with consent of the Village Board of Trustees. Any
order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local disaster
emergency shall be given prompt and general publicity, and shall be filed
promptly with the Village Clerk.
   (C)   The effect of a local disaster emergency declaration is to activate
the response and recovery aspects of the Village of Chatham Emergency
Operations Plan and to authorize the furnishing of aid and assistance
thereunder.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.07 PURCHASING AND EXPENDITURES.
   The Board of Trustees may, on the recommendations of the Director, authorize
any purchases or contracts and mutual assistance agreements necessary to place
the village in a position to effectively combat any disaster resulting from the
explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public
health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to
victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.08 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in CEMA shall, before
entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the oath as set forth in the
Illinois Emergency Management Act, which oath shall be filed with the Office of
Emergency Management of Sangamon County.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.09 TESTING OF DISASTER WARNING DEVICES.
   The testing of the disaster warning devices including outdoor warning sirens
shall be held only on the first Tuesday of each month at 10:00 in the morning.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.10 AUTHORITY TO ACCEPT SERVICES, GIFTS, GRANTS OR LOANS.
   Whenever the federal, state, or county governments or any agency or officer
thereof or whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the village
services, equipment, supplies, material or funds by way of gift or grant for
purpose of Emergency Management Operations, the Village Board may authorize any
officer of the village to receive such services, equipment, supplies,
materials, or funds on behalf of the village.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.11 IMMUNITY.
   Neither the village, the agency or any member thereof or any person acting
at their direction, engaged in any emergency services and disaster operation or
disaster activities, while complying with or attempting to comply with this
chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to this chapter is
liable for the death of or any injury to persons, or damage to property, as a
result of such activity. This section does not, however, affect the right of
any person to receive benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under
the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, under the Worker’s Compensation
Act or the Worker’s Occupational Diseases Act, or under any pension law, and
this section does not affect the right of any such person to receive any
benefits or compensation under any Act of Congress.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.12 COMPENSATION.
   The village may, by its annual appropriations ordinance, provide for the
payment of the salary of the Director and such other office staff and personnel
as may be expressly provided for in this chapter. Nothing herein contained
shall prohibit any member of the agency from receiving compensation from the
State of Illinois Emergency Management Agency under any provision of this
agency.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14)
§ 92.13 INJURIES TO PERSONS AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   As may be permitted by and under the rules, conditions and regulations
adopted by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, certified CEMA
personnel may be deemed employees of the state for purposes of workers’
compensation when engaged in certain official CEMA activities as defined by the
Act.
   (B)   The village’s CEMA members are not considered employees of the village
and instead are volunteers. These volunteers are not provided worker’s
compensation coverage by the village and are not entitled to compensation of
any kind. Any volunteer claiming injury or property damage sustained while
undertaking CEMA volunteer activities under the direction of and for the
benefit of the village may be submitted to the village’s insurance carrier. The
village shall have no liability for any claim of personal injury or property
damage beyond what the village’s applicable insurance coverage for volunteers
may provide, except that the village may pay a CEMA volunteer’s personal
insurance deductible, up to $1,000, for repair of a personal vehicle damaged
while participating in village directed CEMA activities. All village CEMA
members shall be required to sign a waiver and acknowledgement of this
limitation of liability.
(Ord. 14-35, passed 7-22-14; Am. Ord. 18-25, passed 5-22-18)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH, SAFETY, AND SANITATION
Section
Garbage
   
93.01   Garbage receptacle
   
93.02   Garbage disposal
   
93.03   Deposit in street prohibited
   
93.04   Wind blown refuse
   
93.05   Grass and rubbish
Nuisance Vegetation, Rubbish and Pests
   
93.20   Definitions
   
93.21   Nuisances declared
   
93.22   Removal of nuisance of vegetation, rubbish and pests by the owner and
occupants of land
   
93.23   Removal of nuisance of vegetation, rubbish and pests by the village
   
93.24   Enforcement Officer
   
93.25   Legal and equitable remedies
   
93.26   Notice form
Sewage and Water Courses
   
93.40   Sewage
   
93.41   Water courses
   
93.42   Pools
Combustible Refuse; Fires
   
93.50   Combustible refuse
   
93.51   Fires
 
   
93.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Notice of nuisance vegetation, rubbish or pest violation
GARBAGE
§ 93.01 GARBAGE RECEPTACLE.
   It shall be the duty of every owner or his agent or occupant of any house,
building, or apartment in the village where people reside, board, or lodge, or
where animal or vegetable matter is prepared or served, at all times to
maintain in good order a can or cans for garbage, cans, bottles, ashes, or
similar refuse.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   The owner, occupant, or lessee of any premises in the village shall remove
from their premises or otherwise dispose of all garbage, cans, bottles, ashes,
and similar refuse or rubbish of every description whatsoever at least once
each week, and shall keep the premises at all times free and clear of any
accumulation of garbage, cans, bottles, ashes, rubbish, and similar refuse of
every description whatsoever.
(Ord. 79-33, passed 8-28-79) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.03 DEPOSIT IN STREET PROHIBITED.
   No garbage or refuse of any kind shall be deposited in any street or alley
or public way, except as provided in this chapter; and no refuse shall be so
placed that it can be blown about or scattered by the wind.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.04 WIND BLOWN REFUSE.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or material in such a
place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to be scattered or
cause clouds or dust or particles; and it shall be unlawful to permit the
escape of soot, ashes, or other solid products or results of combustion so as
to be wind blown or scattered.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.05 GRASS AND RUBBISH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to dump or
deposit, or cause to be dumped or deposited, any grass, leaves, branches, or
any other things in the roadway or gutter of any public street in the village.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
NUISANCE VEGETATION, RUBBISH AND PESTS
§ 93.20 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter, the following terms have the following
definitions.
   NUISANCE VEGETATION. Includes:
      (1)   Trees, shrubs, bushes, weeds {'{'}as defined herein) or plants
permitted to grow on premises in a village roadway or roadway right-of-way, or
adjacent to any street or alley or other public way in a manner as to obstruct
the view and endanger traffic conditions.
      (2)    Weeds (as defined herein), and dead or dying trees or bushes,
stumps and roots, on land within the village.
      (3)   Elm trees infected with Dutch elm disease or ash trees infected
with the emerald ash borer.
   PESTS. Undesirable arthropods (including certain insects, spiders, mites,
ticks, and related organisms), wood-infesting organisms, rats, mice, and other
obnoxious undesirable animals, but does not include a feral cat, a “companion
animal” as that term is defined in the Humane Care for Animals Act (510 ILCS
70). “animals” as that term is defined in the Illinois Diseased Animals Act
(510 ILCS 50). or animals protected by the Wildlife Code (520 ILCS 5).
   RUBBISH. Any unsightly material, waste products, refuse, debris, trash or
waste lumber deposited, left, piled or scattered that may become a breeding
place for insects, rodents or vermin, or that may give off unpleasant odors or
create a health or fire hazard where located.
   WEEDS.  Annual or perennial herbaceous plants of volunteer growth, not
cultivated or useful for human food or enjoyment. They shall include, but not
be limited to, the following: jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistles of all kinds,
cockleburr. barberry (tall, common or other horticultural varieties), poison
ivy, yellow dock, Indian mallow, sweet clover, wild mustard (including black
mustard and yellow mustard). May weed, lambs’ quarters, pig weed, beggar ticks,
wild lettuce, shepherds purse, smart weed, sow-thistle, tumbleweed. milk weed,
dandelions, and the like; any plant that, when in blossom, gives off an
unpleasant or obnoxious order or pollen irritating to human tissue; and any
plant growth that may conceal rubbish, debris or filthy deposits, or constitute
a fire hazard when dry; and grass that is more than 12 inches in height, random
growth or volunteer growth of bushes or brush that may conceal rubbish, debris
or filthy deposits, or constitute a fire hazard when dry; or any plant that
causes or adds its influence in bringing on hay fever or other similar or
noxious plant; and all plants fitting within the term “weeds” as used in the
Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
§ 93.21 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   Nuisance vegetation, weeds, rubbish and pests, as defined in §
93.20, are hereby declared to be nuisances.
(Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
§ 93.22 REMOVAL OF NUISANCE VEGETATION, RUBBISH AND PESTS BY THE OWNER AND
OCCUPANTS OF LAND.
   (A)   Failure to obey notice, removal by village; costs. In all cases where
the owner, occupant or lessee of real estate on which there is nuisance
vegetation, rubbish or pests, shall (i) fail to cut or remove nuisance
vegetation; (ii) fail to remove rubbish; or (iii) fail to prevent or
exterminate pests after ten calendar days’ notice in writing, mailed to him or
her by certified mail, return receipt requested, at his or her last known
address ascertainable by the village, notifying him or her to (i) cut or remove
nuisance vegetation; (ii) remove rubbish; or (iii) to prevent or exterminate
pests, then the Enforcement Officer may cause the nuisance vegetation to be
cut, trimmed or removed, or the rubbish removed, or pests exterminated or
removed, and the entire expense thereof shall be chargeable to both the person
who owns and the one who controls such real estate, to be collected by suit or
otherwise, in addition to the penalty prescribed in this chapter. The ten days
referred to above shall begin from date of such mailing. In the alternative to
mailing the notice, the notice may be hand-delivered by a village police
officer, and the ten days will begin to run from the date of hand delivery.
   (B)   Failure to pay; penalty. Any person, liable hereunder for payment of
the foregoing expense to the village, shall pay the full amount charged within
ten days after the date the statement was mailed to the owner, occupant or
lessee at his or her last known address, or the charge shall be delinquent.
Failure to pay the charge within the time specified shall thereafter subject
the violator to a penalty of 10% of the unpaid amount of the delinquent charge
or $10, whichever is greater, which shall be collected as part of the
delinquent charge.
   (C)    Removal. Nuisance vegetation, when cut down, shall be removed from
the lot or disposed of in such manner as not to create a nuisance or hazard.
(Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
§ 93.23 REMOVAL OF NUISANCE VEGETATION, RUBBISH AND PESTS BY THE VILLAGE.
   (A)    If the person served with notice fails or refuses to remedy the
violation, the violation may be removed or remedied by private contractors
hired by the village, or, at the discretion of the Enforcement Officer after
consultation with the Mayor, by village personnel.
   (B)    Charge. The village hereby establishes a charge, payable by the owner
and/or person that controls the property (jointly and severally) to the
village, of $100 per hour or greater if actual costs of the use of village
employees, equipment and fuel for removal of nuisance vegetation, rubbish and
pests and exceed $100 per hour. The corporate authorities of the village hereby
find that the charge is fair and reasonable to recompense the village for its
expenses. In the event the Enforcement Officer contracts with a third party for
the removal of rubbish or nuisance vegetation, the charge to the owner,
occupant or lessee shall be the village’s out-of-pocket expenses, plus a $25
service charge for administering the contract, which the corporate authorities
find to be fair and reasonable to recompense the village.
   (C)   Lien.  In the event that the village sends a bill pursuant to §
93.23(B) to the owner, his or her agent, legal representative, or occupant in
legal possession or control of the premises, and the nuisance vegetation,
rubbish or pest removal expense remains unpaid for more than ten days after the
service is performed and expense incurred by the village, the unpaid charge
shall constitute a lien upon the real estate, and the Village Clerk or other
designee shall file a notice of lien in the office of the County Recorder of
Deeds, and mail a copy of the lien to the last ascertainable owner of record,
in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. Upon payment of all
costs, expenses, charges and penalties, the lien created under this section
shall be released by the village, which release shall be filed of record in the
same manner as filing notice of the lien, pursuant to law, the expense of the
filing to be paid by the violator. The following procedure shall apply:
      (1)   Notice of lien. The village or the person performing the service by
authority of the village, in its, his or her own name, may file a notice of
lien in the office of the recorder of deeds in the county in which the real
estate is located. The notice of lien shall be filed within one year after the
cost and expense is incurred. If, for any one property, the village engaged in
any nuisance abatement activity described in §
93.23 on more than one occasion during the course of one year, then the village
may combine any or all of the costs of those activities into a single notice of
lien.
         The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
         (a)   A description of the real estate that sufficiently describes the
parcel;
         (b)   The amount of the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
activities; and
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred bv the
village or someone working on behalf of the village.
         After recording, the notice of lien shall be sent by certified mail to
the property owner, his or her agent or legal representative or occupant in
legal possession or control of the premises and, if different, to the person
who received the tax bill for the preceding year.
      (2)   Release of lien.  Upon payment of the cost after the notice of lien
has been filed as provided herein, the lien shall be released by the village or
person in whose name the lien has been filed, and the release shall be recorded
of record in the same manner as recording the notice of lien.
      (3)   Foreclosure of lien. Subsequent to the filing of the above-
described lien, the village may cause to be filed a complaint for foreclosure
of the lien, or upon becoming a defendant in a pending lawsuit affecting the
premises or real estate, by answer to the complaint or in the nature of an
intervening petition or cross-complaint, the village may proceed in its
corporate name to foreclose the lien. An action to foreclose a lien under this
section must be commenced within two years after the date of filing notice of
lien. The property subject to a lien arising under this section shall be sold
for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to
pay the monies owing the village.
   (D)   Suit. In addition to any other action authorized by this chapter or by
the Illinois Municipal Code, the village may, to the extent permitted by law,
bring suit to foreclose the lien and to sue the owner or lessee or occupant of
the real estate or their agent, in a civil action to recover the money due for
services rendered, plus all expenses and reasonable attorney fees to be fixed
by the court. Any such judgment shall be enforced in accordance with law. In
addition io the charges due, the village is entitled to collect the costs of
filing a notice of lien, foreclosing the lien and litigation costs, together
with all office and legal expenses incurred in connection with the collection
of the amount due.
(Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
§ 93.24 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be by the Code Enforcement Officer of
the village.
(Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
§ 93.25 LEGAL AND EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   In addition to the penalties and liens prescribed herein, the village may
avail itself of all legal and equitable remedies permitted by the Illinois
Municipal Code and other state statutes to abate a nuisance, including, but not
limited to, seeking preliminary and permanent injunctive relief.
(Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
§ 93.26 NOTICE FORM.
   Notice to a violator may be, but is not required to be, in the form of
Appendix A to this chapter.
(Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
SEWAGE AND WATER COURSES
§ 93.40 SEWAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, permit, cause, create, or
contribute to, in any way, an open drain, sewer, or cesspool; and it shall also
be unlawful for any person to permit, create, cause, or contribute to any
unsightly nauseous or unhealthful condition by failing to properly dispose of
sewage or refuse, both within the limits of the village and at any point within
one mile of the village limits.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.41 WATER COURSES.
   It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person, firm, or corporation to
obstruct or pollute any water course or source of water supply in the village.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.42 POOLS.
   Any stagnant pool of water in the village is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit
the nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his or its control.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE; FIRES
§ 93.50 COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in a
way that creates a fire hazard or to store or throw away any refuse of any kind
in any alley, street, or other public way in the village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to dump, leave, or deposit any refuse anywhere in
the village, with or without the consent of the owner of the premises, which is
or may be thrown about by the wind, which consists of garbage or any vegetable
matter subject to decay, or which consists of flammable material so as to form
a fire hazard.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to leave or deposit or abandon any cases,
cartons, car bodies, or similar articles anywhere in the village.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.51 FIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire so close to any building
or other structure as to endanger the building or structure, or on any street
or sidewalk pavement.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, on
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $100 nor to exceed $750
for each violation. Each day during which a violation continues beyond the
specified time for correction shall constitute a separate punishable offense.
(Ord. 75-9, passed 10-14-75; Am. Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
APPENDIX A: NOTICE OF NUISANCE VEGETATION, RUBBISH OR PEST VIOLATION
To:
                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
   (Insert names and addresses of property owners and occupants)
   PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that you have permitted [nuisance vegetation] [rubbish]
[pests] [weeds] to exist on the following property owned or occupied or
otherwise controlled by you within the corporate limits of the Village of
Chatham, in violation of Chapter 93 of the Code of Ordinances of the Village of
Chatham.
   The address of the property is
                                                                                   
, Chatham. Illinois.
   The conditions constituting the violation are generally described as
follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
   You are hereby ordered to remove such [nuisance vegetation] [rubbish]
[pests] [weeds] within ten calendar days of the date of this Notice.
   Chapter 93 of the Code of Ordinances provides that any person violating its
provisions is subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750 for
each day a violation is allowed to continue. If the Village must prosecute you,
either in its Code Hearing Department or in the Circuit Court, for the
violations described above, it will seek fines beginning from the date of this
Notice. Chapter 93 of the Code of Ordinances also provides that if you fail to
remove rubbish, nuisance vegetation or pests, the Village may do so, or may
hire someone to do so, and may place a lien on the premises described in this
Notice if you fail to pay for the work. If the Village itself performs the
work, it will charge a minimum of $100 per hour for the work.
   Definitions of “nuisance vegetation,” “rubbish”, “pests”, and “weeds” from §
93.20 of the Code of Ordinances are found on the reverse side of this form.
   This Notice is dated this        day of
                                             , 20        .
                                                                                                                           
                         Enforcement officer
   NUISANCE VEGETATION. Includes:
      (1)   Trees, shrubs, bushes, weeds {'{'}as defined herein) or plants
permitted to grow on premises in a village roadway or roadway right-of-way, or
adjacent to any street or alley or other public way in a manner as to obstruct
the view and endanger traffic conditions.
      (2)    Weeds (as defined herein), and dead or dying trees or bushes,
stumps and roots, on land within the village.
      (3)   Elm trees infected with Dutch elm disease or ash trees infected
with the emerald ash borer.
   PESTS. Undesirable arthropods (including certain insects, spiders, mites,
ticks, and related organisms), wood-infesting organisms, rats, mice, and other
obnoxious undesirable animals, but does not include a feral cat, a “companion
animal” as that term is defined in the Humane Care for Animals Act (510 ILCS
70). “animals” as that term is defined in the Illinois Diseased Animals Act
(510 ILCS 50). or animals protected by the Wildlife Code (520 ILCS 5).
   RUBBISH. Any unsightly material, waste products, refuse, debris, trash or
waste lumber deposited, left, piled or scattered that may become a breeding
place for insects, rodents or vermin, or that may give off unpleasant odors or
create a health or fire hazard where located.
   WEEDS.  Annual or perennial herbaceous plants of volunteer growth, not
cultivated or useful for human food or enjoyment. They shall include, but not
be limited to, the following: jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistles of all kinds,
cockleburr. barberry (tall, common or other horticultural varieties), poison
ivy, yellow dock, Indian mallow, sweet clover, wild mustard (including black
mustard and yellow mustard). May weed, lambs’ quarters, pig weed, beggar ticks,
wild lettuce, shepherds purse, smart weed, sow-thistle, tumbleweed. milk weed,
dandelions, and the like; any plant that, when in blossom, gives off an
unpleasant or obnoxious order or pollen irritating to human tissue; and any
plant growth that may conceal rubbish, debris or filthy deposits, or constitute
a fire hazard when dry; and grass that is more than 12 inches in height, random
growth or volunteer growth of bushes or brush that may conceal rubbish, debris
or filthy deposits, or constitute a fire hazard when dry; or any plant that
causes or adds its influence in bringing on hay fever or other similar or
noxious plant; and all plants fitting within the term “weeds” as used in the
Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. 15-34, passed 8-11-15)
CHAPTER 94: PARKS AND RECREATION; ZOOS
Section
Parks
   
94.01   Construction of chapter
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Alcoholic liquors; penalty
   
94.04   Hours; penalty
   
94.05   Exceptions
   
94.06   Posting
   
94.07   Village of Chatham park rental and use policy
   
94.08   Park reservation and use fees
   
94.09   Regulations pertaining to use of the parks
   
94.10   SATS Trailheads, Access Points, and Amenities Plan
   
94.11   Rules and regulations for village dog parks
Zoos
   
94.15   Definitions
   
94.16   Compliance with provisions
   
94.17   Regulations applicable to all zoos
   
94.18   Public zoo regulations
   
94.19   License required
   
94.20   Information required to obtain license
   
94.21   Procedures for granting or denying license
   
94.22   Conditions of license
   
94.23   Duration of license; license fee
   
94.24   Zoos not in conformance with provisions declared a nuisance
   
94.25   Enforcement of provisions
 
   
94.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A: Animal escape procedures
Cross-reference:
   Recreation Director, see §
30.27
PARKS
§ 94.01 CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed, to the end that the health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the village shall be protected by the
regulation of the possession or consumption of alcoholic liquors in the village
park.
(Ord. 77-16, passed 6-14-77)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol spirits, wine, and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being.
   VILLAGE PARK. Any park, designated as such, owned by the village, including
but not limited to the Chatham Village Park, to Chatham Community Park, the
West Side Park, and the J.C. Park.
(Ord. 77-16, passed 6-14-77)
§ 94.03 ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS; PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to
possess or consume alcoholic liquors in a village park.
(Ord. 77-16, passed 6-14-77) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 HOURS.
   (A)   All village parks shall be closed to the public at 10:00 p.m.
   (B)   Exceptions to the 10:00 p.m. closing time may be made by the Village
Administrator for group activities. Such exceptions shall be made in writing.
When such an exception is made, the Village Police Department shall be notified
of the exception by the Village Administrator.
   (C)   No person other than those persons authorized in writing by the
Village Administrator, and officers and employees of the village, shall enter
or remain in any park owned by the village after the closing time established
in division (A) of this section.
   (D)   The Village Administrator shall within 90 days of this Ordinance, post
the entrance of each park with the closing hours established by this Ordinance.
(Ord. 77-16, passed 6-14-77; Am. Ord. 92-2, passed 2-25-92) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   The Board of Trustees of the village by formal action may grant specific
exceptions to this chapter to any person or organization when the exception is,
in their opinion, in the best interests of the residents of the village.
(Ord. 77-16, passed 6-14-77)
§ 94.06 POSTING.
   This ordinance shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the village park.
The failure to post this ordinance in the village park shall not affect the
validity of this chapter.
(Ord. 77-16, passed 6-14-77)
§ 94.07 VILLAGE OF CHATHAM PARK RENTAL AND USE POLICY.
   (A)   General. The Park Rental and Use Policy of the village is hereby
established to provide a systematic method by which parks and park amenities
may be reserved by the residents of the community. A reservation is not
required for park use for occasional play. For multiple activities or special
use (which includes use by a resident or groups, multiple days, or week play
for a designated area) a permit is recommended and will guarantee use for the
dates and times specified on the permit. All village playground areas shall
remain open for public access and public pathways located within any village
park shall remain open to the public at all times. Occasionally, parks may be
excluded from the reservation availability at the discretion of the village.
   (B)   Objectives. The objectives of this policy are:
      (1)   To provide maximum utilization of parks through centralized
scheduling.
      (2)   To provide an impartial distribution of park amenities to the
various community groups who wish to reserve.
      (3)   To plan cooperatively with other community agencies to enhance
individual and group recreational needs.
      (4)   To provide recreational activities which take into consideration
the needs of the community.
      (5)   To provide the best possible maintenance of the parks using
available manpower and monetary resources.
   (C)   Administration. This Policy shall be administered by an officer or
employee of the village designated by the Village Manager, and referred to
herein as the Park Administrator. This section does not create a new employment
position.
   (D)   Priorities. In scheduling the use or reservation of a park or park
amenities (defined as an area of a park containing special recreational
facilities, such as a pavilion, athletic field, etc.) the Park Administrator
shall apply the following priorities:
      (1)   Uses of athletic fields established pursuant to written agreements
with the village (e.g., with baseball and soccer leagues) shall have absolute
priority over all other uses of athletic fields.
      (2)   Festivals with a history of at least three consecutive years (e.g.,
the Sweet Corn Festival) and not involving athletic fields shall have absolute
priority over all other non-athletic uses.
      (3)   Other uses shall be prioritized in the following order where there
is a conflict:
         (a)   Use by the Village Recreation Board or other organ of the
village;
         (b)   Use by the Ball-Chatham School District;
         (c)   Use by units of government other than the Ball-Chatham School
District, the boundaries of which overlap the boundaries of the Village of
Chatham;
         (d)   Use by of nonprofit corporations and associations;
         (e)   Use by private individuals;
         (f)   Use by for-profit business entities;
         (g)   Use by units of government, the boundaries of which do not
overlap the boundaries of the Village of Chatham;
         (h)   Within groups (d) and (e) above, residents' groups (groups with
80% or more village residents or nonprofit organizations with a business office
in Chatham) shall be given priority over nonresident groups.
      (4)   Parks and park amenities may be used on a drop-in basis by any
group or individual without a reservation on a first come, first served basis,
so long as the park or amenity has not been previously reserved by another
group. In case of inclement weather, the Village Park and Recreation Department
shall make the final decision regarding use of the park or park amenities.
      (5)   The Park Administrator's determination of priorities shall be
final.
   (E)   Requests for reservations.  
      (1)   Organizations, groups and individuals desiring to reserve parks or
park amenities shall complete an application for reservation designed by the
Park Administrator. Each application shall designate a responsible contact
person or persons, who shall:
         (a)   Sign the application;
         (b)   Agree to be responsible for any damage to village property
caused by participants of the event;
         (c)   Acknowledge receipt of the park use policy; and
         (d)   Agree that the permit may be revoked for failure to adhere to
the park use policy.
      (2)   Reservation requests shall be approved beginning on the following
dates:
         (a)   Spring Season (March - May): February 15.
         (b)   Summer Season (June - August): April 15.
         (c)   Fall Season (September - November): July 15.
         (d)   Winter Season (December - February): November 15.
   (F)   Other regulations regarding reservations.
      (1)   Any individual, organization, entity or group wishing to reserve a
park or park amenity for use shall have an approved reservation permit prior to
publicly advertising the use of the park or location, either for a single use
or multiple use requests.
      (2)   A multiple use request may not exceed more than three days without
the consent of the Village Board as in, for example, a festival such as the
Sweet Corn Festival. Some activities may be determined to be not appropriate
for specific parks due to location, use, or overall function of the park.
      (3)   The requesting party shall include all activities or uses of the
park when making the request, sufficient for the Park Administrator to
determine priorities.
      (4)   At the time of application, all special requests must be indicated
in detail on the reservation form. These include, but are not limited to,
bringing in tables and chairs, inflatable amusement equipment, selling
concessions (including items to be sold), selling of miscellaneous items for
fund raising or profit, extended park hours use, use of a public address
system, admission charges, additional maintenance, use of snow fence, and water
or electrical access.
      (5)   Applicants shall state in writing that they have reviewed and will
comply at all times with the regulations for use of the parks, §
94.09 of this Code.
      (6)   Events attracting more than 100 participants may present public
safety issues and may otherwise disproportionately impact the parks. As a part
of confirming the reservation for use the police will be consulted regarding
potential impacts to the parks and village public safety.
      (7)   Fees for large events are subject to a surcharge based on
anticipated costs of cleanup by village personnel. Fees will be estimated in
advance by Park Administrator. Large group events may be subject to additional
fees for public safety and traffic control.
(Ord. 13-49, passed 12-10-13)
§ 94.08 PARK RESERVATION AND USE FEES.
   (A)   Establishment. Groups or individuals reserving parks or park amenities
on a single or multiple use bases shall be required to pay the established fee
at least one week prior to the date reserved. A reservation shall be recorded
upon payment of the fee and the security deposit. Payment of fees shall be made
at the Chatham Village Hall. If a park or park amenity is damaged and requires
more than normal maintenance and/or repair to be restored to its original
condition, the group or individual shall be charged the amount necessary to
cover the cost of the required maintenance and/or repair. Fees for use of the
parks are as follows, and are subject to change without notice.
Facility                                    Cost per Hour Rental
                                         Residents Non-residents
Covered Bridge Park                      $50       $65
Jaycee Park (entire park)                N/a       N/a
Jaycee Park Baseball Field               $30       $40
Jaycee Park Pavilion                     $20       $30
Jaycee Park Basketball Court North/South N/a       N/a
South Park (entire park)                 N/a       N/a
South Park Baseball Fields               $40       $50
Bob Erickson Field                       $60       $75
South Park Terry Burke Amphitheater      $50       $75
South Park Football Field East/West      $60       $75
South Park Pavilion                      $10       $15
South Park Soccer Field                  $30       $40
South Park Soccer Field (All)            N/a       N/a
South Park Tennis Court                  $20       $30
South Park Tennis Courts (All)           N/a       N/a
Pickleball Court                         $20       $30
Pickleball Courts (All)                  N/a       N/a
Village Square Entire Park               N/a       N/a
Village Square Gazebo                    $10       $15
Village Square Pavilion                  $10       $15
West Park All                            N/a       N/a
West Park Baseball Field                 $20       $25
West Park Pavilion                       $10       $15
West Park Volleyball Pit                 $10       $15
 
   (B)   Resident vs non-resident users. To qualify for resident fees, a group
shall consist of 80% or more residents of the village, village boundaries. The
80% residency requirement shall be calculated based on the total number of
individuals using the park. Residency shall be determined based on the home
address of the individuals as opposed to the business address or the address of
other family members. The Park Administrator may waive the residency
requirement if it is considered in the best interest of the village.
   (C)   Commercial users. No individual or group may reserve a park or park
amenity for commercial purposes. Company picnics, softball leagues, and the
like, and other uses by for-profit entities, where no products or services are
advertised or sold, are not deemed "commercial purposes" within the meaning of
this paragraph.
   (D)   Waiver of fees. The village may waive or reduce fees to schools,
private groups or organization in exchange of services or pursuant to other
agreed-on arrangements. A waiver or reduction of fees over $250 shall be
approved by the Village Board.
   (E)   Refund of fees. A refund of a reservation fee may be granted for the
following reasons:
      (1)   If the Park Administrator determines that the determines that the
park is in an unusable condition or subject to damage due to weather
conditions.
      (2)   If the group or individual provides written notification of
cancellation to the Park Administrator at least one week prior to the date
reserved.
(Ord. 13-49, passed 12-10-13; Am. Ord. 19-24, passed 8-27-19)
§ 94.09 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO USE OF THE PARKS.
   (A)   The following regulations shall govern the use of the parks.
      (1)   Each party using a park shall report any damage, accidents and or
maintenance concerns to the Park Administrator immediately.
      (2)   Other than in designated parking areas and on roads, vehicles are
not allowed in the parks without the specific and advance permission of the
Park Administrator.
      (3)   Due to the scheduling or early setups for the other functions, all
groups and organizations are requested to use only the area, field, or park
that has been assigned to them.
      (4)   No park may be reserved or used for partisan political activities
or electioneering, except that political candidates may hand out literature at
festivals and events. Non-partisan public meetings and information forums are
permitted.
      (5)   Groups using the village parks, fields, buildings or facilities are
responsible for litter control and pick up. The park should be left in equal or
better condition that it was found. Please dispose of all trash and recyclables
in the proper containers. Damage or excessive litter may result in a loss of
privileges and fees for cleanup.
      (6)   Individuals are responsible for repair or replacement of damage as
a result of misuse of the park, equipment or park amenities. Groups and
organization assume all responsibility for the repair or replacement of damage
as a result of misuse of the park, equipment or park amenities by their
members.
      (7)   Groups may not use the fields or parks when the weather conditions
are dangerous or when the field conditions are not acceptable. All groups must
adhere to the inclement weather practice for field conditions; (no standing
water, saturated turf conditions, or times when safety is a concern).
      (8)   Groups shall adhere to all village ordinances, policies and
procedures when using the facilities, parks and fields, as well as Sangamon
County of Public Health regulations for food and beverage vendors.
      (9)   All village playground areas shall remain open for public access.
Public pathways located within any village park shall remain open to the public
at all times.
      (10)   All animals shall be on a leash or subject owner commands and
control.
      (11)   Vendors are allowed in the parks only if they are:
         (a)   Licensed by the village pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this Code; or
         (b)   Sponsored by an event that has been issued a permit by the
Village Park and Recreation Department.
      (12)   Activities including sound amplification should not unreasonably
interfere in any way with other park users or adjacent property owners.
Amplification and special lighting are allowed only if a permit is issued at
the time of the reservation request.
      (13)   When portable bathrooms are needed, the user must make
arrangements to obtain and remove them from the park no later than 3:00 pm the
day after the event.
      (14)   Unauthorized use of pyrotechnics and fireworks are not allowed on
park property.
      (15)   Some parks and activities may be excluded from park reservations
in the discretion of the village.
   (B)   Violation of these rules may result in revocation of park reservation
privileges, in addition to any other action the village may have for fines.
(Ord. 13-49, passed 12-10-13)
§ 94.10 SATS TRAILHEADS, ACCESS POINTS, AND AMENITIES PLAN.
   The Village Board hereby approves the SATS Trailheads, Access Points, and
Amenities Plan.
(Ord. 16-47, passed 9-27-16)
§ 94.11 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR VILLAGE DOG PARKS.
   The following rules and regulations shall govern the use of village dog
parks:
   (A)   The dog park shall be open from 7:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m.
   (B)   It is recommended that small dogs use the small dog area. and large
dogs use the large dog area.
   (C)   Use at your own risk. Owners are responsible and liable for the
actions and behavior of their dogs at all times.
   (D)   It is recommended that dogs be accompanied by an individual of 14
years of age or older.
   (E)   It is recommended that children be supervised by a parent or guardian.
   (F)   Users are limited to three dogs per visit.
   (G)   Dog owners must be in the park at all times.
   (H)   Dogs should remain leashed while walking between the parking lot and
the dog runs.
   (I)   Dog owners must keep their leash in hand at all times.
   (J)   Please do not bring dog food or people food into the park. Small dog
treats are acceptable since that's what one uses to train a dog.
   (K)   Owner must clean up dog feces. Seal waste in the provided plastic bags
before disposing in designated receptacles.
   (L)   No animals other than dogs are allowed in this area.
   (M)   Dogs must be licensed and vaccinated. Proof of a current rabies
vaccination and license required upon request of a police or animal control
officer. Tags may serve as proof.
   (N)   Aggressive dogs are not allowed. If your dog becomes unruly or plays
rough, leash it and leave immediately.
   (O)   Female dogs in heat and puppies under four months old are prohibited.
   (P)   Sick dogs and dogs with parasites (worms, fleas, or ticks) are
prohibited.
   (Q)   Failure to abide by the park rules may result in loss of privileges
and owners may be ticketed up to $500.
   (R)   All other park policies apply.
(Ord. 22-14, passed 4-26-22)
ZOOS
§ 94.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE ZOO. A zoo open only to house hold guests and business invitees and
not to members of the general public.
   PUBLIC ZOO. A zoo open to members of the general public.
   ZOO. A collection of living animals which includes animals which are of a
wild nature or disposition, or ferae naturae in the eyes of the law.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91)
§ 94.16 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall own or operate a private or public zoo
within the corporate limits of the village except in compliance with all terms
and conditions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.17 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZOOS.
   The following regulations pertain both public or private zoos:
   (A)   Compliance with other laws and ordinances. The operation of any zoo
shall fully comply with all applicable standards, rules and regulations
pertaining to the requirements or restrictions enacted or promulgated by the
state, or any political subdivision or agency thereof, or by the government of
the United States or agency thereof, including but not limited to, the zoning,
building and life safety ordinances and regulations of the village, the United
States Department of Agriculture Rules and Regulations, the Federal
Occupational Safety and Health Act, the Illinois Department of Public Health
Foods and Sanitation Standards, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, the
Illinois Environmental Protection Act, the Illinois Endangered Species
Protection Act, the Illinois Animal Control Act, and the Illinois Humane Care
for Animals Act.
   (B)   Display of USDA Certificate. Each zoo shall have an exhibitors'
certificate from the United States Department of Agriculture, which shall be
prominently on display at the zoo's administrative offices.
   (C)   Debris. All trash, animal and food waste, and debris shall be removed
and properly disposed of daily.
   (D)   Sanitation. The zoo, all buildings, cages, animal housing facilities
an other areas displayed for public view shall be kept clean and sanitary at
all times. Each animal facility shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized in
accordance with standard industry practice and United States Department of
Agriculture regulations. A regular pest control program shall be administered
by each zoo so that pests (cockroaches, flies, ticks, lice, mites, rats, and
the like) are not attracted to the area.
   (E)   Odor control. The zoo animals and all structures and buildings
connected therewith shall not created or cause any offensive odor or smell of
any kind.
   (F)   Repair and maintenance. The zoo and all animal housing facilities,
fences, buildings, and cages shall be constructed and kept in good repair at
all times. Cages and other animal housing facilities shall be constructed of
nontoxic materials in a structurally sound design that permits cleaning and
sanitation.
   (G)   Health and disease control. Proper veterinary care shall be provided
for all animals in accordance with standard industry practice and United States
Department of Agriculture regulations, including vaccination for rabies and
other dangerous diseases.
   (H)   Noise. The animals shall not make sounds common to their species in an
excessive, continuous or untimely fashion.
   (I)   Security. No animal shall be permitted to roam freely within any part
of the zoo premises accessible to the public at anytime, except in a petting or
viewing area for domesticated animals only. Adequate controls shall be taken to
prevent animal escapes. Exhibits in any way accessible to the public must be
key locked at all times. Access doors and operating levers to dangerous animal
enclosures shall be clearly identified. A battery operated electric wire may be
required to be installed on the extreme top of, or inside of potentially
dangerous animal facilities.
   (J)   Location of animals. Animal cages or other facilities shall not be
located within 30 feet of any property line, public street, public sidewalk, or
alley.
   (K)   Perimeter fence. A sturdy fence which meets or exceeds United States
Department of Agriculture standards shall completely enclose the zoo premises.
An appropriate gate shall be located at the zoo entrance.
   (L)   Size and characteristics of animal housing facility. Animals
maintained at a zoo shall be provided adequate space in appropriate cages or
other facilities to prevent escape and overcrowding and to maintain normal
exercise according to species and in a manner consistent with industry
standards and United States Department of Agriculture Regulations. Indoor
housing shall be sufficiently temperature controlled and ventilated to provide
adequate air circulation.
   (M)   Escaped animal procedures.
      (1)   Escaped animal procedures shall be as set forth in Appendix A.
      (2)   Once it has been determined that a potentially dangerous animal has
escaped, such escape shall be communicated to the Village Police Department.
All non-zoo personnel in the escaped animal area shall be guided to the nearest
building and directed to remain indoors until told otherwise by zoo personnel.
If at any time an escaped animal poses a risk of physical harm or death to any
person, such persons, a zoo employee with authority to shoot, and the Village
Police Department may render the animal immobile by means of tranquilizers. In
an emergency where the animal cannot be tranquilized any village police officer
may destroy the animal.
      (3)   Analysis of each animal escape is important to the continual
improvement of the plan. The Zoo Director and the senior police officer will
file a report on the incident. The analysis report of each escape shall be
maintained in the files of the zoo.
      (4)   At least once per calendar half, the zoo operator shall conduct at
least one hour of training for all zoo personnel in escaped animal procedures,
and shall conduct an escaped animal drill. The Chief of Police shall be
notified in advance of such training, and shall delegate at least one police
sergeant to attend such training.
   (N)   Insurance. The following types of insurance shall be obtained and
continuously maintained:
      (1)   Public liability insurance in an amount not less than $ 1,000,000
for bodily injuries (including death) in any one occurrence and not less than $
100,000 for property damage.
      (2)   Workers Compensation insurance in the statutory amount.
   (O)   Inventory. An inventory of all animals must be maintained in zoo files
at all times which shall contain but not limited to the following information
on each animal. Disposal of dead animals shall be supervised by a licensed
veterinarian.
      (1)   Common name;
      (2)   Scientific name;
      (3)   Date of acquisition;
      (4)   Approximate age at arrival;
      (5)   Date sold;
      (6)   Date of death;
      (7)   Cause of death;
      (8)   Sex;
      (9)   Behavioral information;
      (10)   Nutrition and care records; and
      (11)   Medical records.
   (P)   Personnel. All zoo personnel shall be properly trained in the
principles of zoo keeping. The staff shall be instructed in the necessity for
constant, through inspection of all caging, fencing, and equipment. The concept
of a secure perimeter is stressed. At least one employee with authority to
tranquilize animals and manage an escaped animal shall be on duty at all time
when non-zoo personnel are present at the zoo.
   (Q)   Location restrictions. No dwelling shall exist on the same platted lot
as a zoo; provided that this restriction does not apply to a dwelling inhabited
by the zoo operator or full time zoo personnel.
   (R)   Inspection reports. The zoo operator shall provide to the village a
copy of every inspection report the operator receives from the United States
Department of Agriculture or other agency. The regular written Village
inspection reports shall be maintained on file.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.18 PUBLIC ZOO REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements of §
94.17, public zoos shall comply with the following additional regulations:
   (A)   Times open to public. The maximum hours a public zoo may be open is
from dawn until sunset of each day.
   (B)   Walkways. Each public zoo shall have signed trails or walkways
constructed out of a material conducive to handicap accessibility. Such
walkways shall be suitable for pedestrians as well as persons in wheelchairs.
Non-skid walks shall be provided wherever grades indicate.
   (C)   Operation of entrance/exit. The entrance/exit shall be controlled by
at least one zoo employee at all times the zoo is open to the public.
   (D)   Barriers.
      (1)   In addition to the cage, fence or other housing facility confining
the animals, adequate barriers shall also be provided in accordance with
standard industry practice and United States Department of Agriculture
regulations. Such barriers may include guard rails, chains, cables, low fences,
glass, masonry walls, or hedges with wire running throughout them.
      (2)   The barrier requirements of this division (D) do not apply to any
area reserved for viewing or petting of domesticated animals only.
   (E)   Signs. Signs shall comply with the regulations in the Village Zoning
Ordinance.
   (F)   Public facilities. The following public facilities shall be provided
at each public zoo:
      (1)   Parking. An area designated for parking of at least 25 automobiles
and three buses within reasonable walking distance of the zoo entrance shall be
provided. If the parking area is not paved, adequate dust control measures
shall be maintained. No zoo visitors shall be allowed to park on any public
street.
      (2)   Restrooms. Permanent full service handicap accessible, separate
men's and women's public restrooms shall be provided. Newly opened zoos may
provide portable restrooms in lieu of permanent restrooms for the first six
months of operation.
      (3)   Telephone. At least one public telephone shall be provided at a
central location, for emergency use only.
      (4)   Drinking fountain. At least one drinking fountain shall be provided
in the area of the restrooms.
   (G)   Emergency facility. A properly supplied first aid kit shall be
maintained and readily available.
   (H)   Groups. Groups of visitors of more than 20 shall be accompanied by a
zoo employee at all times.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.19 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall operate a public or private zoo within
the corporate limits of the village unless licensed in accordance with this
subchapter.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.20 INFORMATION REQUIRED TO OBTAIN LICENSE.
   Any person, firm, or corporation may obtain or renew a license to operate a
public zoo within the village by submitting an application for license to the
Village Clerk and paying the non-refundable license fee set forth in §
94.23. The application shall be on forms prescribed by the Village
Administrator and shall contain the following information about the zoo:
   (A)   The name, business address and telephone number of the person, firm or
corporation.
   (B)   If the zoo operator is a corporation, the corporation shall provide a
certificate of good standing and the name, address and telephone number of the
corporation's president and of its registered agent.
   (C)   If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall provide the
name, addresses and phone numbers of all partners holding greater than a 5%
interest.
   (D)   If the applicant is doing business under an assumed name the applicant
shall provide a copy of the assumed name certificate filed with the Secretary
of State of the corporation.
   (E)   The applicant shall provide proof of insurance as required in §
94.17(N) and shall agree to keep such insurance in force during the term of the
license.
   (F)   The applicant shall agree to observe all provisions and conditions of
this subchapter during the term of its license.
   (G)   The application shall be signed by the applicant or a responsible
officer of the applicant.
   (H)   The application shall be accompanied by any zoo rules and regulations.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91)
§ 94.21 PROCEDURES FOR GRANTING OR DENYING LICENSE.
   (A)   Applications for a zoo operator's license or renewal shall be
submitted to the Village Clerk, who shall give the applications to the Village
Administrator for processing. The Village Administrator shall within seven
working days of the receipt of the application by the Clerk, cause the Building
Administrator to inspect the premises to be licensed to determine if they are
in accordance with this subchapter. Within five days thereafter, the Village
Administrator shall grant or deny the license. If the license is denied the
Village Administrator shall state the reasons for the denial in writing.
Thereupon the applicant may appeal in accordance with division (B) of this
Section, or may within ten days resubmit a license application curing any
deficiencies, without having to pay an additional license fee. The Village
Administrator shall grant a license or render a final decision denying the
license within seven working days of resubmission.
   (B)   In the event a license or renewal is denied, the applicant may appeal
the denial of the application to the Planning and Programming Committee of the
Village Board and may request a hearing before the Planning and Programming
Committee, which will be held within seven working days of the request for the
hearing. The Planning and Programming Committee's determination shall be
reviewable in accordance with Illinois Statutes pertaining to administrative
review.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91)
§ 94.22 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   A licensee under this subchapter shall as a condition of licensure comply
with this subchapter in all respects.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91)
§ 94.23 DURATION OF LICENSE; LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for a zoo shall be $ 500. A license shall be
effective from January 1 through and including December 31 of any year; a
licensee shall submit its application for renewal of a license on or before
December 1 of each year. The license fee for an application received after July
1 of any year shall be $ 250.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91)
§ 94.24 ZOOS NOT IN CONFORMANCE WITH PROVISIONS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   Any zoo within the village which is not in conformance with this subchapter
is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The Village Board may, in addition to all
other remedies, apply to a court of appropriate jurisdiction for preliminary or
permanent injunctive relief to abate such a nuisance.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91)
§ 94.25 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The Village Police Department, Village Administrator and Building Code
Administrator are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of
this subchapter, and may enter on the premises of any public or private zoo
within the village limits of the village at reasonable hours and upon
reasonable notice to conduct inspections. They may also, if authorized by the
Village Board, be accompanied in such inspections by an A.A.Z.P.A. Fellow
retained by the village.
   (B)   The Village Administrator may revoke the license of any licensee who
fails to comply with this subchapter. The Administrator shall, before revoking
a license, order a licensee to show cause why the license should not be
revoked, and shall specify the deficiencies which the Administrator believes
exist. The licensee shall, within five working days of the date of the notice,
provide the Administrator with written reasons and other evidence why the
license should not be revoked. Within five days of receipt of such reasons and
evidence, the Administrator shall render a decision, which may be appealed by
the licensee in the same manner as a denial of licensee in accordance with §
94.21.
   (D)   Notwithstanding anything in division (B) of this section, the Village
Administrator may revoke the license of and order the closure of any licensee
when he or she reasonably believes there is an imminent threat to the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the village, subject to a post-revocation
hearing within two working days.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $250 and not more than $750. Each day a violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense.
(Ord.13-49, passed 12-10-13)
APPENDIX A: ANIMAL ESCAPE PROCEDURES
Section
   
1.   Animal escape procedures
§ 1. ANIMAL ESCAPE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Prevention of animal escape is an integral component in escape
procedures. Prevention entails the maintenance of the integrity of the
facilities and the practice of appropriate husbandry techniques. Inherent to
the operation, a zoo exhibits animals that are considered an immediate threat
to human life if they were to escape. Certainly, the escape of any animal can
be a very serious matter if not handled in a strategic and timely fashion.
   (B)   The actual response to an animal escape will vary depending upon type
of animal, time of day, and place of escape. The goal of each response is
recapture of the animal without injury to the animal, staff, or public. While
even the most dangerous animals may be successfully returned to their
enclosures if appropriate procedures are followed, all escapes can entail risk
to the animal, personnel, or public.
   (C)   If a potentially dangerous animal escapes:
      (1)   Notify all employees of the escape and calmly evacuate all persons
to the nearest building away from the area of disturbance. Instruct them to
stay until notified by the zoo staff that it is safe to exit. Make certain that
all windows and doors are closed and locked.
      (2)   Close and lock all gates and guard if possible.
      (3)   The Chatham Police Department shall be notified that an animal has
escaped, and supplied with details on what animal has escaped, and the last
known location. Police officers will not take part in the recapture. The police
function will be to provide crowd control and notification of neighboring areas
to remain indoors. They may also assist in communications with other emergency
personnel. If the animal, in the Police Departments judgement, is a direct and
immediate threat to human life, the police force will assist, order or carry
out the destruction of the animal.
      (4)   Zoo personnel should try to keep the animal under surveillance from
a safe distance or a vehicle, never place your safety in danger. Always move
slowly and back out of any situation involving a predatory animal. Keep in mind
that most animals, if not severely panicked after escape, will try to go back
to their exhibits on their own. Never chase an escaped animal, you want the
animal to stay near the exhibit and remain unfrightened. An attempt will be
made to slowly drive the animal towards a corral or exhibit, confine it until
it is immobilized, or otherwise manually regain control over it.
      (5)   Once the animal is recaptured, the zoo director will transmit an
all clear signal to zoo personnel. Zoo staff will inform non-zoo personnel that
the situation is again normal. The senior police officer will account for all
personnel involved in the operation and will designate a squad to check the
area involved for injured persons and damage.
(Ord. 91-41, passed 9-10-91)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Sidewalks; costs
   
95.02   Parades; regulation
Streets; Openings
   
95.10   Permission to open
   
95.11   Applications for permits
   
95.12   Duty of permit holder
   
95.13   Proof of insurance or bond
   
95.14   Jurisdiction
   
95.15   Inspection
   
95.16   Openings to be guarded
   
95.17   Rules for excavation
   
95.18   Temporary sidewalk
Encroachments on Public Rights-of-Way
   
95.30   Definitions
   
95.31   Encroachments on right-of-way
   
95.32   Placement of signs on public property and rights-of way
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 SIDEWALKS; COSTS.
   (A)   One-half of the cost of any sidewalk with a standard width of three
feet, in front of each of the several and respective lots, tracts, or parcels
of land, contiguous to and abutting upon the line thereof, shall be paid by
special taxation on the lots, tracts, or parcels of land according to their
frontage. The remaining one-half of the cost of the sidewalk of the standard
width of three feet, together with the total cost of constructing approaches
and street crossings, shall be paid by the village out of the village fund of
the village, raised by general taxation upon the property thereof not otherwise
appropriated.
   (B)   Should the owners of the lots or parcels of land petition for a
sidewalk greater in width than three feet, the cost above and beyond the cost
of the standard width of three feet shall be paid entirely by special taxation
upon the parcels of land according to their frontage.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 95.02 PARADES; REGULATION.
   A permit, at no cost, for a parade shall be requested from the Police
Department no latter than 14 days prior to the date of the parade and shall
select one of the two parade routes attached to Ordinance 00-63 as Exhibit A
and Exhibit B.
(Ord. 00-63, passed 11-14-00)
STREETS; OPENINGS
§ 95.10 PERMISSION TO OPEN.
   No street openings shall be permitted for the installation, maintenance, or
repair of sewer or water lines or services in any street, alley, boulevard, or
other public way without a permit having first been issued authorizing said
opening. Street opening permits shall be issued only upon application and upon
payment of the fee of $10 in advance.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.11 APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS.
   All applications for permits shall be made to the Village Clerk or other
officer or department as shall be determined from time to time. Each
application shall describe the location of the intended excavation, the size
thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm, or corporation doing the
actual excavating work, and the name of the person, firm, or corporation for
whom or which the work is being done. The application shall also contain an
agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating
to the work to be done.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80)
§ 95.12 DUTY OF PERMIT HOLDER.
   All street openings shall be made and closed by the permit holder according
to the standards and specifications required by the Village Superintendent for
the particular opening authorized by the permit. The street shall be relaid or
repaved by the permit holder at the permit holder's expense and said permit
holder shall restore the surface and subsurface of the street to as good a
condition as when opened.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80)
§ 95.13 PROOF OF INSURANCE OR BOND.
   Prior to the issuance of any permit by the village, the applicant for the
permit shall make satisfactory proof to the Village Engineer that the
applicant, his agents, and employees are fully protected by insurance or bond
covering public liability, property damage, and Worker's Compensation claims
arising out of the issuance of such permit.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80)
§ 95.14 JURISDICTION.
   With respect to village streets under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation of the state, no provision herein shall be applicable when the
provision is contrary to the statutes of the state or regulations of the
Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80)
§ 95.15 INSPECTION.
   The Village Superintendent or his designated representative shall from time
to time inspect any excavations being made in or under any public street,
alley, or public way in the village to see to the enforcement of the provisions
of this subchapter. Notice shall be given by the permit holder to the Village
Superintendent at least four hours before the work of refilling any excavation
commences.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80)
§ 95.16 OPENINGS TO BE GUARDED.
   Any person, firm, or corporation making or maintaining any excavation in any
street, alley, or other public way shall keep the excavation adequately guarded
by barricades and lights to protect persons, vehicles, and property from
injury; and shall indemnify and save harmless, protect, and defend the village
from any suit, claim, demand, liability, or expense of any kind or nature
whatsoever arising by, through, or on account of the permit holder's
activities.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80)
§ 95.17 RULES FOR EXCAVATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation not in conformity with the
terms of the permit issued therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained at all
times to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground; and no excavation shall have
a subsurface width or length beyond that of the opening made at the surface.
   (B)   No injury or damage shall be done to any pipes, cables, or conduits in
the making of the excavation. Notice shall be given to the owners or operators
of the pipes, cables, or conduits or to any village department or officer
charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by
the making of any excavation before such pipes, cables, or conduits shall be
disturbed. The holder of the permit shall be responsible for and repair all
damage to the pipes, cables, or conduits. No unnecessary damage or injury shall
be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.18 TEMPORARY SIDEWALK.
   If any sidewalk is blocked by any opening or excavation, a temporary
sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and
convenient for users.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80)
ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
§ 95.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA. The area lying between the project right-of-way
limits and the platted street limits within which the village, by concurrence
in the establishment of the project right-of-way lines, will permit the state
to enter to perform all necessary construction operations.
   ENCROACHMENT. Any building, fence, sign or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located, or maintained, in, on, under, or over any portion of the
project right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way
line has been established.
   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT.  Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign,
or similar overhanging structure from a building immediately adjacent to the
limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway. The permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be
construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed
outside the project right-of-way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
   PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY. Those areas within the project right-of-way lines
established jointly by the village and state which will be free of
encroachments, except as hereinafter defined.
   ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Those areas existing or acquired by dedication, or by
fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect.
(Ord. 85-3, passed 3-12-85)
§ 95.31 ENCROACHMENTS ON RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect or
cause to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment as
defined in §
95.30, except as provided in division (C) below, within the limits of the
project right-of-way where no project right-of-way lines have been established.
   (B)   Project right-of-way lines have been established at the following
location: none.
   (C)   Revocable permits have been issued by the village for the temporary
retention of the following permissible encroachments: none.
(Ord. 85-3, passed 3-12-85) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.32 PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Except as permitted in division (B) of this section, no person, firm
or corporation shall place, cause to be placed or permit to be placed, any
sign, billboard, placard or other advertisement upon any property owned by the
village or within any public right-of-way owned by the village.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit:
      (1)   A single real estate or political sign, up to nine square feet in
size, placed in the yard of a property owner within a public right-of-way,
where the property owner retains an ownership right in the underlying fee, and
which is not within ten feet of any pavement or within 25 feet of the
intersection of two public streets.
      (2)   Signs placed on public property by not-for-profit, fraternal,
civic, veterans and religious organizations advertising community events. These
signs may be erected up to 14 days before the event and shall be removed within
two days after the event.
      (3)   Signs in any village park placed by vendors in connection with a
civic event which has been authorized by the Village Board.
      (4)   Signs at the entrance to a subdivision identifying the subdivision
to the public.
   (C)   The Village Administrator shall have the authority to remove, or cause
to be removed, any signs which are in violation of this section.
(Ord. 98-32, passed 5-12-98) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of §§
95.10 through
95.18 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense; and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 80-20, passed 7-22-80)
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating §
95.31 shall be fined not less than $5 nor more than $10 for each offense; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which
a violation continues or exists.
(Ord. 85-3, passed 3-12-85)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
95.32 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $250 for each offense.
(Ord. 98-32, passed 5-12-98)
CHAPTER 96: TREES
Section
   
96.01   Property of village
   
96.02   Care and control
   
96.03   Removal and trimming expenses
§ 96.01 PROPERTY OF VILLAGE.
   All trees, shrubs, or other growing vegetation, growing upon the streets,
alleys, or other public thoroughfares of the village shall be and are the
property of the village. Rules for the care of trees, shrubs, or other growing
vegetation shall be made from time to time by the President and Board of
Trustees of the village.
(Ord. passed 11-7-21)
§ 96.02 CARE AND CONTROL.
   All trees, shrubs, or other growing vegetation adjacent to the streets,
alleys, or other public thoroughfares of the village, while not the property of
the village, shall be under the care and control of the village, by its
President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. passed 11-7-21)
§ 96.03 REMOVAL AND TRIMMING EXPENSES.
   All expenses connected with the removal, trimming, or alteration of trees,
shrubs, or other growing vegetation shall be borne by the party or parties upon
whose property the offending trees, shrubs, or other growing vegetation may be
located. The collection of the expense shall be enforced as provided by statute
for the collection of special assessments.
(Ord. passed 11-7-21)
CHAPTER 97: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Burning of waste
Fireworks
   
97.10   Sale of fireworks
   
97.11   Definition
   
97.12   Permit required for display of fireworks
   
97.13   Public display; agreement; insurance coverage
   
97.14   Compliance with state and federal laws on fireworks required
   
97.15   Permissible display hours
   
97.16   Cleanup of debris from display
   
97.17   Permit fee
   
97.18   Permit issuance/limitations
 
   
97.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 BURNING OF WASTE.
   (A)   As used in this section, YARD WASTE includes and is limited to leaves,
grass clippings, wood chips, and garden waste such as weeds and stalks. YARD
WASTE does not include tree and shrub branches. OTHER WASTE includes paper,
plastic, domestic waste, waste oil, tires, construction waste, lumber, and
every other type of garbage, rubbish, or refuse not specifically within the
definition of YARD WASTE, other than tree and shrub branches.
   (B)   Burning of yard waste is prohibited within the corporate limits of the
village, except in areas which are zoned P-1 under the zoning regulations of
this code of ordinances.
   (C)   The burning of other waste is prohibited at all times in all areas
within the corporate limits of the village.
   (D)   Burning of yard waste in areas which are zoned P-1 under the zoning
regulations of this code of ordinances is subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Burning of yard waste is permitted Wednesday through Friday from 9:
00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and Saturday from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. Each fire must
be completely extinguished by 7:00 p.m., Wednesday through Friday, and 12:00
p.m. on Saturday.
      (2)   No burning of yard waste is permitted on any state or national
holiday.
      (3)   No burning of yard waste is permitted when the wind is in excess of
12 mph.
      (4)   Burning of yard waste must be personally supervised at all times by
a person at least 14 years of age.
      (5)   Persons burning yard waste shall do so with due regard for the
safety of others and shall take appropriate precautions to insure that the fire
is contained at all times.
      (6)   The burning of yard waste producing obnoxious orders or emitting
excessive smoke is prohibited.
      (7)   Burning of yard waste shall be conducted so as not to create a
visibility hazard on any roadway, sidewalk or private drive.
      (8)   No yard waste may be burned, except yard waste which was generated
on the zoning lot where the burning occurs.
   (E)   Burning of tree and shrub branches in all areas of the village is
subject to the following regulations:
      (1)   Burning of branches is permitted Wednesday through Saturday.
      (2)   Persons burning branches shall do so with due regard for the safety
of others and shall take appropriate precautions to insure that the fire is
contained at all times.
   (F)   The Village Police Department is charged with the responsibility of
monitoring and enforcing this section. The Village Police Department may order
the extinguishment of any fire which, in the opinion of the officer on duty,
violates this section.
   (G)   Burning of yard waste, other waste and branches within the village in
violation of this section is declared a nuisance.
(Ord. 93-47, passed 9-28-93; Am. Ord. 03-78, passed 12-16-03) Penalty, see §
97.99
FIREWORKS
§ 97.10 SALE OF FIREWORKS.
   The sale of fireworks is prohibited within the Village of Chatham.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.11 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIREWORKS. Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or
combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation,
and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy
guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman
candles, dago bombs, smoke devices, chasers and devices of like construction
and any device containing any explosive substance, except the term FIREWORKS
shall not include auto flares, wire sparklers, snakes, flow worms, trick
noisemakers and paper caps containing not in excess of .25 grain (16.2 mg.) of
explosive content per cap and toy pistols, toy guns or other devices for use of
the caps, the sale and use of which shall be pemlitted at all times. For
purposes of this subchapter, the firework definitions set forth in the
Pyrotechnic Use Act, 425 ILCS 35/1, shall also apply and shall be incorporated
herein.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18)
§ 97.12 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DISPLAY OF FIREWORKS.
   No person or persons shall display, use or explode fireworks without first
obtaining a permit from the Chatham Fire Protection District and delivering a
copy of the permit, along with the insurance and indemnification information,
to the Village Manager at least 15 days before the proposed display.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.13 PUBLIC DISPLAY; AGREEMENT; INSURANCE COVERAGE.
   No permit for a public display of fireworks shall be issued unless the
person applying is a lead pyrotechnic operator and that person executes and
delivers with the applicant an appropriate hold harmless agreement to the
village and proof of insurance in a sum not less than $1,000,000 conditioned on
compliance with the provisions of the Pyrotechnic Use Act and the regulations
of the State Fire Marshal adopted thereunder.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18)
§ 97.14 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS ON FIREWORKS REQUIRED.
   No person or persons shall apply for a permit, display, use, or explode
fireworks as defined in §
97.11, unless they are in compliance with the provisions of the Pyrotechnic Use
Act and all other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.15 PERMISSIBLE DISPLAY HOURS.
   No person or persons shall display, use, or explode fireworks except between
the hours of 5:30 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. On December 31 of each year, it shall be
permissible to display, use or explode fireworks between the hours of 5:30 p.m.
and 1:00 a.m. on January 1.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.16 CLEANUP OF DEBRIS FROM DISPLAY.
   Every person who displays, uses or explodes fireworks shall clean up all
debris from the display. In addition to any other penalty provided for by the
Village of Chatham Code of Ordinances, failure to clean up debris shall be
considered by the Village Manager in determining whether to renew an existing
permit or grant a subsequent permit.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.17 PERMIT FEE.
   The applicant shall be responsible for paying any applicable permit fees
established by the Chatham Fire Protection District, directly to the Chatham
Fire Protection District.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18)
§ 97.18 PERMIT ISSUANCE/LIMITATIONS.
   The Chief of the Chatham Fire Protection District is authorized to accept
applications on behalf of the village and issue up to four permits for
fireworks within the Village of Chatham each year in accordance with the terms
and conditions of this subchapter. The Village Board may increase the number of
permits available by adoption of a resolution.
(Ord. 18-10, passed 2-27-18)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   A)   (1)   Any person violating §
97.01 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine as follows:
         (a)   For the first offense, not less than $25 or more than $50.
         (b)   For the second offense, not less than $100 or more than $250.
         (c)   For the third or subsequent offense, not less than $300 or more
than $750.
      (2)   In addition, the village may seek any other remedies available at
law and equity to restrain or enjoin violations of §
97.01.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of
§§
97.10 through
97.18 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $75 nor more than $750 for
each offense.
(Ord. 93-47, passed 9-28-93; Am. Ord. 03-78, passed 12-16-03; Am. Ord.18-10,
passed 2-27-18)
CHAPTER 98: RAFFLES
Section
   
98.01   Definitions
   
98.02   License required; application procedures; fee
   
98.03   Licensing restrictions
   
98.04   Ineligibility for license
   
98.05   Raffle manager; bond requirements
   
98.06   Conduct of raffles
   
98.07   Records and reports
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   BUSINESS. A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and
civic interests of the village.
   CHARITABLE. An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit
an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   NON-PROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in section 5/28-2(b) of the "Illinois
Criminal Code of 1961,” conducted by an organization licensed under this
chapter in which:
   (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery; except, that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a public exhibited sporting
contest.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
(Ord. 99-15, passed 3-23-01)
§ 98.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION PROCEDURES; FEE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall conduct a raffle within the
corporate limits of the village without having first obtained a license
therefor.
   (B)   Application for license. Each application for a license shall be in
writing upon forms provided by the village and shall contain the following:
      (1)   Name and address of individual making application;
      (2)   Name and address of organization applying for a license;
      (3)   Approximate number of members of the organization that reside in
the village and the length of existence of the organization;
      (4)   Name and address of the raffle manager;
      (5)   The location(s) at which raffle chances are to be sold or issued;
      (6)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
      (7)   The maximum number of raffle chances to be sold;
      (8)   The time of determination of winning chances;
      (9)   The location(s) at which winning chances will be determined;
      (10)    A sworn statement, signed by the presiding officer and secretary,
if there is one, of the organization attesting to the not-for-profit character
of the organization and attesting to the fact the organization is not otherwise
ineligible to receive a license; and
      (11)    Such other information as the village may require.
   (C)   License fee. No fee shall be required for the issuance of a license.
   (D)   Issuance or denial. Application for licenses shall be submitted to the
Village President or to the Village Chief of Police. The Village President or
Chief of Police shall act either to issue or deny the license within 30 days.
(Ord. 99-15, passed 3-23-01) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.03 LICENSING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Location. Sales of raffle chances shall be only at locations
designated in the license application and which are within the borders of the
village.
   (B)   Eligibility for license. Licenses shall be issued only to a bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal, educational or veterans'
organization which operates without profit to their members and which have been
in existence continuously for a period of five years immediately before making
application for a license and which have had, during that entire five year
period, a bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives.
   (C)   Duration of license. Licenses shall permit the applicant to issue or
sell raffle chances only for those dates stated in the license application, but
in no event shall the period of sales exceed 180 days. Each license is valid
for one raffle only.
   (D)   Maximum value of prizes.
      (1)   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by
a licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed $150,000.
      (2)   The retail value of each individual prize awarded by a licensee in
a single raffle shall not exceed $150,000.
   (E)   Price of chances. The price charged for each raffle chance sold or
issued shall not exceed $250.
(Ord. 99-15, passed 3-23-01) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.04 INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.
   The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony.
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter.
   (C)   Any person not of good moral character.
   (D)   Any firm in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or (C) of
this section has proprietary, equitable or credit interest or in which such a
person is active or employed.
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not.
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in divisions (A), (B) or
(C) of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
raffle.
(Ord. 99-15, passed 3-23-01)
§ 98.05 RAFFLE MANAGER; BOND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Manager required; bond required. All operation of, and the conduct of,
raffles shall be under the supervision of a single raffles manager designated
by the organization. At the time the application is submitted to the village,
the manager shall give a fidelity bond in the amount of the maximum dollar
amount of all raffle chances to be sold, as stated on the application, in favor
of the organization conditioned upon his honesty in the performance of his
duties. The bond shall provide that notice of its cancellation shall be given
in writing to the village not less than 30 days prior to its cancellation.
   (B)   Waiver of bond requirement. The above bond requirement may be waived
by the unanimous vote of the members of the organization. The occurrence of
said unanimous vote shall be by affidavit of the organization's presiding
officer, filed with the village.
(Ord. 99-15, passed 3-23-01)
§ 98.06 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   Use of proceeds. The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be
exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to
conduct that game.
   (B)   Participation. No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring
organization may participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   Remuneration. No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
participating in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   Rental of premises. A licensee may rent a premises on which to
determine the winning chance in a raffle only from an organization which is
also licensed under this chapter.
   (E)   Location. Raffle chances may be sold or issued only at the locations
specified on the license, and winning chances may be determined only at those
locations specified on the license.
   (F)   Minors. No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age of 18 years may be
within the area where winning chances are being determined only when
accompanied by his parent or guardian.
(Ord. 99-15, passed 3-23-01) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.07 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Records to be kept. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles
shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each
single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
   (B)   Accounting of revenues. Gross receipts from the operation of raffles
programs shall be segregated from other revenues of the organization, including
bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same non-profit
organization pursuant to license therefor issued by the Department of Revenue
of the State and placed in a separate account. Each organization should have
separate records for its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles should not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Monthly report. Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall
report monthly to its membership and to the village its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from raffles and the distribution of net proceeds
itemized as required by this section.
   (D)   Preservation of records; public inspection. Records required by this
section shall be preserved for three years and organizations shall make
available their records relating to operation of raffles for public inspection
at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 99-15, passed 3-23-01) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the foregoing provisions shall be subject to
penalty of not less than $250 and not more than $750.
(Ord. 99-15, passed 3-23-01)
CHAPTER 99: INOPERABLE AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   Inoperable or abandoned motor vehicles on public property
   
99.03   Inoperable motor vehicles on private property
   
99.04   Abandoned motor vehicles on private property
   
99.05   Lawsuit seeking remedies
   
99.06   Parking of vehicles with expired registration stickers
   
99.99   Penalty
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-101.5 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, an ABANDONED VEHICLE is any vehicle in a state of disrepair rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition or any motor vehicle that
has not been moved or used for seven consecutive days or more and is apparently
deserted.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3 of the Illinois
Municipal Code, an INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE is any motor vehicle from which,
for a period of at least seven days, the engine, wheels, tires, or other parts
have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels, or other parts have been
altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of
being driven under its own motor power. INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE shall not
include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being
driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations nor to any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in
use, nor to any operable historic vehicles over 25 years of age, nor to a motor
vehicle on a premises lawfully engaged in the wrecking and junking of motor
vehicles.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-146 of the Illinois Vehicle Code,
a MOTOR VEHICLE means every vehicle which is self-propelled, except for
vehicles moved solely by human power and motorized wheelchairs.
   PERSON. Any human being, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, public or private, within the corporate limits
of the village that is not a street or highway.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
(Ord. 01-69, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 1-28-03)
§ 99.02 INOPERABLE OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Inoperable motor vehicles which are on public property, a street or a
highway, are hereby declared a nuisance. They shall be towed or otherwise dealt
with by the Police Department in accordance with procedures set forth in 625
ILCS 5/4-201 et seq. of the Illinois Vehicle Code, which is herein incorporated
by reference, together with all future amendments thereto.
(Ord. 01-69, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 1-28-03) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.03 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Inoperable motor vehicles on private property are hereby declared a
nuisance.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer discovers an inoperable motor vehicle on
private property, the officer shall determine the owner of record of the
property, and if the vehicle has a license plate, the owner of the vehicle. The
officer shall attempt to determine the identity of persons occupying the
property if different from the owner of record. The officer shall cause a
notice in substantially the following form to be mailed, by Certified U.S.
Mail, return receipt requested, or by personal delivery to the owner of record
of the property, and to all persons known to the officer, after reasonable
investigation, to occupy the property, and also to the owner of the motor
vehicle, if the owner is known:
      NOTICE TO REMOVE OR REPAIR INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE
   PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that the Police Department of the Village of Chatham,
Illinois, has determined that there exists an inoperable motor vehicle,
generally described as follows and hereinafter referred to as “The Vehicle”:
Make:   ____________________
Model:   ____________________   
Model Year, if known:   ____________________
Color:   ____________________
License No., if known:   ____________________   State:   ____________________
Other identifying characteristics:
   _______________________________________________________
The Vehicle is currently located on the following property:
Address:
   __________________________________________________________________________
   The Vehicle is in violation of Chapter 99 of the Village of Chatham Code of
Ordinances, which prohibits inoperable motor vehicles on private property
within the corporate limits of the Village.
   You are hereby ordered to remove or repair such inoperable vehicle within
seven calendar days from the date of service of this Notice, if it has been
hand-delivered, or within eleven calendar days from the date of mailing of this
notice, if it was mailed by certified mail.
   The Chatham Code of Ordinances provides that any person violating its
provisions is subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than $750.00
for each day a violation is allowed to continue. If the Village must prosecute
you for having an inoperable motor vehicle, it may seek fines beginning from
the date of this Notice.
   If you fail to remove or repair the inoperable motor vehicle by the date set
forth in this notice, the Village may remove the inoperable vehicle, or may
hire someone to do so. Any person ordered to repair or remove an inoperable
vehicle may have a hearing with the Chief of Police. A request for a hearing
must be made in writing and delivered to the Municipal Clerk no later than
seven days after the date of service of this notice, if served personally; or
eleven days after the date of mailing of this notice, if it was mailed. If no
hearing is requested, or if the Chief determines after the hearing that the
vehicle is indeed inoperable, the vehicle may be towed without further notice.
   Definitions: As used in this notice, “inoperable motor vehicle” means any
motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven days, the engine,
wheels, tires, or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine,
wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so treated that
the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. “Inoperable
motor vehicle” shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to
perform ordinary service or repair operations nor to any motor vehicle that is
kept within a building when not in use, nor to any operable historic vehicles
over twenty-five years of age, nor to a motor vehicle on the premises lawfully
engaged in the wrecking and junking of motor vehicles.
   “Repair” means to take such action as is required to make an inoperable
motor vehicle capable of being driven under its own power.
This Notice is dated this __________ day of _______________, 200__.
____________________________________________
Signature
   (C)   Notice by certified mail pursuant to this section shall be
accomplished if the village receives a return receipt from the addressee or if
the certified or regular mailing is returned “unclaimed” or “refused”.
   (D)   In the event that a violation of §
99.02 and this section is not corrected within the time specified in the
notice, or if there is a hearing, within five days after the hearing, the
Police Department may proceed to tow and dispose of the inoperable motor
vehicle in accordance with the procedures set forth in 625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, which is herein incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 01-69, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 1-28-03) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.04 ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Vehicles which are not inoperable, but which are abandoned in the sense of
not having been moved for seven consecutive days or more and being apparently
deserted, may be removed by the Police Department and otherwise dealt with in
accordance with 625 ILCS 5/4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, but only if:
   (A)   The owner of the property on which the vehicle was abandoned is
different from the owner of the vehicle;
   (B)   The owner of the property on which the vehicle was abandoned requests
the Police Department to take action; or
   (C)   If approved by the Chief of Police in his or her sole discretion.
(Ord. 01-69, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 1-28-03) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.05 LAWSUIT SEEKING REMEDIES.
   In addition to any other remedies, the corporate authorities may at any time
instruct the Village Attorney to filing a lawsuit in the Circuit Court of
Sangamon County, seeking any or all remedies available in the Illinois
Municipal Code respecting abatement of nuisances. The corporate authorities may
seek penalties in accordance with §
99.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. 01-69, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 1-28-03)
§ 99.06 PARKING OF VEHICLES WITH EXPIRED REGISTRATION STICKERS.
   No person may stop, park, or leave standing upon a public street, highway,
or roadway a vehicle upon which is displayed an Illinois registration plate or
plates or registration sticker after the termination of the registration period
for which the registration plate or sticker was issued or after the expiration
date set by 625 ILCS 5/3-314 or 3-314.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 01-69, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 1-28-03) Penalty, see §
99.99
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates or aids and abets in the violation of §§
99.02,
99.03 or
99.04 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $250 and no more than $750,
plus the cost to the village of its attorney's fees and shall be required by
the court to make a disposition on the abandoned, unclaimed, or inoperable
vehicle. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter and in 625 ILCS
5/4 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, the village may bring a common law nuisance
action against a person who is responsible for a nuisance as defined in this
chapter, and in connection therewith, may seek all remedies available in law or
equity in connection with such an action, and shall be entitled as part of the
action to an award of its attorneys fees and costs.
   (C)   A person who violates §
99.06 of this chapter shall be fined the sum of $25 for each violation. Each
day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 01-69, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 03-08, passed 1-28-03)
CHAPTER 100: SOLICITATION AND OTHER DOOR-TO-DOOR ACTIVITIES
Section
   
100.01   Definitions
   
100.02   Posting of notice regarding solicitation
   
100.03   Duty to comply with notices and requests to leave premises
   
100.04   Solicitation license required
   
100.05   Registration fee; investigation
   
100.06   Duty to carry, exhibit license
   
100.07   Revocation of license; appeals
   
100.08   Hours of solicitation and exempt activities
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. the Chief of Police or other police officer designated by
the Chief of Police to carry out the Chief’s duties under this chapter.
   EXEMPT ACTIVITIES. the door-to-door seeking of donations to, or selling
goods on behalf of, not-for-profit corporations and organizations; door-to-door
dissemination of political, religious, charitable and other non-commercial
information; and door-to-door sale or solicitation of newspaper, magazines, and
books.
   SOLICITATION. The entry on a private property without a prior appointment
with the occupant thereof for the purpose of selling, leasing or obtaining
orders for the sale or lease of, goods or services.
   SOLICITOR. A person, firm or corporation engaged in solicitation, and
includes peddlers, itinerant merchants, and transient vendors of merchandise,
as those terms are used in § 11-42-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code, who enter
private property without a prior appointment.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11)
§ 100.02 POSTING OF NOTICE REGARDING SOLICITATION.
   (A)   Every person desiring to secure protection from uninvited solicitation
as provided by this chapter shall comply with the directions in this section.
   (B)   Notice of refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence or
place of business, may be given in the following manner:
      (1)   A weatherproof card, not less than three inches by four inches in
size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence
or business, and containing the following words: “NO SOLICITORS”.
      (2)   The letters shall be at least one-third inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the card shall be provided by the Chief of Police to
persons requesting the card.
   (C)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor that the solicitor does not have an invitation to solicit at the
premises.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11)
§ 100.03 DUTY TO COMPLY WITH NOTICES AND REQUESTS TO LEAVE PREMISES. 
   (A)   Any solicitor, whether or not licensed, and other than those engaged
in exempt activities, going onto the premises of any residence or business in
the village with a notice stating “NO SOLICITORS” shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor, whether or not licensed, and any person engaged in
exempt activities, who has gained entrance into any residence or business,
whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.04 SOLICITATION LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage or attempt to engage in
solicitation, other than exempt activities, in the village without having first
obtained a license from the Chief of Police. On an application form provided by
the Chief of Police, the solicitor shall provide his or her identification,
including name, address, phone number, and driver’s license number; the name of
the solicitor’s employer, the nature of the products or services involved in
the solicitation, the name of the manufacturers of such products or of the
organization which the solicitor is representing, and the proposed method of
operation in the village. No person shall make any false statement upon any
application. The act of signing an application shall constitute consent to a
criminal background check by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.05 REGISTRATION FEE; INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Each applicant shall pay to the Chief of Police a nonrefundable fee in
the amount of $25 at the time of application. The Chief of Police shall turn
the funds over to the Treasurer for deposit into the General Fund of the
village.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the funds and the completed application form, the
Chief of Police shall commence an investigation, including a criminal
background check, of the applicant. The Chief of Police shall complete the
investigation and grant or deny the application for license within three
business days.
   (C)   A license application shall be denied for the following reasons only:
      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of a misdemeanor in the preceding
five years or a felony in the preceding ten years;
      (2)   The applicant or the business of which the applicant is an agent or
representative has been found guilty of, or entered into a consent decree with
respect to, any violation of the Consumer Fraud and Deceptive Trade Practices
Act; or
      (3)   A false statement has been made on the application.
   (D)   If the license application is granted, the Chief of Police shall issue
a solicitor’s license which shall state the name and address of the licensee,
the type of business engaged in by the licensee, and the expiration date of the
license, which shall be six calendar months from the date of issuance.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11)
§ 100.06 DUTY TO CARRY, EXHIBIT LICENSE.
   Each person shall, at all times while engaged in solicitation in the village
other than exempt activities, carry upon his or her person the solicitor’s
license issued pursuant to this chapter. The License shall be exhibited by the
licensee upon the request of any police officer or any person solicited.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.07 REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEALS.
   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revoked by the by the
Chief of Police because of any violation by the registrant of this chapter, or
of any other ordinance of the village, or of any state or federal law. A person
whose license application is denied, or whose license is revoked may, within
five calendar days thereof, appeal the denial or revocation to the Village
President, who shall within ten days thereafter conduct an informal hearing
regarding the denial or revocation and either affirm or reverse the action of
the Chief of Police. A person whose license has been revoked, or whose
application has been denied, may not apply for another license for a period of
two years from the date of revocation or denial.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11)
§ 100.08 HOURS OF SOLICITATION AND EXEMPT ACTIVITIES.
   No person shall engage in solicitation or in exempt activities within the
village other than between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through
Saturday and 12:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be liable to a fine of not less than $200 or more than $750. Each
provision violated, and each day a violation occurs, is a separate offense.
   (B)   Corporations and other entities shall be separately liable for
violations of this chapter by their employees and agents. Each violation by
each employee and each agent shall be a separate offense for a corporation or
other entity employing such employee or agent.
(Ord. 11-37, passed 6-28-11)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMBULANCE SERVICES
         
APPENDIX A: REQUIRED TRAINING
         
APPENDIX B: LIST OF REQUIRED EQUIPMENT
      
113.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
114.   DISCONTINUING BUSINESS SALES
      
115.   TAXATION
      
116.   SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
      
117.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
118.   VIDEO GAMING
      
119.   PROHIBITING CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
Itinerant Food Vendors on Public Property
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   License requirements
   
110.03   Application for license
   
110.04   Fee
   
110.05   Processing of license application
   
110.06   Display; location
   
110.07   Conditions of licensure
   
110.08   Suspension and revocation of license
Massage Establishments
   
110.15   Definitions
   
110.16   License required
   
110.17   Filing of application and fee provision
   
110.18   Application for massage establishment
   
110.19   Limitation on location
   
110.20   Issuance of license for massage establishment
   
110.21   Facilities necessary
   
110.22   Operating requirements
   
110.23   Advertising
   
110.24   Inspections
   
110.25   Employment of person under age 18 prohibited
   
110.26   Transfer of license
   
110.27   Display of license
   
110.28   Employment of massage therapists
   
110.29   Revocation or suspension of license for massage establishment
   
110.30   Renewal of license
   
110.31   Violation and penalty
   
110.32   Maintaining public nuisance
 
   
110.99   Penalty
ITINERANT FOOD VENDORS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ITINERANT FOOD VENDOR. A natural person selling or offering for sale, food
or beverages or both for human consumption on property belonging to the Village
of Chatham, including but not limited to a bicycle path, the village square and
parks. ITINERANT FOOD VENDOR does not include a vendor who sets up for business
for a period of less than five days in connection with a fair, carnival,
festival or similar gathering. Nor does ITINERANT FOOD VENDOR include a vendor
whose business is located on private property or property belonging to some
unit of government other than the village.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   Each itinerant food vendor shall have a current itinerant food vendor’s
license from the village and a current certificate of inspection from the
Sangamon County Health Department.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An application for an itinerant food vendor license shall be made through
the Village of Chatham on forms specified by the Village Manager. The applicant
shall designate the location or locations preferred by the applicant and
applicable dates, and the applicant shall provide the following information and
documents:
   (A)   Name, residential address and social security number;
   (B)   Copy of current state photo identification or driver’s license;
   (C)   Description of the food and beverages to be sold by the vendor;
   (D)   Whether the applicant seeks an annual license or a ten-day license;
   (E)   The date, or approximate date, of the applicant’s latest previous
application for a license under this subchapter, if any;
   (F)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted, whether in the Code
Enforcement Department of the village or otherwise, of a violation of any of
the provisions of this subchapter, and whether the applicant’s license has ever
been revoked;
   (G)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of a
felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal
law of the United States or is a registered sex offender;
   (H)   The applicant’s Illinois Department of Revenue identification number
for retailers’ occupation tax.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.04 FEE.
   The license application shall be accompanied by the following fees:
   (A)   Two hundred dollars for an annual license good one year from the date
of issuance; or
   (B)   Forty dollars for license good for one day; plus
   (C)   A $25 background check fee for the applicant’s first application in
any single calendar year.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12)
§ 110.05 PROCESSING OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Village Manager shall process the license application and, in
conjunction therewith, the Chief of Police shall perform a background check on
the applicant.
   (B)   No license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a
felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state or federal
law of the United States, within five years of the date of the application; nor
to any person who is a registered sex offender, nor to a person who has been
twice convicted in the previous five years of a violation of any of the
provisions of this subchapter, nor to a person whose license pursuant to this
subchapter has been revoked in the previous five years, nor to a person lacking
a Sangamon County Health Department certificate and an Illinois Department of
Revenue tax identification number.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12)
§ 110.06 DISPLAY; LOCATION.
   The Village Manager shall designate all locations for itinerant food vendors
within the village, and shall not issue more licenses than there are designated
locations. An itinerant food vendor shall notify the village 24 hours prior to
opening for business. All locations for itinerant food vendors shall be
reserved on a first come, first served basis, and licensees shall contact the
village office to reserve location. Vendors may not open for business unless
the location has been reserved.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12)
§ 110.07 CONDITIONS OF LICENSURE.
   The following shall be conditions of licensure:
   (A)   The licensee shall at all times maintain a Sangamon County Health
Department certificate of inspection and shall prominently display such
certificate and the village itinerant food vendor’s license.
   (B)   The interior and the exterior of every food vending vehicle and all
equipment therein shall have smooth washable surfaces and shall be maintained
in good repair and in a sanitary manner. All trash and any other waste must be
placed in a trash receptacle or removed from the property.
   (C)   Hours of operation are limited to one-half hour after sunrise to one-
half hour before sunset and to a maximum of 12 hours in any 24-hour period.
   (D)   The licensee shall be limited to one vehicle or one pushcart, which
shall not be stored on public property during hours when the licensee is not
open for business. The licensee shall not advertise on public property except
for signage on the vendor’s vehicle or pushcart.
   (E)   The licensee shall not utilize village utilities.
   (F)   The licensee may use employees and agents but shall have workers
compensation insurance coverage for any employees and shall be personally
present at all times sales or offers for sales are being made.
   (G)   The licensee shall faithfully make retailers occupation tax returns
and pay retailers occupation taxes.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Village Code Enforcement Official is charged with enforcing this
subchapter. In the event of a minor violation of licensing conditions that does
not present an imminent threat to public health or safety, the Code Enforcement
Official may bring an enforcement action in the Village Code Hearing
Department.
   (B)   In event of a violation of the license conditions that in the opinion
of the Code Enforcement Official, poses an imminent threat to public health or
safety, the Code Enforcement Official may suspend the licensee’s license
pending correction of the condition to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement
Official, or at the licensee’s option, pending hearing in the Code Hearing
Department.
   (C)   In the event the Code Enforcement Official discovers that a licensee
has became ineligible for license, the Code Enforcement Official may revoke the
license, subject to administrative review in the Circuit Court pursuant to the
Administrative Review Law.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12) Penalty, see §
110.99
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 110.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   ADVERTISE OR ADVERTISING MATERIALS. The issuance of any card, sign, or
device to any person; the causing, permitting, or allowing of any sign or
marking on or in any building, vehicle, or other structure; or any printed,
audio, or video material published in or broadcast by any newspaper, magazine,
television, radio, internet, internet streaming device, blog, chat room,
website, or social media.
   APPLICANT. Any person that applies for a massage establishment license.
   BODYWORK OR BODYWORK SERVICES. Any method of applying pressure on or
friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating,
touching or stimulating, the external parts of the body, by another individual,
with the hands, any body part, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or
similar preparations, for compensation. The definition of bodywork or bodywork
services for the purposes of this chapter is intentionally not the same and is
broader than the definition of massage in this chapter, and is intended to
cover massage, bodywork services provided by bodywork practitioners, and other
similar services that fit the general definition, regardless of what the
services or the person providing the services is called, unless expressly
excluded by this chapter.
   BODYWORK PRACTITIONER OR BODYWORK PROVIDER. Any person who provides bodywork
services, including massage therapists.
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons other than massage therapists, who render any
service to the licensee, who receive compensation directly from the licensee,
and who have no physical contact with customers and clients.
   HEALTH OFFICER. Health officer shall mean the Director of the Department of
Health of the County of Sangamon or his authorized representative.
   LICENSEE. An applicant who has received a license from the Village to
operate a massage establishment.
   MASSAGE, MASSAGE SERVICES OR MASSAGE THERAPY. Any system of structured
palpitation or movement of the soft tissue of the body, including, but not
limited to, techniques such as effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage
or kneading, tapotement or percussion, tapping, pounding, friction, vibration,
compression, touching, stimulating, and stretching the external parts of the
body with or without the aid of lubricants, rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointments, salt or herbal
preparations, hydromassage, thermal massage, a massage device that mimics or
enhances the actions typically performed by human hands, or any other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice. MASSAGE for the purposes of this
chapter is intended to cover massage and bodywork services provided by massage
therapists, bodywork practitioners, and other similar services that fit the
definition, regardless of what the services or the person providing the
services is called, unless expressly excluded by this chapter.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any
establishment having a fixed place of business within the village that
advertises or offers massage services, or where any person for any
consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage, or carries on, or
permits to be engaged or carried on any massage services as defined in this
chapter.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages
in the practice of massage as defined in this chapter, and who holds a valid
license from the Illinois Department of Finance and Professional Regulation, or
possesses written documentation of exemption from licensing or certification
under the Illinois Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.) to perform
massage services. For the purposes of this chapter, "massage therapist" shall
include practitioners of Asian bodywork approaches and other similar
practitioners exempt from licensing under the Illinois Massage Licensing Act
(225 ILCS 57/25).
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, limited liability
company, joint venture, joint stock company, corporation or combination thereof
in whatever form or character.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. The male or female genitals, pubic area, buttocks,
anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, offer, engage in, conduct
or carry on, or to permit to be advertised, offered, engaged in, conducted or
carried on, in or upon any premises in the village, the operation of a massage
establishment as herein defined, without first having obtained a license from
the village pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, with the exception of
the following:
   (A)   Hospitals, nursing homes, medical facilities, or offices at which
physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists, naprapaths,
occupational therapists, physical therapists, or other health care workers duly
licensed by the State of Illinois to provide, on an ongoing basis, professional
health services to individuals including, but not limited to, services
permitted by the Illinois Occupational Therapy Practices Act (335 ILCS 75/1 et
seq.); the Illinois Physical Therapy Act (225 ILCS 90/1 et seq.); or the
Illinois Naprapathic Practices Act (225 ILCS 63/1 et seq.);
   (B)   Athletic trainers for any athletic program of a private or public
school, college, or any athletic team regularly organized or engaging in
competition;
   (C)   Barbers, estheticians, and cosmetologists who are duly licensed by the
State of Illinois, and who only provide massage services of the neck, back,
face, scalp, hair, hands, and feet of a patron who is fully clothed;
   (D)   Any school or educational institution licensed to do business as a
school or educational institution in the State of Illinois, or any school
recognized by or approved by or affiliated with the American Massage Therapy
Association, the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork, or the Federation of State Massage Therapy Boards, and which has for
its purpose or offers courses in the teaching of the theory, method,
profession, or work of bodywork or massage, including clinical externships,
practicums or community services;
   (E)   Home-based massage services provided by a person who is duly licensed
by the State of Illinois, provided that such person is otherwise in compliance
with the village Code pertaining to home occupations; and
   (F)   Massage services offered or conducted by a licensed massage
establishment and which are performed at a location other than a massage
establishment, provided that such massage services are performed in accordance
with this chapter.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.17 FILING OF APPLICATION AND FEE PROVISION.
   (A)   Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a
massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the chief of
police or his designee as provided herein and pay a non-refundable fee of $100
plus the cost of all background checks conducted under § 110.18(B)(5). The
application shall be in the form provided by the Village Clerk or the Chief of
Police or his designee.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his designee shall, within five days of the
receipt of an application for a massage establishment license, forward copies
of such application to the Village Clerk, the department of buildings and
inspections, the fire department, the county department of health, and the
department of planning and community development. The police department, the
department of buildings and inspections, the fire department, the county
department of health, and the department of planning and community development
shall, within 30 days of the receipt of a copy of the application, inspect the
premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and make written
recommendations to the Chief of Police or his designee concerning compliance
with the codes, laws, regulations, and ordinances that each respective
department administers. The chief of police or his designee shall thereafter
forward his recommendation to the mayor for review and final determination
whether to grant or deny the application for a license under this chapter, and
shall also provide a copy of his recommendation to the Village Clerk.
   (C)   Within ten days of receipt of the recommendation from the chief of
police or his designee, the mayor shall determine whether to grant, deny or
hold an application for further investigation, and the village clerk shall
notify the applicant that his or her application is granted, denied, or held
for further investigation by the mayor. The period of any such additional
investigation shall not exceed 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant in writing. Upon the conclusion of such additional investigation, the
mayor shall determine whether to grant or deny, and the Village Clerk shall
advise the applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied by
the Mayor.
   (D)   Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation,
the mayor shall direct the village clerk to advise the applicant in writing of
the reasons for such action. The failure or refusal of the applicant to
promptly give any information relevant to the investigation of the application;
the submission of false, misleading or incomplete information; the refusal or
failure of the applicant to appear at any reasonable time and place for
examination under oath regarding the application; or the refusal of the
applicant to submit or to cooperate with any inspection required by this
chapter shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Mayor.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.18 APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The application for a license to operate a massage establishment shall
set forth the exact nature of the massage services to be administered, and the
proposed place of business and facilities therefor.
   (B)   The application for a license shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The applicant's name, current address, telephone number, and date
of birth.
      (2)   The name, address, and date of birth of all employees, massage
therapists, managers, and persons with supervisory authority that have been or
are intended to be employed by the applicant or provide massage services.
      (3)   Whether the applicant has had any license denied, revoked or
suspended in the Village of Chatham, State of Illinois, or any other state or
municipality for a massage establishment, and the reasons therefor.
      (4)   Whether the applicant, or any employee, massage therapist, manager,
or person with supervisory authority has had any criminal or municipal
ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond, and pleadings of nolo
contendere on all charges, except minor traffic violations, within the last
five years.
      (5)   Authorization for the chief of police or his designee to conduct a
background check and take fingerprints on the applicant, and any manager or
person with supervisory authority.
      (6)   A copy of the State of Illinois issued massage license for each
massage therapist that has been or is intended to be employed by the applicant
to provide massage services, or a copy of the certification or other written
documentation or proof of exemption for licensing as required by the Massage
Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/25). For example, practitioners of Asian bodywork
services must provide proof of certification from the American Organization of
Bodywork Therapies of Asia or documentation from another Asian bodywork
organization that he or she is approved by such organization based on a minimum
level of training, demonstration of competency, and adherence to ethical
standards set by the governing board (225 ILCS 57/25(g)).
      (7)   A drawing or floor plan of the premises designating each room by
its purpose or the activity that will take place in each room.
      (8)   If the premises is leased:
         (a)   A copy of the lease, and any subleases, assignments or
acceptances in effect at the time of application;
         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the legal owner of the
premises;
         (c)   If the legal owner is not an individual, the name, address and
telephone number of a representative or agent authorized to act on behalf of
the legal owner; and
         (d)   If the premises is managed or supervised by someone other than
the legal owner thereof, the name, address and telephone number of the person,
business or entity who manages or supervises the premises.
      (9)   If the applicant is a business:
         (a)   The type of business or entity (i.e., sole proprietorship,
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, etc.);
         (b)   The name of the business or entity, and all assumed names under
which the business or entity is conducted; and
         (c)   The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and dates of birth of
all persons with management and supervisory authority of the business or
entity.
      (10)   The information requested in divisions (B)(1), (3), (4) and (5)
shall also include information for the following persons:
         (a)   If the applicant is a sole proprietorship, the information
sought to be provided shall be for the individual.
         (b)   If the applicant is a partnership, the information sought to be
provided shall be for each general and limited partner, for each individual who
is a general partner of such general or limited partnership, and for each
individual who owns more than five percent (5%) of such limited partnership.
         (c)   If the applicant is a joint venture, the information sought to
be provided shall be for each joint venturer and each individual who owns more
than 5% of such joint venture.
         (d)   If the applicant is a corporation, the information sought to be
provided shall be for each officer and director, and if the corporation's stock
is publicly traded, each shareholder owning more than 5% of the outstanding
stock in said corporation.
         (e)   If the applicant is a limited liability company, the information
sought to be provided shall be for each manager and member owning or holding
more than a 5% membership interest.
   (C)   If a change in any information required under this section occurs at
any time during a license period, the licensee shall file a written statement
with the village clerk indicating the nature and effective date of the change.
The change in information statement shall be filed no later than ten days after
the change(s) take effect.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.19 LIMITATION ON LOCATION.
   Massage establishments shall be located only in B-2 (General Business
District), I-1 (Restricted Performance Manufacturing), and I-2 (General
Performance Manufacturing) districts, and within such districts, a massage
establishment shall not be located within 750 feet of another massage
establishment or in a building or structure which contains a business that
sells or dispenses alcoholic beverages in any manner.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.20 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the mayor's determination as referred to in this
chapter, the Village Clerk shall issue a license to maintain, operate or
conduct a massage establishment, unless the mayor finds:
      (1)   That the operation of the massage establishment, as proposed by the
applicant, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited
to, the building, health, planning, housing, zoning, and fire codes of the
Village of Chatham; or
      (2)   That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or
indirectly engaged in the management and operation of a massage establishment
has been convicted of or pled guilty to:
         (a)   A felony;
         (b)   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children; or
         (c)   Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, keeping a place of
prostitution, pimping, or other similar offense opposed to decency and
morality; or
      (3)   That the applicant has failed or refused to give information
relevant to the investigation of the application; submitted false, misleading
or incomplete information; or has refused to submit to or cooperate with any
inspection required by this chapter; or
      (4)   That the operation of the massage establishment, as proposed by the
applicant, would violate the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The mayor, at his discretion, may issue a license to any person
convicted of or who has pled guilty to any felony, if he finds that such
conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of application, the
applicant has had no subsequent convictions, and the applicant has shown
evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the public trust.
   (C)   Every massage establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter
shall expire on April 30 the of each year, unless sooner suspended or revoked
in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.21 FACILITIES NECESSARY.
   (A)   No massage establishment shall be issued a license, nor be operated,
established or maintained within the village, unless said establishment
complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
      (1)   Construction of room used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and
showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall
be installed in accordance with the building code of the Village of Chatham.
      (2)   All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas,
lavatories, and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
      (3)   Adequate bathing, dressing, locker, and toilet facilities shall be
provided for patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and
female patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing,
locker, toilet, and massage room facilities shall be provided. Separate toilet
and lavatory facilities shall be maintained for personnel.
      (4)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be disinfected
after use on each patron.
      (5)   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels, and other materials used in connection with administering
massages. All soiled linens, towels, and other materials shall be kept in
properly covered containers or cabinets, which shall be kept separate from the
clean storage areas.
      (6)   Toilet facilities shall be provided within the massage
establishment in convenient locations. When five or more employees and patrons
of different sexes are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet
facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided
for each 20 or more employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one
time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets after one water closet has
been provided. Toilet facilities shall be designated as to the sex accommodated
therein.
      (7)   Lavatories or washbasins shall provide both hot and cold running
water and shall be installed in the toilet room. Lavatories or washbasins shall
be provided with a soap dispenser and sanitary towels.
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
service.
   (B)   The department of buildings and inspections, the fire department, the
county department of health, and the department of planning and community
development shall certify that the proposed massage establishment complies with
all the requirements of the village Code with respect to the provisions that
each respective department administers, and shall send such certification to
the chief of police or his designee, who shall then provide such certification
together with the recommendation to the mayor for review and final
determination whether to grant or deny the application for a license under this
chapter. The chief of police or his designee shall also provide a copy of the
certification and recommendation to the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.22 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
   (B)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all patrons and prospective customers
or provided to all patrons and prospective customers as a written price list.
   (C)   All employees, managers, persons with supervisory authority, massage
therapists, agents, and independent contractors shall wear clean, non-
transparent outer garments, which cover the sexual and genital areas while on
the licensed premises. Employees, massage therapists, agents, and independent
contractors shall not disrobe, or offer or agree to disrobe, either wholly or
partially while in the presence of any patron receiving massage services. A
separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with
individual lockers for each employee and massage therapist. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
   (D)   All massage establishments shall maintain clean, laundered sheets and
towels in sufficient quantity, and shall be laundered after each use thereof
and stored in a sanitary manner.
   (E)   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths, or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, manager, person
with supervisory authority, massage therapist, agent, or independent
contractor.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any employee, manager, person with
supervisory authority, massage therapist, agent, or independent contractor, to
place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to
fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or genital area of any person
while on the licensed premises.
   (G)   No employee, manager, person with supervisory authority, massage
therapist, agent or independent contractor shall perform, or offer or agree to
perform any act which would require the touching of the patrons' genital area.
   (H)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms,
and all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or
steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be
thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs and showers
shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. When carpeting is used on the
floors, it shall be kept dry.
   (I)   Oils, creams, lotions, or other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (J)   No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron impaired
by intoxicating liquor or drugs, nor shall any massage therapist administer a
massage to a patron while impaired by intoxicating liquor or drugs.
   (K)   No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting
any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation, or skin eruption, unless a
physician or nurse practitioner duly licensed by the State of Illinois
certifies in writing that such person may be safely massaged and prescribing
the conditions thereof.
   (L)   Each massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a massage to
each patron.
   (M)   (1)   All licensees shall maintain, as a business record of the
licensed massage establishment, a record of:
         (a)   The date and time of all massage services performed at the
licensed premises;
         (b)   The name of the massage therapist administering massage
services; and
         (c)   The amounts received for massage services.
      (2)   The record of the date, time, and service provided must be made
before services are initiated, and the record of the amount received for
services must be made at the time payment is rendered. All records shall be
kept for a period of at least one year and shall be made available in a format
that can be inspected at any reasonable time upon request by the mayor or the
chief of police or their designees.
   (N)   The main entrance to the massage establishment where patrons and
potential customers are greeted shall be clearly visible from the outside and
shall have and maintain clear glass that is not painted over, darkened, or
otherwise blocked by cloth or any other obstruction.
   (O)   A sign shall be posted in a prominent location near the main entrance
of the massage establishment identifying the establishment as a massage
establishment and state the trade or business name as it appears on the massage
establishment's license.
   (P)   Prospective customers and patrons shall be provided with written
notice which states the following:
      “State law prohibits soliciting another for the purpose of a sexual act.
Solicitation can be punishable as a Class 4 felony, subject an offender to
fines and imprisonment, and impoundment of any vehicle used by the offender to
commit the offense. Offers or requests to buy or purchase sexual services or
acts shall be immediately reported to law enforcement.”
   (Q)   Written notice shall be posted in a conspicuous location accessible to
all employees and massage therapists which states the following:
      “State law prohibits soliciting another for the purpose of a sexual act.
Solicitation can be punishable as a Class 4 felony, subject an offender to
fines and imprisonment, and impoundment of any vehicle used by the offender to
commit the offense. Offers or requests to buy or purchase sexual services or
acts should be immediately reported to the Village of Chatham Police Department
by calling 911.”
   (R)   The hours of operation for massage establishments shall be limited to
the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (S)   There shall be not be placed, published, or distributed any
advertisement, picture, or statement in any manner or medium which is false,
deceptive, or misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize
any massage services, or which reasonably appears to suggest or imply any
sexual activity in connection with massage services.
   (T)   No person shall reside or be allowed to remain overnight in the
licensed premises; provided, however, that if the licensed premises contains
living quarters that are properly zoned and authorized for such residential use
above the massage establishment, the entrance to such living quarters shall be
separate from the entrance to the massage establishment and shall not be
accessible in any manner from the interior of the massage establishment.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.23 ADVERTISING.
   No massage establishment granted a license under provisions of this chapter
shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published, or
distributed any advertising material that depicts any portion of the human body
that would reasonably suggest or imply to prospective customers that any sexual
activity is available or will be performed in connection with massage services,
or that employees, managers, persons with supervisory authority, or massage
therapists are dressed in any manner other than prescribed in this chapter, nor
shall any massage establishment suggest or imply in the text of such
advertising that any sexual activity is available or will be performed in
connection with massage services.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.24 INSPECTIONS.
   The Police Department and the department of buildings and inspections shall
from time to time, and at least once a year, make an inspection of each massage
establishment granted a license under the provisions of this chapter for the
purposes of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are complied
with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. As a condition of the issuance of a license under this chapter, the
licensee consents to walk-through inspections by authorized village employees,
without notice, at any time during business hours. It shall be unlawful for any
licensee to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to
hinder such officer in any manner.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.25 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSON UNDER AGE 18 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, owner, manager, or person with
supervisory authority to employ any person who is not at least 18 years of age.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.26 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   No license for the operation of a massage establishment issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable; provided, however, that
upon the death or incapacity of a licensee, the massage establishment may
continue in business for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 90 days, to
allow for the approval of a new license.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.27 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Every licensee shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place within
the massage establishment so that the same may be readily seen by patrons or
prospective customers entering the premises.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.28 EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPISTS.
   (A)   Massage establishments shall not employ or contract with any person as
a massage therapist unless he or she holds a current, valid license issued by
the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation or written
proof of exemption from said license, as required by the Massage Licensing Act
(225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.). Upon receiving notice or constructive notice that a
massage therapist has been disciplined or subject to investigation by the
department, the licensee shall be responsible for obtaining information as to
the status of said massage therapist's license.
   (B)   Each massage establishment shall maintain a current list of all
licensed massage therapists who perform massage services and proof of their
current, valid license or written proof of exemption from said license as
required by the Massage Licensing Act (225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.). The licensee
shall allow inspection of such records at any reasonable time upon request by
the village.
   (C)   No student or non-licensed person, other than a person with written
proof of exemption from licensure as required by the Massage Licensing Act (225
ILCS 57/1 et seq.), shall be allowed in a massage therapy room with a patron
unless accompanied by a licensed massage therapist at all times.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.29 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Any license issued for a massage establishment under this chapter may
be revoked or suspended by the mayor after a hearing for good cause or where
any provision of this chapter, the village code, or any criminal law is
violated by the licensee or any massage therapist, employee, manager, person
with supervisory authority, agent, or independent contractor of the licensee
while at the massage establishment. For purposes of license revocation or
suspension, the licensee shall be strictly liable for such violations,
regardless of actual or constructive knowledge of such violations. It shall
also be cause for revocation or suspension that the licensee has made a false
statement on an application for a license or renewal thereof under this
chapter, or in any case where the licensee refused to permit any duly
authorized police officer, village inspector, or health inspector of the County
of Sangamon to inspect the licensed premises or the operations therein. Such
license may also be revoked or suspended by the mayor after hearing upon the
recommendations of a duly authorized police officer, village inspector, or the
health inspector that such business is being managed, conducted, or maintained
without regard for the public health or health of patrons or prospective
customers, or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter by any employee, agent or independent
contractor of the licensee, including a massage therapist, shall be cause for
suspension of the license for not more than 30 days in the first instance. Any
subsequent violation of this chapter by any employee, manager, person with
supervisory authority, agent, or independent contractor of the licensee,
including a massage therapist, shall be cause for further suspension or
revocation of the license.
   (C)   The mayor, before revoking or suspending any license, shall give the
licensee at least ten days' written notice of the reasons for said revocation
or suspension, and the opportunity for a public hearing before the mayor, at
which time the licensee may present evidence bearing upon the question.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.30 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Any licensee may renew his or her license prior to the expiration thereof on
April 30 of each year, provided that he or she is qualified to receive a
license and the massage establishment complies with all of the requirements in
this chapter. Applications for renewal of license must be made in writing to
the chief of police or his designee not more than two months and not less than
one month prior to expiration of an existing license and accompanied by the
applicable license fee.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.31 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this
chapter, who operates, maintains, or conducts a massage establishment without
first obtaining a license and paying a license fee to do so from the Village of
Chatham, or otherwise violates any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be
punished by a fine not less than $100 nor more than $750. Each day in which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.32 MAINTAINING PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any building used, operated, or maintained as a massage establishment in
violation of this chapter with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent
permission of the owner, licensee, or person managing or supervising the
building, together with all fixtures and other property used in violation of
this chapter, are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 19-33, passed 11-12-19)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person operating as an itinerant food vendor within the village
without an itinerant food vendor license shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of $750. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate
offense.
   (B)   Any holder of an itinerant food vendor license who violates any term
of this §§
110.01 through
110.08 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $750 for
each offense. In addition, the holder’s license may be suspended for up to ten
days for a first offense, and up to 30 days for any subsequent offense, by the
Administrative Hearing Officer of the Code Hearing Department. Each day a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 12-16, passed 5-22-12)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
Licensing Provisions
   
111.10   License required
   
111.11   Application for license
   
111.12   Disposition of license application
   
111.13   Restriction on licenses
   
111.14   Record of licenses
   
111.15   Insurance requirements
   
111.16   Initial license applications; fees
   
111.17   Classification and fees
   
111.17A   Temporary permit for outside sales
   
111.17B   Outdoor cafe permit
   
111.17C   Outdoor street permit
   
111.18   Term of license; renewals
   
111.19   Transfer of license
   
111.20   Incomplete applications
   
111.21   Disposition of fees
   
111.22   Conditions of license
   
111.23   BASSET training
Standards of Operation
   
111.30   Location restrictions
   
111.31   Sanitary conditions
   
111.32   View from street
   
111.33   Premises restrictions
   
111.34   Personnel restrictions
   
111.35   Prohibited acts and conditions
   
111.36   Sales to minors, drunkards, and the like
   
111.37   Prohibitions regarding persons under the age of 21
   
111.38   Noise from licensed premises
Administration and Enforcement
   
111.50   Liquor Commissioner
   
111.51   Violation of retailers' occupation tax act; citizen complaints
   
111.52   Revocation or suspension of local license; fines; notice; hearing;
appeal
   
111.53   Forfeiture of fees
   
111.54   Use of premises after revocation
   
111.55   Effective date; repealer; publication; transition
   
111.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine, and beer, and every
liquid or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer,
and capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. This chapter
shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol
produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations promulgated
thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing .5% or less, of alcohol by
volume.
   BANQUET HALL. A business organized in a way that it provides a place
available for rental by members of the general public. The building housing the
business shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of 50 persons safely. The
business is typified by wedding celebrations, parties, business meetings, or
dances by private clubs or individuals. In this type of business, the lessor or
licensee is paid a fee by the lessee for use of the hall and or providing
alcoholic liquor.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes among
other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
   BREW PUB. A manufacturer and retailer of alcohol who holds a brew pub
license from the State of Illinois.
   CATERER RETAILER. A person who serves alcoholic liquors for consumption,
either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as
an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals (not including snacks as the
primary meal) and alcoholic liquors are sold at a package price agreed upon
under contract.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of the state, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its members
through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring, or leasing a building
or space in a building of such extent and character as may be suitable and
adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation of its
members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen and
dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of servants
and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for its members
and their guests; provided that such club files with the Liquor Commissioner at
the time of its application for a license under this chapter two copies of a
list of names and residences of its members, and similarly files within ten
days of the election of any additional member his or her name and address; and,
provided further, that its affairs and management are conducted by a board of
directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their
annual meeting and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the club
is paid, or directly or indirectly receives in the form of salary or other
compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond
the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by
the members or by its board of directors or other governing body out of the
general revenue of the club.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. A grocery store which also sells motor fuel.
   DISTILLING PUB. A manufacturer and retailer of spirits who holds a
distilling pub license from the State of Illinois.
   GROCERY STORE. A retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of food
and household items with the sale of alcoholic liquors as incidental to its
primary business.
   HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised,
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered to adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which 25 or more
rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or
more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or
buildings in connection therewith and such building or buildings, structure or
structures, being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity.
   LIQUOR CONTROL ACT. The Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-1,
et seq. as now or hereafter amended.
   LIQUOR COMMISSIONER. The President of the village.
   MICROBREWERY. A manufacturer of alcohol who holds a Class 1 brewer's license
from the State of Illinois.
   PACKAGE STORE. A retail establishment, the primary business of which is the
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off premises.
   PERSON. Any natural person, or any corporation or partnership or
unincorporated association.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held
out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are
actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space
being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. Any business claiming
to be a restaurant must document, on demand of the Liquor Commissioner, that
60% or more of its gross receipts during the past three months is derived from
the sale of food as distinguished from alcoholic liquor.
   RETAILER. A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever, and includes and means all sales made by any person, whether
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL. Refers to and means sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SPECIAL EVENT. An event conducted by an educational, fraternal, political,
civic, religious or other nonprofit organizations.
   SPECIAL EVENT RETAILER. An educational, fraternal, civic, religious or
nonprofit organization which sells or offers for sale, beer or wine or both,
only for consumption at the location and on the dates designated by a special
event license.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substance in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   STATE COMMISSION. The Illinois Liquor Control Commission.
   TEMPORARY EVENT. An event conducted by or at the location of a for-profit
business or private individual.
   TEMPORARY EVENT RETAILER. A for-profit business which sells or offers for
sale, alcoholic spirits, beer, and/or wine only for consumption at the location
and on the dates designated by a temporary event license.
   TO SELL. Includes to keep or expose for sale and to keep with intent to
sell.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above defined.
   WINERY.  A manufacturer and retailer of wine who holds a wine maker retailer
license from the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 96-90, passed 5-14-96; Am. Ord. 99-40,
passed 7-27-99; Am. Ord. 03-49, passed 10-28-03; Am. Ord. 21-32, passed 10-12-
21; Am. Ord. 23-35, passed 10-10-23)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 111.10 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to manufacture, sell or offer for sale at retail in the
village any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer’s license,
or in violation of the terms of such license.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 21-32, passed 10-12-21) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.11 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   An applicant for a license shall submit to the Liquor Commissioner or to the
Village Clerk (who shall transmit the application to the Liquor Commissioner)
an application in writing under oath stating:
   (A)   The applicant's name and mailing address;
   (B)   The name and address of the applicant's business;
   (C)   If applicable, the date of the filing of the assumed name of the
business with the County Clerk;
   (D)   In case of a copartnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation; or in the case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was
incorporated and the date of its becoming qualified under the Business
Corporation Act of 1983 to transact business in the state.
   (E)   The number, the date of issuance and the date of expiration of the
applicant's current state and local retail liquor licenses;
   (F)   The name and address of the landlord if the premises are leased, with
a copy of the lease.
   (G)   Whether the applicant has made an application for a liquor license
which has been denied, and if so, the reasons therefor;
   (H)   Whether the applicant has ever had any previous liquor license
suspended or revoked, and if so, the specific reasons thereof;
   (I)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any criminal
misdemeanor or felony, and if so, the particulars thereof;
   (J)   Whether the applicant possesses a current Federal Wagering Stamp, and
if so, the reasons therefor;
   (K)   Whether the applicant or any other person with an interest in the
applicant's place of business is a public official, and if so, the particulars
thereof;
   (L)   The applicant's name, sex, date of birth, social security number,
position and percentage of ownership in the business; and the name, sex, date
of birth, social security number, position and percentage of ownership in the
business of every owner, partner, corporate officer, director, manager and any
person who owns 5% or more of the shares of the applicant's business entity or
parent corporations of the applicant business entity;
   (M)   In addition to any other requirement of this section, an applicant for
a special event retailer’s or a temporary event retailer’s license shall also
submit proof of adequate dram shop insurance for the special event or the
temporary event prior to being issued a license.
   (N)   If the application is made in behalf of a partnership, firm,
association, club or corporation, then the same shall be signed by at least two
members of such partnership or the president and secretary of such corporation
or two authorized agents of the partnership or corporation.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 23-35, passed 10-10-23)
§ 111.12 DISPOSITION OF LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Liquor Commissioner may, in the exercise of his or her discretion,
require any applicant for a new village liquor license, or any applicant for a
renewal of a village liquor license, to be fingerprinted, whether said
applicant be an individual or a partnership. Should the applicant be a
corporation, the Liquor Commissioner may, within his or her discretion, require
the following to be fingerprinted:
      (1)   The officers, manager or director of said corporation; or
      (2)   Any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than
5% of the capital stock of said corporation.
   (B)   All such fingerprinting shall be done by the Police Department. The
fingerprints shall be submitted to the appropriate state and federal agencies
for processing as available. The cost of fingerprinting shall be paid by the
applicant.
   (C)   The Liquor Commissioner may, after examination of the application,
require the submission of further information needed for a determination under
§
111.13 or conduct further investigations as set forth in §
111.50(B)(5).
   (D)   The Commissioner shall issue a written acceptance or rejection of an
application within 60 days of its receipt by the Commissioner or Village Clerk;
or shall notify an applicant of the reasons for further time being necessary to
complete the investigation or processing.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.13 RESTRICTION ON LICENSES.
   No liquor license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the village or, if a corporation,
which does not employ a resident manager who resides within Sangamon County;
   (B)   A natural person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which such person resides;
   (C)   A natural person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, unless the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission determines that
such person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust
after considering matters set forth in such person's application and the State
Commission's investigation.
   (E)   A natural person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is
keeping a house of ill fame;
   (F)   A natural person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (G)   A natural person whose license under this Ordinance or under the
Liquor Control Act has been revoked for cause;
   (H)   A natural person who at the time of application for renewal of any
license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   (I)   A copartnership, if any general partnership thereof or any limited
partnership thereof, owning more than 5% of the aggregate limited partner
interest in such copartnership, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than residence.
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, assistant manager, or director
thereof, of any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than
5% of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence.
   (K)   A corporation, unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless it is
a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act to
transact business in the state.
   (L)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee.
   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited a bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation.
   (N)   A person who does not actually or beneficially own the premises for
which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period
for which the license is to be issued.
   (O)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of local liquor
control commissions, any mayor, alderman, or member of the city council or
commission, any president of a village board of trustees, any member of a
village board of trustees, or any president or member of a county board; and no
such official shall be interested directly in the manufacture, sale or
distribution of alcoholic liquor, except that license may be granted to such
official in relation to premises which are not located within the territory
subject to the jurisdiction of that official if the issuance of such license is
approved by the State Commission.
   (P)   Any person, firm or corporation not eligible for or who has failed to
obtain a state retail liquor dealer's license.
   (Q)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   (R)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed by
805 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3) through (a)(10) or by 805 ILCS 5/28-3, or as proscribed
by a statute replacing any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
   (S)   A natural person to whom a federal gaming device or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period.
   (T)   A copartnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period.
   (U)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, of any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp for the current tax period.
   (V)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 19-7, passed 2-26-19)
§ 111.14 RECORD OF LICENSES.
   The Village Administrator shall keep a complete record of all such licenses
issued and shall furnish the Chief of Police with a copy thereof. Upon
revocation or suspension of any license, the Village Administrator shall
immediately give written notice thereof to the Chief.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.15 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   No license shall be granted to an applicant until such applicant shall
furnish evidence satisfactory to the Local Commissioner that such applicant is
covered by a policy of dram shop insurance issued by a responsible insurance
company authorized and licensed to do business in the state insuring such
applicant against liability which such applicant may incur under the Liquor
Control Act. The evidence of the insurance policy shall indicate that the term
of the insurance is of sufficient length to encompass the period of the license
sought.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.16 INITIAL LICENSE APPLICATIONS; FEES.
   (A)   The first and initial license fee for new licenses applied for between
January 1 and June 30 of any year shall be in an amount equal to the annual fee
described in §
111.18 plus a non-refundable fee of $ 200 to defray the costs of investigation
of the applicant as provided for and pursuant to the provisions of this
section, payable in one installment. The first and initial license fee for new
licenses applied for between July 1 and December 31 for any year shall be in an
amount equal to one-half the annual fee plus the non-refundable fee of $ 200 to
defray the costs of investigation of applicant as provided for and pursuant to
the provisions of this section payable in one installment.
   (B)   Any sale, transfer, or assignment of more than 50% of the shares of a
corporation shall terminate said license for the purpose of payment of a fee
for a first and initial license.
   (C)   Any bankruptcy, insolvency of a license, or any sale, transfer, or
assignment of any copartner or copartnership or copartnership interest in a
license held by a copartnership shall terminate and said license for the
purpose of payment of a fee for a first and initial license.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.17 CLASSIFICATION AND FEES.
   (A)   Non Gaming licenses.
      (1)   A Class B “Banquet Hall” license shall authorize the service or
sale of alcoholic liquor at retail, to be sold and served by the drink or
pitcher only, although beer may be sold by the keg, and wine may be sold by the
bottle, so long as beer and wine are served by the drink or by the pitcher, for
consumption on the premises only, in the course of banquet hall business. In
the course of this business, the licensee is responsible for control of patrons
in the business premises, and at no time may patrons be allowed to act as
bartenders or otherwise dispense liquor. At all times that the premises are
used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, the licensee or a manager acting for the
licensee must be on the premises. The annual fee for the license shall be $800
payable in two installments, $400 on December 31 of each year and $400 on June
30 of each year.
      (2)   A Class BP "Brew Pub" license shall be issued only to a brew pub
and shall entitle the licensee to manufacture beer and sell at retail the beer
manufactured on or off the premises. The beer may be sold in bundles of bottles
or cans for consumption off the premises where sold, or by the glass, bottle or
can, not to exceed 16 ounces, or by the pitcher of a capacity not to exceed 60
ounces, for consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee for such
license shall be $1,000. The annual fee shall be payable in two installments,
namely, $500 on December 31 of each year and $500 on June 30 of each year.
      (3)   A Class C “Convenience” license shall be issued only to a
convenience store, and shall entitle the licensee to sell beer and wine only,
in the original package only and in not more than case lots, in bottles and
cans only, for consumption off the premises where sold. The annual fee for such
license shall be $1,000. The annual fee shall be payable in two installments,
namely, $500 on December 31 of each year and $500 on June 30 of each year.
      (4)   A Class CR "Caterer Retailer" license shall authorize the holder to
operate as a caterer retailer within the corporate limits of the village. A CR
license is subject in all respects to all restrictions, conditions and
licensing procedures set forth in this chapter, except as specifically modified
as follows:
         (a)   A CR license is not a license to sell, offer to sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor at a specific location; therefore location restrictions set
forth on this chapter, and the provisions of §
111.15(B), (N) and (Q) do not apply.      
         (b)   A CR license holder is not prohibited from holding another
retail liquor license issued by the village; however, the restriction of such
other license shall apply at the location which is licensed pursuant to the
other license.
         (c)   A CR license holder shall not sell, offer to sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor in the village during the following hours:
            1.   Monday through Saturday: 12:00 a.m. through 8:00 a.m.
            2.   Sunday: 12:00 a.m. through 12:00 p.m., and after 10:00 p.m.
         (d)   A CR license holder shall not sell, offer to sell or dispense
alcoholic liquor on more than two days per year at any one location zoned
residential under the Zoning Ordinance of the village, nor on more than ten
days per year at any one location zoned business under the Zoning Ordinance of
the village.
         (e)   A village CR license does not prohibit the licensee from
selling, offering to sell or dispensing alcoholic liquor outside the corporate
limits of the village in conformity with the State Liquor Control Act and with
the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of other jurisdictions.
         (f)   A CR licensee shall at all times, and as a condition of its
license, observe state, county, and local laws, rules and regulations
pertaining to the handling of food.
         (g)   A CR licensee shall not sell, offer for sale, or dispense
alcohol other than in conjunction with the sale, offer for sale, or service of
prepared meals.
         (h)   A CR license holder shall have, as a condition of its license, a
valid Caterer Retail license issued by the state.
         (i)   A CR license holder shall maintain records showing all occasions
on which it has sold, offered for sale, or dispensed alcoholic liquor,
including the location and dates of such occasions, and the persons with whom
the license holder has contracted. These records shall be maintained for two
years and shall be open to inspection by the Liquor Commissioner or his or her
designee.
      (5)   A Class DP "Distilling Pub" license shall be issued only to a
distilling pub and shall entitle the licensee to manufacture spirits and sell
at retail the spirits manufactured on or off the premises. The spirits may be
sold in bottles for consumption off the premises where sold, or by the lowball
glass, shot glass or as part of a cocktail when consumed on the premises. The
annual fee for such license shall be $1,000. The annual fee shall be payable in
two installments, namely, $500 on December 31 of each year and $500 on June 30
of each year.
      (6)   A Class G “Grocery” license shall be issued to a grocery store, and
shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic liquor, in the original package
only and in not more than case lots, in bottles or cans only, for consumption
off the premises where sold. The annual fee for such license shall be $600. The
annual fee shall be payable in two installments, namely, $300 on December 31 of
each year and $300 on June 30 of each year.
      (7)   A Class LP "Limited Package" license shall be issued only to a
retail business, the principal business of which is other than the sale of
alcoholic liquor, and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail beer and
wine only, in the original package only, for consumption off the premises where
sold. Sales of single cans or bottles of beer are prohibited. Sales of beer and
wine through a drive-up window are prohibited. The annual fee for such license
shall be $1,000. The annual fee shall be payable in two installments, namely,
$500 on December 31 of each year and $500 on June 30 of each year.
      (8)   A Class M "Microbrewery" license shall be issued only to a
microbrewery, and shall entitle the licensee to sell beer only, in the original
package only and in not more than case lots, in bottles and cans only, to
distributors and, if granted an exception by the State of Illinois, retailers.
The annual fee for such license shall be $1,000. The annual fee shall be
payable in two installments, namely, $500 on December 31 of each year and $500
on June 30 of each year.
      (9)   A Class N “Not for Profit” license may be granted only to a club,
and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail alcoholic liquor for
consumption, but not in the original package on the premises specified in the
license. The annual fee for such license shall be $300. The annual fee shall be
payable in two installments, namely, $150 on December 31 of each year and $150
on June 30 of each year.
      (10)   A Class P “Package” license shall be issued to a package liquor
store, and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail alcoholic liquor, in
the original package only for consumption off the premises where sold. Sales
through a drive-up window are allowed in accordance with the law and applicable
zoning regulations. The annual fee for such license shall be $800. The annual
fee shall be payable in two installments, namely, $400 on December 31 of each
year and $400 on June 30 of each year.
      (11)   A Class R-l “Restaurant 1" license shall be issued to a restaurant
and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine only, by the
glass, in bottles, or in cans, for consumption on the premises where sold. The
annual fee for such license shall be $600. The annual fee shall be payable in
two installments, namely, $300 on December 31 of each year and $300 on June 30
of each year.
      (12)   A Class R-2 “Restaurant 2" license shall be issued to a restaurant
and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine by the glass, in
bottles, or in cans, or other alcoholic liquor not in the original package, for
consumption on the premises where sold. A restaurant holding a Class R-
2 license must be located in an area zoned for restaurants and is not to be
considered a “tavern” under the Zoning Ordinance of the village. The annual fee
for such license shall be $800. The annual fee shall be payable in two
installments, namely, $400 on December 31 of each year and $400 on June 30 of
each year.
      (13)   A Class RE “Recreational” license shall be issued to a
recreational business and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail, on the
premises specified, for consumption on the premises, of alcoholic liquor by the
drink or vinous beverages by the bottle or carafe, or beer if by the pitcher of
a capacity not to exceed 60 ounces or by the bottle or glass of a capacity not
to exceed 16 ounces. The annual fee shall be $800 payable in two installments,
namely, $400 on December 31 of each year and $400 on June 30 of each year.
         (a)   Service of alcoholic liquor shall be only during the time that
the athletic or sports portions of the premises are open and available for use.
         (b)   Food may be served for the convenience of the patrons, so long
as such food service complies with all applicable health regulations and
licensing requirements.
         (c)   A certified record of annual revenue shall be included with the
liquor license renewal application and shall be considered by the local Liquor
Control Commissioner as a basis of nonrenewal of the liquor license.
         (d)   A recreational license issued for a golf course or sports
complex may also authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption
outside the physical structure of the premises but adjacent to and within the
property lines of the facility, excluding public parking lots, sidewalks, and
roadways, subject to the following provisions:
            1.   All alcoholic liquor shall be purchased from the recreational
premises. No outside alcoholic liquor shall be permitted on the premises; and
            2.   A policy of dram shop insurance shall be required for the
outside premises and shall comply with all the insurance requirements as
provided for in this chapter and 235 ILCS 5/6-21; and
            3.   A trained employee shall be responsible for the service of
alcohol at the outside recreational activity.
      (14)   A Class SE “Special Event” license shall authorize the sale at
retail during a special event on the premises specified, and during the time
specified therein, of alcoholic liquor by a special event retailer. The term of
the license shall not exceed five days. The license application shall set forth
whether or not the event is open to the public and shall contain an estimate of
the largest number of adult persons expected to be in attendance at any time
during the event. The estimate shall be based on historical attendance
experiences for similar events after consultation by the license applicant with
the Chief of Police. The fee for the license shall be as follows:
         (a)   If the special event is not open to the public, or if it is open
to the public and less than 250 adult persons are expected be in attendance at
the event at any time: $50 per day or portion of a day;
         (b)   If the special event is open to the public and 250 adult persons
or more are expected to be in attendance at any time: $100 per day or portion
of a day.
      (15)   A Class T “Tavern” license shall entitle the licensee to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises specified and to sell
at retail alcoholic liquor in the original package only for consumption off the
premises where sold. The annual fee for such license shall be $1,000. The
annual fee shall be payable in two installments, namely, $500 on December 31 of
each year and $500 on June 30 of each year.
      (16)   A Class W "Winery" license shall be issued only to a winery and
shall entitle the licensee to manufacture wine and sell at retail the wine
manufactured on or off the premises. The wine may be sold by the bottle for
consumption off the premises where sold, or by the glass, bottle or carafe, for
consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee for such license shall
be $1,000. The annual fee shall be payable in two installments, namely, $500 on
December 31 of each year and $500 on June 30 of each year.
      (17)   A Class TE "Temporary Event" license shall authorize the sale at
retail during a temporary event on the premises specified, and during the time
specified therein, of alcoholic liquor by a temporary event retailer. The term
of the license shall not exceed five days. The license application shall set
forth whether or not the event is open to the public and shall contain an
estimate of the largest number of adult persons expected to be in attendance at
any time during the event. The estimate shall be based on historical attendance
experiences for similar events after consultation by the license applicant with
the Chief of Police. The fee for the license shall be as follows:
         (a)   If the temporary event is not open to the public, or if it is
open to the public and less than 250 adult persons are expected be in
attendance at the event at any time: $50 per day or portion of a day;
         (b)   If the temporary event is open to the public and 250 adult
persons or more are expected to be in attendance at any time: $100 per day or
portion of a day.
   (B)   Gaming licenses.
      (1)   (a)   A Class R-1G "Restaurant 1 Gaming" license shall be issued to
a restaurant and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine
only, by the glass, in bottles, or in cans, for consumption on the premises
where sold. The annual fee for such license shall be $1,000, The annual fee
shall be payable in two installments, namely, $500 on December 31 of each year
and $500 on June 30 of each year. Holders of a Class "R-1G" license may conduct
video gaming on the premises where licensed, in addition to the service of
alcohol, upon issuance of a video gaming license from the Illinois Gaming Board
and in compliance with the Video Gaming Act and any and all other rules and
regulations. The village reserves the right to revoke a license if video gaming
is not active on the premises within 60 days after issuance of the R-1G license
and/or video gaming otherwise ceases on the premises for a period of 30
consecutive days.
         (b)   To be eligible for a Class R-1G license, the gross receipts of
the sale of food, nonalcoholic beverages and alcoholic beverages must be more
than 25% of the net terminal income for the prior 12-month period. In addition
to the information requested of all applicants for village liquor licenses
pursuant to §
111.11, applicants for a Class R-1G license shall submit a projection of
expected receipts from sales of food and non-alcoholic beverages, from sales of
beer and wine, and from video gaming. Upon application for renewal of a Class
"R-1G" liquor license, licensees shall submit information on actual receipts
from sales of food and nonalcoholic beverages, from sales of beer and wine, and
from video gaming for the 12 calendar months prior to application for renewal
or, if in operation for less than 12 calendar months at the time of application
for renewal, for such amount of time as the licensee has been in operation in
the village.
      (2)   (a)   A Class R-2G "Restaurant 2 Gaming" license shall be issued to
a restaurant and shall entitle the licensee to sell at retail beer and wine by
the glass, in bottles, or in cans, or other alcoholic liquor not in the
original package, for consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee
for such license shall be $1,000. The annual fee shall be payable in two
installments, namely, $500 on December 31 of each year and $500 on June 30 of
each year. Holders of a Class "R-2G" license may conduct video gaming on the
premises where licensed, in addition to the service of alcohol, upon issuance
of a video gaming license from the Illinois Gaming Board and in compliance with
the Video Gaming Act and any and all other rules and regulations. The village
reserves the right to revoke a license if video gaming is not active on the
premises within 60 days after issuance of the R-2G license and/or video gaming
otherwise ceases on the premises for a period of 30 consecutive days.
         (b)   To be eligible for a Class R-2G license, the gross receipts of
the sale of food, nonalcoholic beverages and alcoholic beverages must be more
than 25% of the net terminal income for the prior 12-month period. In addition
to the information requested of all applicants for village liquor licenses
pursuant to §
111.11, applicants for a Class R-2G license shall submit a projection of
expected receipts from sales of food, non-alcoholic beverages or beer, wine or
other alcoholic liquor and video gaming. Upon application for renewal of a
Class "G" liquor license, licensees shall submit information on actual receipts
from sales food, non-alcoholic beverages or beer, wine or other alcoholic
liquor and video gaming, for the 12 calendar months prior to application for
renewal or, if in operation for less than 12 calendar months at the time of
application for renewal, for such amount of time as the licensee has been in
operation in the village.
      (3)   (a)   A Class TG "Tavern Gaming" license shall be issued to a
tavern and shall entitle the licensees to sell at retail alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises specified and to sell at retail alcoholic liquor in
the original package only for consumption off the premises where sold. The
annual fee for such license shall be $1,000. The annual fee shall be payable in
two installments, namely, $500 on December 31 of each year and $500 on June 30
of each year. Holders of a Class "TG" license may conduct video gaming on the
premises where licensed, in addition to the service of alcohol, upon issuance
of a video gaming license from the Illinois Gaming Board and in compliance with
the Video Gaming Act and any and all other rules and regulations. The village
reserves the right to revoke a license if video gaming is not active on the
premises within 60 days after issuance of the TG license and/or video gaming
otherwise ceases on the premises for a period of 30 consecutive days.
         (b)   To be eligible for a TG license, the gross receipts of the sale
of food, non-alcoholic beverages and alcoholic liquor must be more than 25% of
the net terminal income for the prior 12-month period. In addition to the
information requested of all applicants for village liquor licenses pursuant to
§
111.11, applicants for a Class TG license shall submit a projection of expected
receipts from sales of food, non-alcoholic beverages, alcoholic liquor, tobacco
and video gaming. Upon application for renewal of a Class "TG" liquor license,
licensees shall submit information on actual receipts from sales of food, non-
alcoholic beverages, alcoholic liquor, tobacco and video gaming, for the 12
calendar months prior to application for renewal or, if in operation for less
than 12 calendar months at the time of application for renewal, for such amount
of time as the licensee has been in operation in the village.
   (C)   The number of licenses issued by the village shall be as follows:
      (1)   There may be one Class B license;
      (2)   There may be three Class C licenses;
      (3)   There may be one Class G license;
      (4)    There may be two Class N licenses;
      (5)   There may be two Class P licenses;
      (6)   There may be one Class LP license;
      (7)   There may be zero Class R-l licenses;
      (8)   There may be one Class R-2 license;
      (9)   There may be one Class RE license;
      (10)   There may be one Class SE license outstanding at any time;
      (11)   There may be two Class T licenses;
      (12)   There may be one Class R-1G license;
      (13)   There may be three Class R-2G licenses;
      (14)   There may be eight Class TG licenses; and
      (15)   There shall be no limit on the number of Class CR licenses
outstanding at one time.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   A Class ETG "Extraterritorial Tavern Gaming" license shall
be issued to a tavern and shall entitle the licensees to sell at retail
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises specified and to sell at
retail alcoholic liquor in the original package only for consumption off the
premises where sold. To be eligible for an "ETG" license, the establishment
must meet the following requirements:
            1.   Be located on property that is not located within the
corporate limits of the Village;
            2.   Be subject to a pre-annexation or annexation agreement with
the village that has a minimum of ten years remaining on the term of the
agreement; and
            3.   Have been previously granted a liquor license from the county
prior to entering or renewing its pre-annexation or annexation agreement with
the village.
         (b)   The annual fee for such license shall have a fixed component and
variable component. The fixed fee shall be $1,000 and shall be payable in two
installments, namely, $500 on December 31 of each year and $500 on June 30 of
each year. The variable component shall equal the municipal share of the VGT
Tax Distribution for the preceding calendar year as reported by the Illinois
Gaming Board. This shall be payable in two installments with 50% paid on
December 31 of each year and 50% paid on June 30 of each year. The variable
component shall be waived by the village if the village (as opposed to the
county) receives the municipality share of the VGT Tax Distribution from the
State of Illinois, whether it be directly or through an agreement with the
county.
      (2)   Holders of a Class "ETG" License may conduct video gaming on the
premises where licensed, in addition to the service of alcohol, upon issuance
of a video gaming license from the Illinois Gaming Board and in compliance with
the Video Gaming Act and any and all other rules and regulations. The village
reserves the right to revoke a license if video gaming is not active on the
premises within 60 days after issuance of the "ETG" license and/or video gaming
otherwise ceases on the premises for a period of 30 consecutive days.
      (3)   To be eligible for a "ETG" license, the gross receipts of the sale
of food, non-alcoholic beverages and alcoholic liquor must be more than 25% of
the net terminal income for the prior 12- month period. In addition to the
information requested of all applicants for village liquor licenses pursuant to
§
111.11, applicants for a Class "ETG" license shall submit a projection of
expected receipts from sales of food, non-alcoholic beverages, alcoholic
liquor, tobacco and video gaming. Upon application for renewal of a Class "ETG"
liquor license, licensees shall submit information on actual receipts from
sales of food, non-alcoholic beverages, alcoholic liquor, tobacco and video
gaming, for the 12 calendar months prior to application for renewal or, if in
operation for less than 12 calendar months at the time of application for
renewal, for such amount of time as the licensee has been in operation.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 98-57, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 99-40,
passed 7-27-99; Am. Ord. 99-62, passed 11-23-99; Am. Ord. 99-66, passed 1-11-
00; Am. Ord. 00-20, passed 4-11-00; Am. Ord. 01-27, passed 5-8-01; Am. Ord. 01-
70, passed 11-13-01; Am. Ord. 03-49, passed 10-28-03; Am. Ord. 04-66, passed
11-9-04; Am. Ord. 05-38, passed 8-23-05; Am. Ord. 07-69, passed 11-13-07; Am.
Ord. 08-16, passed 4-22-08; Am. Ord. 09-07, passed 3-10-09; Am. Ord. 10-06,
passed 2-9-10; Am. Ord. 10-51, passed 8-24-10; Am. Ord. 12-11, passed 3-27-12;
Am. Ord. 13-13, passed 5-14-13; Am. Ord. 13-36, passed 9-24-13; Am. Ord. 14-07,
passed 2-11-14; Am. Ord. 15-40, passed 9-22-15; Am. Ord. 15-41, passed 9-22-15;
Am. Ord. 16-20, passed 5-24-16; Am. Ord. 16-26, passed 5-24-16; Am. Ord. 17-25,
passed 6-13-17; Am. Ord. 18-34, passed 6-12-18; Am. Ord. 19-6, passed 2-26-19;
Am. Ord. 19-15, passed 6-11-19; Am. Ord. 20-16, passed 5-12-20; Am. Ord. 20-32,
passed 12-8-20; Am. Ord. 21-32, passed 10-12-21; Am. Ord. 21-33, passed 10-12-
21; Am. Ord. 21-51, passed 12-28-21; Am. Ord. 22-09, passed 3-30-22; Am. Ord.
22-25, passed 6-28-22; Am. Ord. 22-26, passed 6-28-22; Am. Ord. 22-42, passed
9-27-22; Am. Ord. 22-52, passed 12-13-22; Am. Ord. 22-54, passed 12-27-22; Am.
Ord. 23-35, passed 10-10-23; Am. Ord. 24-08, passed 2-27-24; Am. Ord. 24-12,
passed 4-23-24; Am. Ord. 24-26, passed 7-9-24)
§ 111.17A TEMPORARY PERMIT FOR OUTSIDE SALES.
   (A)   On application and payment of the license fee as set forth herein, the
holder of a Class R-1, R-2 or T license may be issued a temporary permit to
sell alcoholic liquor as authorized by the license classification, outside of
the permanent structure and on the property where the licensee’s permanent
structure is located, under the following conditions:
      (1)   A temporary fence, not less than four feet in height, made of wood
or other similar material shall be erected. The fencing shall be designed and
positioned so as to separate the licensee’s patrons from the general public.
      (2)   Access into the outside area shall be from the permanent structure
only and no access shall be permitted from the street, sidewalk or adjoining
property emergency exits as required by city ordinance must be provided.
      (3)   No music of any kind may be played or broadcast from the outside
area or within the permanent structure which is of such a volume so as to
disturb the neighborhood in any manner. Music shall not be played or broadcast
after 10:00 p.m.
      (4)   Outside portable sanitary facilities must be provided by the
licensee as required.
      (5)   No sales or dispensing of alcoholic liquor may be made from the
outside area or permanent structure to any person upon adjoining property,
public street, sidewalk or alley, and no alcoholic liquor served in an open
container may be removed from the outside area or permanent structure.
      (6)   Proof of dram shop insurance coverage on the outside area must be
submitted with the completed application.
      (7)   Adequate security must be provided by the licensee.
      (8)   Outside area activities may not begin prior to 12:00 p.m. (noon)
and will cease at the normal closing time for the licensee, or 12:00 midnight,
whichever is earlier.
   (B)   An outside sales permit may be issued for a maximum for two
consecutive days. Not more than two permits may be issued to a licensee during
a calendar year.
   (C)   The fee for a temporary outside sales permit shall be $50 for each day
for which the permit is to be used. Issuance of an outside sales permit to a
licensee shall be treated separately from the licensee’s primary license and
shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the commissioner for just
cause.
   (D)   Within the permitted area, the licensee shall be subject to all other
regulations governing the class of license held by the licensee, including but
not limited to regulations governing the sale of food, except as specifically
amended herein.
(Ord. 01-35, passed 6-12-01)
§ 111.17B OUTDOOR CAFE PERMIT.
   (A)   On application and payment of an investigation and processing fee of
$100, in addition to the license fee set forth herein, the holder of a Class T,
BP, DP, W, R-1 or R-2 license may be issued an outdoor café permit.
   (B)   Upon issuance, an outdoor cafe permit shall entitle the licensee to
sell alcoholic liquor as authorized by his or her primary classification,
outside of the permanent structure of his or her premises under the following
conditions:
      (1)   A permanent fence, not less than three feet in height, made of wood
or other similar material, shall be erected by the licensee.
         (a)   The fence shall be designed in such a manner so that the vision
of a person on either side of the fence is not obscured when viewing through
the fence.
         (b)   The fencing shall be positioned between the area in which
alcoholic liquor can be consumed outside and any adjoining residential or
commercial property.
      (2)   (a)   Access into the outdoor cafe shall be from the permanent
structure only and no access shall be permitted from the street, sidewalk, or
adjoining property.
         (b)   Emergency exits as approved by the Village Building Inspector
shall be provided.
      (3)   No music of any kind, which is of such a volume so as to disturb
the neighborhood in any manner, may be played or broadcast from the outdoor
cafe or within the permanent structure which is of such a volume so as to
disturb the neighborhood in any manner.
      (4)   No sales or dispensing of alcoholic liquor may be made from the
outside area or permanent structure to any person upon adjoining property,
public street, sidewalk or alley; and no alcoholic liquor served in an open
container may be removed from the outdoor cafe or permanent structure.
      (5)   The permit for the outdoor café shall be displayed, together with
the licensee’s T, BP, DP, W, R-1 or R-2 license, and shall be considered as
part of the license, and subject to suspension or revocation whenever the
license is subject to suspension or revocation.
      (6)   The licensee shall be subject to all other regulations governing
the class of license held by the licensee, including but not limited to,
regulations governing hours and the sale of food, except as specifically
amended herein.
      (7)   The annual fee for an outdoor cafe permit shall be $100, with a $15
annual renewal/inspection fee.
      (8)   There shall be one outdoor cafe permit outstanding in the village.
(Ord. 06-09, passed 2-28-06; Am. Ord. 21-32, passed 10-12-21) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.17C OUTDOOR STREET PERMIT.
   (A)   On application and payment of an investigation and processing fee of
$100, in addition to the license fee set forth herein, the holder of a Class T
license may be issued an outdoor street permit.
   (B)   Upon issuance, an outdoor street permit shall entitle a licensee to
allow alcoholic liquor, as authorized by his or her primary classification,
outside of the pennanent structure and off his or her premises for consumption
purposes only, including onto a defined portion of the village's streets,
alleys and/or sidewalks (hereinafter “permitted area”), subject to the
following restrictions and conditions:
      (1)   Providing temporary fencing around the permitted area and no
alcoholic liquor is pennitted outside of said designated and fenced area. The
fencing shall provide at least one primary means of ingress and egress around
the permitted area, as well as an emergency exit, unless additional areas or
exits are necessary for fire and safety reasons as detennined by the Village
Building Inspector.
      (2)   The holder of the permit shall be responsible for monitoring the
means of ingress and egress, as well as other areas of the permitted area so as
to provide for adequate crowd control and to prevent any alcoholic liquors from
being removed from the permitted area by invitees or customers.
      (3)   The holder of the permit shall be required to participate in a
meeting with representatives from the village's law enforcement officers to
review the physical layout of the site for the event and the designated area,
to address the fencing and all other safety issues.
      (4)   The holder of the permit is responsible for removal of all refuse,
litter, debris, garbage and the like from the permitted area within two hours
of the ending time of the permit. Any permit holder that fails to remove all
refuse, litter, debris, garbage and the like as required shall be billed for
the village's services in performing such removal which the holder agrees to
pay within 60 days of billing.
      (5)   The holder of the permit, or an employee or agent thereof, shall be
responsible for checking the identification of all invitees or guests that will
consume alcoholic liquor within the permitted area and shall provide a
wristband or other form of identification to demonstrate the individual is 21
years of age or over.
      (6)   The holder of the permit is required to provide necessary restroom
facilities as determined by the village if such restroom facilities do not
exist at the permitted area.
      (7)   Proper barriers and signage are erected to protect the permitted
area as approved by the village law enforcement and state law.
      (8)   The permit holder shall indemnify the village for any and all
damages or claims associated with the event and permit and shall be responsible
for any damage done to village property associated with the event and permit.
      (9)   No sales of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted outside of the
permitted license structure.
   (C)   The permit for the outdoor street shall be displayed, together with
the licensee's T license, and shall be considered as part of the license, and
subject to suspension or revocation whenever the license is subject to
suspension or revocation.
   (D)   The licensee shall be subject to all other regulations governing the
class of license held by the licensee, including but not limited to,
regulations governing hours and the sale of food, except as specifically
amended herein.
   (E)   An outdoor street permit must be approved by the Village Liquor
Commissioner, as well as by adoption of a resolution of the Village Board.
(Ord. 18-12, passed 2-27-18)
§ 111.18 TERM OF LICENSE; RENEWALS.
   Each license issued hereunder shall terminate on December 31 following the
issuance thereof. Any licensee may renew such license at the expiration
thereof, provided that it is then qualified to receive a license and the
premises for which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such
purpose; provided further that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall
not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Village
Board from decreasing or limiting the number of classes of licenses to be
issued within the village.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.19 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall be a purely personal privilege, effective for a period
not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as provided herein,
and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable for transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee, and shall not descend
by the laws of testate or intestate devolution; provided that executors or
administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic
liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor under the
order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased
or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of such decedent, or such
insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of such license, but not longer
than six months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
   (B)   A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for
any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such
license in accordance with this section.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.20 INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applications for liquor licenses which are incomplete or fail to
contain the statements of information required by §
111.11 shall be rejected by the Liquor Commissioner. The Commissioner shall
issue a written rejection of such application setting forth the deficiencies in
said application within 60 days of its receipt by the Liquor Commissioner or by
the Village Clerk. Prior to such rejection, the applicant may submit the
additional information or statements required to complete such application in
accordance with §
111.11.
   (B)   Administrative or legal expenses incurred in reviewing incomplete
liquor license applications, advising the applicant of such deficiencies, and
rejecting such applications shall be paid by the applicant. A bill or invoice
shall be submitted to the applicant specifying the additional administrative or
legal expenses incurred in processing the applicant's incomplete liquor license
application, which shall be paid by the applicant together with the annual
license fee prior to the issuance of such liquor license.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.21 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All such fees shall be paid to the Village Treasurer at the time application
is made. In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be
returned to the applicant, except for the non- refundable fee set forth in §
111.19. If the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited as set forth
above, and no portion thereof shall be refunded.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.22 CONDITIONS OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Closing hours.
      (1)   Except as provided in divisions (A)(2), (A)(3) and (A)(4) of this
section, it shall be unlawful for the holder of any license issued under this
subchapter to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the
village during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the holder of an R-1 or R-2 license
located in an area zoned B-1 under the Chatham Zoning Ordinance, to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village during the
following hours:
         (a)   Monday through Thursday: 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m. and after
10:00 p.m.
         (b)   Friday and Saturday: 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m.
         (c)   Sunday: l2:00 midnight to 12:00 noon.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class “T” license issued
under this subchapter to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor
in the village during the following hours:
         (a) Monday through Friday: 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m.
         (b) Saturday: 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
         (c) Sunday: 1:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for the holder of a Class “B” license to sell
or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village during the
following hours:
         (a)   Monday through Friday: 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m. and after 11:
00 p.m.
         (b)   Friday: 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m.
         (c)   Saturday: 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
         (d)   Sunday: 1:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon.
      (5)   Class “P” (Package) licensees and Class “T” (Tavern) licensees
shall cause the premises to be vacated within one-half hour after the time at
which sales of alcohol are required by this section to be terminated and until
the time the licensee may resume sales under this section. All other licensees
electing to remain open for other business during periods of time when the
sales of alcoholic liquor are prohibited by this section shall conspicuously
post a notice stating that alcoholic liquor is not available for sale during
such periods of time.
      (6)   In addition, the holder of any license, regardless of
classification, shall be permitted to sell or offer for sale at retail
alcoholic liquor in the village from the closing time established above for
December 31 until the hour of 1:00 a.m. on January 1 in any year, until 1:00
a.m. on Thanksgiving Day, and as allowed by special permit issued under §
111.50(B)(8).
   (B)   Election days. Subject to division (A) of this section, licensees may
sell at retail any alcoholic liquor on the day of any national, state, county,
or village election, including primary elections, during the hours the polls
are open, within the political area in which such election is being held.
   (C)   Refilling original packages. No person licensed under this chapter
shall fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package of alcoholic
liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of alcoholic liquor; and it
shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession for sale at
retail any bottles, casks or other containers, containing alcoholic liquor,
unless in original packages, except vinous beverages and pitchers of beer as
permitted elsewhere herein.
   (D)   Quantity sales for on-premises consumption. It shall be unlawful for
any licensee, to sell, give away, or permit to be sold, served, or given away
for consumption on the licensed premises any distilled spirits except by the
glass, in individual servings not exceeding three fluid ounces.
   (E)   Displaying license. Every licensee shall cause the license or licenses
to be framed and hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed
premises.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 96-90, passed 5-14-96; Am. Ord. 99-27,
passed 6-8-99; Am. Ord. 00-12, passed 1-25-00; Am. Ord. 03-49, passed 10-28-03;
Am. Ord. 08-06, passed 1-22-08; Am. Ord. 10-29, passed 5-11-10; Am. Ord. 17-52,
passed 12-26-17; Am. Ord. 19-18, passed 6-25-19) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.23 BASSET TRAINING.
   (A)   (1)   All original license applications and renewals for liquor
license after July 1, 2017, shall be accompanied with proof of completion
within the last three years of a state certified Beverage Alcohol Sellers and
Servers Education and Training (BASSET) program or other State of Illinois
Liquor Control Commission (ILCC) approved program for all persons who sell or
serve alcoholic beverages, all management personnel working on premises, and
anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the
purchases of alcoholic beverages, pursuant to that license.
      (2)   All original license applications and renewals for a liquor license
after January 1, 2018, by any governmental, not for profit, service club, or
religious organizations who utilize unpaid volunteers for the activities
described in the preceding paragraph are subject to the following rules:
         (a)   Unpaid volunteers are not required to have completed a state
certified BASSET program or other ILCC approved program as long as their
activities at all times are within the presence of another person who has
completed BASSET or other approved seller and server training.
         (b)   Compliance is required with all other provisions of this
division (A). In addition, the production requirement in division (D) of this
section shall be construed to require any governmental, not for profit, service
club, or religious organization to maintain on the premises or at the function
in question to provide a photocopy of all certificates of completion of BASSET
or other approved seller and server training, including certificates of those
individuals under which unpaid volunteers are claimed to be lawfully acting.
   (B)   Beginning July 1, 2017, any new owner, new manager, new employee, or
new agent required by this section to complete alcohol seller and server
training, shall within 90 days from the beginning of their employment with that
licensee, provide proof of completion within the last three years of a state of
ILCC approved seller and server training program and shall, until completion of
the seller and server training program, work under the supervision of a person
who has completed BASSET or other approved seller and server training.
   (C)   A "state certified BASSET training program" is defined as a BASSET
program licensed by the ILCC as authorized by 235 ILCS 5/3-12(11.1). Training
programs may be in the classroom or on line as provided by law or
administrative regulations. All licensed BASSET providers and trainers shall be
required to produce upon request of state or local liquor control authorities
all licenses and certificates to prove current qualifications. BASSET providers
and trainers shall provide a certificate of course completion to participants
as proof of completion.
   (D)   A photocopy of certificate of completion for all owners, managers,
employees, or agents required by this section to have BASSET or other approved
seller and server training shall:
      (1)   Be maintained, by the establishment, in a manner that will allow
inspection, upon demand, by any designee of both the state or local liquor
control authorities.
      (2)   Be attached to original license applications and renewals for a
liquor license.
(Ord. 17-37, passed 7-11-17)
STANDARDS OF OPERATION
§ 111.30 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale or retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, home for the aged or
indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives or children, or any military or
naval station; provided that this prohibition shall not apply to hotels
offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or restaurants or other
places where the sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business
carried on, if such place of business or use so exempted is established for
such purposes prior to the establishment of any such church, school, home for
the aged or indigent persons, or for veterans, their wives or children, or any
military or naval station, nor to the renewal of a license for the sale at
retail of alcoholic liquor on premises within 100 feet since of any church or
school, where such church or school has been established within such 100 feet
since the issuance of the original license. In the case of a church, the
distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used
for worship services or educational programs and not to property boundaries.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a license to a
church or private school to sell at retail alcoholic liquor, if any such sales
are limited to period when groups are assembled on the premises solely for the
promotion of some common object other than sale or consumption of alcoholic
liquor.
   (C)   No such license shall be issued to any person for the sale of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age, or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such
minors.
   (D)   No license, except as permitted for Class P license holders, shall
allow the selling or disposition of beer, wine, or any other alcoholic liquor
through a drive-up window.
   (E)   A license issued hereunder shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only in the premises described in the application and license. Such location
may be changed only when and upon the written permit to make such change shall
be issued by the Local Commissioner. No change of location shall be permitted
unless the proposed new location is in compliance with the provisions and
regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 15-41, passed 9-22-15) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.31 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with any and
all village and county ordinances regulating the condition of the premises used
for the storage or sale of food for human consumption.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.32 VIEW FROM STREET.
   (A)   In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises is licensed (other than a restaurant, hotel, or club) no screen,
blind, curtain, partition, article, or thing shall be permitted in the windows
or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside such premises, which
shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the
street, road, or sidewalk at all times. No booth, screen, partition, or other
obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or
about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a clear view of the
entire interior from the street, road, or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is
sold for consumption on the premises shall be continuously lighted during
business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all parts of
the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible.
   (B)   In case the view into any such licensed premises required by the
foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee, or be
permitted to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall
be subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the
provisions of this section, the Village President shall have the right to
require the filing of plans, drawings, and photographs showing the clearance of
the view as above required.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.33 PREMISES RESTRICTIONS.
   No licensed premises shall be operated or occupied in violation of any
building, fire, health or safety code, rule, regulation, occupancy or capacity
limitation established or adopted by the village, the state, the county, or if
applicable, the Fire Protection District for the village.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.34 PERSONNEL RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Change of personnel.
      (1)   Any changes in partnerships, officers, directors, persons holding
directly or beneficially more than 5% of the stock or ownership interest,
managers or assistant managers of establishments licensed under this chapter
shall be reported in writing to the Liquor Commissioner within ten days of the
change. All such new personnel shall meet all the standards of this chapter and
must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor license. All such changes in personnel
shall be subject to review by the Liquor Commissioner.
      (2)   When a license has been issued to a partnership and a change of
ownership occurs resulting in a partnership interest by one who is not eligible
to hold a liquor license, the license shall terminate.
      (3)   When a license has been issued to a corporation, and a change takes
place in officers, directors, managers or shareholders of more than 5% of the
stock, resulting in the holding of office or such shares of stock by one who is
not eligible for a license, the license shall terminate.
      (4)   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer
eligible for a license, the license shall terminate.
   (B)   Employees. It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor any persons who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; and it shall be
unlawful for any persons who is afflicted with or is a carrier of any such
disease to work in or about any premises or to engage in any way in the
handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor. No employee, agent or
manager, while on duty within the premises, shall use or consume any illegal
drugs or alcoholic liquor, or be under the influence of illegal drugs or
alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   Supervision. A license which operates with a manager or assistant
manager shall have on duty at all times such manager or assistant manager when
the license is in effect.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.35 PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS.
    (A)   Peddling. It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the
village.
   (B)   Gambling. No person, establishment, or business issued a license shall
allow video gaming on the licensed premise unless the person, establishment or
business holds a Class R-1G License, R-2G or Class TG License or is otherwise
permitted to have video gaming at a licensed fraternal establishment, licensed
veterans establishment, or licensed truck stop establishment as defined and
allowed under the Illinois Video Gaming Act. Operation of a video gaming
terminal by any other license holder shall be cause for revocation of the
applicable liquor license in addition to any and all other penalties allowed by
law and this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful
to permit all other types of gambling on any premises licensed to sell
alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   Solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any licensee, manager, or other
person in charge of any licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or
offered for sale for consumption thereon to engage, employ, or permit the
engagement or employment of any persons, nor shall any person be permitted to
remain on the premises who shall solicit any patron or customer thereof to
purchase alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor or sexual favors or services for
herself, himself, or any other person; nor shall any person, whether employer,
entertainer, or otherwise, solicit any patron or customer therein to purchase
alcoholic or nonalcoholic liquor for herself, himself, or any other person
therein. However, nothing herein contained shall prohibit any adult manager,
waitress or waiter who shall be regularly employed therein from accepting and
serving the order of a patron or customer in the regular course of employment
as such manager, waitress or waiter.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 12-29, passed 7-10-12; Am. Ord. 16-20,
passed 5-24-16; Am. Ord. 18-35, passed 6-12-18) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.36 SALES TO MINORS, DRUNKARDS, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No licensee or officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person, or to any
person known to be an habitual drunkard, insane, mentally ill, mentally
deficient, or in need of mental treatment. No person, after purchasing or
otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give, or deliver such
alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service. It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of 21 years to misrepresent his or her age for the purpose
of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in the village where
alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (B)   In every place in the village where alcoholic liquor is sold, there
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall
read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS
   UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS
You are subject to a fine up to $ 500 under the ordinances of the Village of
Chatham if you purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, or
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a liquor license, or his or her
agent or employee, to suffer or permit any persons under the age of 21 to be or
remain in any room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the
room or place where such licensed premises is located; provided that this shall
not apply to any person under the age of 21 who is accompanied by a parent or
guardian, or to that portion of any licensed premises which derives its
principal business from the sale or service of commodities other than alcoholic
liquor.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit
any person of which he or she is the parent or guardian to violate any
provision of this Section.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to draw,
pour or mix any alcoholic liquor in any licensed retail premises. It shall be
unlawful for persons under the age of 18 to be employed as waiters and
waitresses to deliver to customers alcoholic liquor drawn, poured or mixed by
another. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
dispense, sell or deliver any alcoholic liquor in the original package, bottle
or case for consumption off the premises of any licensed establishment.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.37 PROHIBITIONS REGARDING PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21.
   (A)   Purchase or possession of alcoholic liquor by a person under 21 years
of age.
      (1)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor
is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase or
accept a gift of alcoholic liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his or her
possession.
      (2)   If a licensee or such licensee’s agent or employee believes, has
reason to believe, or should have reason to believe that a sale or delivery of
alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of the age of the prospective recipient,
such licensee, agent or employee shall, before making such sale or delivery,
demand presentation of some form of positive identification (containing proof
of age) issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties.
Reasonable care in compliance with the provisions of this division (A)(2) shall
be competent evidence and may be considered in prosecution, revocation, or
suspension for the violation of any section of this chapter relating to
revocation or suspension for the violation of any other provision of this
chapter.
      (3)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card,
use the identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
information for the purpose of allowing a minor to misrepresent his or her age
to purchase or obtain alcoholic liquor.
      (4)   No person under the age of 21 shall consume alcoholic liquor,
purchase alcoholic liquor, accept a gift of alcoholic liquor, or have alcoholic
liquor in his or her possession; provided, however, that this paragraph shall
not prohibit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of
21 in a home pursuant to the direct supervision and approval of the parent or
legal guardian of such person under the age of 21 nor the possession of
alcoholic liquor by a person under the age of 21 making a delivery of such
alcoholic liquor pursuant to the order of the parent, legal guardian or
employer of such person under the age of 21.
   (B)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent or
guardian intentionally or knowingly to permit any person under the age of 21
for whom the parent or guardian is responsible to violate any provision of this
chapter. Every parent or guardian whose residence is used by a person under the
age of 21, child, or ward or a person under the age of 21 invitee of a child or
ward for the consumption of any alcoholic beverage in a manner which violates
this section shall be presumed to have permitted the conduct which constitutes
the violation unless the contrary is established by a preponderance of the
evidence.
   (C)   Prohibited gatherings.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally or knowingly to
permit the gathering of two or more persons at a residence that he or she
occupies where any one or more of such persons is a person under the age of 21
if: (1) the person occupying the residence knows that any such person under the
age of 21 is in possession of or is consuming any alcoholic liquor; and (2) the
possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor by such person under the age
of 21 is not otherwise permitted by this chapter.
      (2)   No person shall rent a hotel or motel room from the proprietor or
agent thereof for the purpose of or with the knowledge that such room shall be
used for the consumption of alcoholic liquor, or the possession or consumption
of any cannabis or other controlled substance prohibited by Illinois statutes,
by persons under the age of 21. No parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody or control of any person under the age of 21 shall knowingly
permit or encourage such person under the age of 21 to violate this section.
   (D)   Religious services and ceremonies exempt. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the possession and dispensing, or consumption by
a person under the age of 21 years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a
religious service or ceremony.
   (E)   Penalty. Any violation of this section can result in a penalty as set
forth in §
111.99 of the Village Code.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 20-25, passed 9-22-20)  Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.38 NOISE FROM LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   No licensee other than a Class SE licensee, or officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such a licensee, shall operate a
licensed premises, or permit the operation of a licensed premises, so as to
cause a violation of the Illinois Pollution Control Board regulations
pertaining to noise, including but not limited to the General Provisions found
at 35 Illinois Administrative Code 900, 5 Illinois Administrative Code 900 et
seq., and the rules specifically pertaining to Property-Line-Noise-Sources
found at 35 Illinois Administrative Code 901, and 5 Illinois Administrative
Code 901 et seq., which are incorporated herein by reference.
   (B)   In any hearing conducted by the Liquor Commissioner, an official
report from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency that a licensee has
violated the Pollution Control Board rules pertaining to noise shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a Class SE license or licensee.
(Ord. 01-41, passed 7-10-01)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 111.50 LIQUOR COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   The Village President is hereby designated as the Liquor Commissioner
and shall be charged with the administration of the Liquor Control Act and of
such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted.
The President may appoint a person or persons to assist in the exercise of the
powers and the performance of the duties provided for in division (B) of this
section.
   (B)   The Liquor Commissioner shall have all the powers, functions, and
duties with respect to local liquor licenses granted by the Liquor Control Act,
including:
      (1)   Grant and/or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for cause
all local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within the
village and to impose fines as set forth herein.
      (2)   Enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter, at any
time, upon the premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of the Liquor Control Act or this chapter, or any rules or
regulations adopted by the Liquor Commissioner or by the State Commission, have
been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of the
licensee in connection therewith.
      (3)   Receive complaints from any citizen with the village that any of
the provisions of the Liquor Control Act or of this chapter have been or are
being violated, and to act upon such complaints in the manner provided by the
Liquor Control Act or this chapter.
      (4)   Receive local license fees and pay same to the Village Treasurer.
      (5)   Examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a
local license or for a renewal thereof, of any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served, or any licensee against whom a
citation proceeding has been instituted by the State Commission; to examine, or
cause to be examined, the books and records of any such applicant or licensee
or respondent; and to hear testimony and take proof for information in the
performance of the Liquor Commissioner's duties; and for such purposes, to
issue subpoenas which shall be effective in any part of the state. For the
purpose of obtaining any of the information desired by the Liquor Commissioner
under this section, the Commissioner may authorize an agent to act on his or
her behalf.
      (6)   Notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under the
General Not for Profit Corporation Act or a foreign corporation functioning as
a club in this state under a certificate of authority issued under that Act has
violated the Liquor Control Act by selling or offering for sale at retail
alcoholic liquors without a retailer's license.
      (7)   Revoke and suspend licenses, and levy fines, in accordance with §
111.52.
      (8)   To grant a permit to the holder of any license, regardless of
classification, to extend their hours of business to 1:00 a.m. for specific
events, but no more than three times per year per licensee. Such a request must
be made in writing no less than 48 hours prior to the event. No permit shall be
granted unless it is tied to an event associated with a nationally recognized
holiday or a community-wide event.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 19-18, passed 6-25-19)
§ 111.51 VIOLATION OF RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX ACT; CITIZEN COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the Liquor
Commissioner, upon the complaint of the State Department of Revenue, may refuse
the issuance or renewal of a retail license, or suspend or revoke such license,
for any of the following violations of the “Retailers' Occupation Tax Act,”
approved June 28, 1933, as amended:
      (1)   Failure to make a tax return.
      (2)   The filing of a fraudulent return.
      (3)   Failure to pay all of part of any tax or penalty finally determined
to be due.
      (4)   Failure to keep books and records.
      (5)   Failure to secure and display a certificate or subcertificates of
registration.
      (6)   Wilful violation of any rule or regulation of the State Department
of Revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
   (B)   Any five residents of the village shall have the right to file a
complaint with the Liquor Commissioner that a licensee has been or is violating
the provisions of this Ordinance or the Liquor Control Act or the rules or
regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be in writing in the
form prescribed by the Liquor Commissioner and shall be signed and sworn to by
the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision,
rule, or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon
which belief is based. If the Liquor Commissioner Is satisfied that the
complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the facts alleged
there is reasonable cause for such belief, he shall set the matter for hearing
and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing
and of the particular charge in the complaint.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.52 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LOCAL LICENSE; FINES; NOTICE; HEARING;
APPEAL.
   (A)   The Liquor Commissioner may revoke or suspend any license if he or she
determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this Act or
of any valid ordinance or resolution enacted by the Village Board or any
applicable rule or regulations established by the Liquor Commissioner or the
State Commission which is not inconsistent with law. In lieu of suspension or
revocation, the Liquor Commissioner may instead levy a fine on the licensee for
such violations. The fine imposed shall not exceed $ 1,000 for each violation;
each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
Not more than $ 10,000 in fines under this section may be imposed against any
licensee during the period of his license. Proceeds from such finds shall be
paid into the general corporate fund of the village.
   (B)   However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended and no
licensee shall be fined except after a public hearing by the Liquor
Commissioner with a three-day written notice to the licensee affording the
licensee an opportunity to appear and defend. All such hearings shall be open
to the public and the Liquor Commissioner shall reduce all evidence to writing
and shall maintain an official record of the proceedings. If the Liquor
Commissioner has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community he or
she may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such
conclusion and without notice or hearing, order the licensed premises closed
for not more than seven days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be heard
during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in the
conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises such order
shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
   (C)   The Liquor Commissioner shall within five days after such hearing, if
he or she determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or
suspended or that the licensee shall be fined, state the reason or reasons for
such determination in a written order, and either the amount of the fine, the
period of suspension, or that the license has been revoked, and shall serve a
copy of such order within the five days upon the licensee.
   (D)   The licensee after the receipt of such order of suspension or
revocation shall have the privilege within a period of 20 days after the
receipt of such order of suspension or revocation of appealing the order to the
State Commission for a decision sustaining, reversing or modifying the order of
the Liquor Commissioner. If the State Commission affirms the Liquor
Commissioner's order to suspend or revoke the license at the first hearing, the
appellant shall cease to engage in the business for which the license was
issued, until the Liquor Commissioner's order is terminated by its own
provisions or reversed upon rehearing or by the courts.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.53 FORFEITURE OF FEES.
   Whenever any license hereunder has been revoked as provided for in this
chapter, the licensee shall incur a forfeiture of all monies that have been
paid for the license.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.54 USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION.
   When a license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted
to any person for a period of one year thereafter for the conduct of the
business of manufacturing, distributing or selling alcoholic liquor in the
premises described in such revoked license.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.55 EFFECTIVE DATE; REPEALER; PUBLICATION; TRANSITION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, this chapter shall
become effective on June 15, 1994. The Village Clerk is directed to publish
this chapter in pamphlet form and to mail a copy thereof to each current liquor
licensee in the village.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C), Ordinance 73-10, as amended,
pertaining to liquor control, is hereby repealed.
   (C)   Section
111.18, pertaining to classifications and fees, shall become effective for
existing licenses on January 1, 1995. Until January 1, 1195, the
classifications and fees set forth in Ordinance 73-10, as amended, shall remain
in effect as to existing licensees. Between June 15, 1994 and January 1, 1995,
the Liquor Commissioner may, however, issue the new class “P” license provided
by this chapter, at the fee established by this chapter.
   (D)   Existing licensees renewing their licenses on January 1, 1995 shall be
redesignated into the new license classification which best describes the
licensee's actual business operation as of the date of passage of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)    Any person other than a licensee violating any provision of this
chapter, or a bartender selling to underage persons, shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $$250 nor more than $500 for each offense. A bartender who
sells to a person under the age of 21 may be fined not less than $500 for a
first offense and $750 for a second offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   A licensee violating any provision of this chapter may be fined by the
Local Commission in lieu of suspension or revocation. The fine shall not
exceed,$500 for each such first violation, $1,000 for each such second offense,
and $1,500 for each such third offense. Each day on which the violation occurs
shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than $10,000 in fines under
this section may be imposed against any licensee during the period of the
licensee’s license.
   (C)   Proceeds of fines imposed by the Liquor Commissioner shall be paid
into the Village Treasury.
(Ord. 94-23, passed 5-24-94; Am. Ord. 20-25, passed 9-22-20)
CHAPTER 112: AMBULANCE SERVICES
Section
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Attendant-driver qualifications
   
112.03   Required equipment
   
112.04   Vehicular standards
   
112.05   Service standards
   
112.06   Traffic regulations
   
112.07   Exemptions
   
112.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Required training
   
Appendix B:   List of required equipment
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMBULANCE. Any privately- or publicly-owned motor vehicle or aircraft that
is specially designed or constructed and equipped, that is intended to be used
for and is maintained or operated for the transportation of patients. This
includes dual purpose police patrol cars and funeral coaches or hearses which
otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter, except any motor vehicle
or aircraft owned by, or operated under the direct control of the United
States.
   ATTENDANT. A trained or qualified individual responsible for the operation
of an ambulance and the care of the patients whether or not the ATTENDANT also
serves as driver.
   ATTENDANT-DRIVER. A person who is qualified as an attendant and a driver.
   DUAL PURPOSE POLICE PATROL CAR. A vehicle, operated by a police department,
which is equipped as an ambulance, even though it is also used for patrol or
other police purposes.
   PATIENT. An individual who is sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or
organization of any kind, including any governmental agency other than the
United States.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-14-78)
§ 112.02 ATTENDANT-DRIVER QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person, attendant, or attendant-driver, either as owner, agent, or
otherwise, shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise, or otherwise
be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of the
transportation of patients upon the streets, alleys, or any public way or place
of the village unless that person, attendant, or attendant-driver shall
successfully have completed the emergency medical technicians course of
training in accordance with the American College of Orthopedic Surgeons, the
basic requirements of which are as set forth in Appendix A following this
chapter.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-14-78) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT.
   No ambulance shall be operated for ambulance purposes, and no individual
shall drive, attend, or permit it to be operated for such purpose on the
streets, alleys, or any public way or place of the village unless the ambulance
shall at all times contain all the equipment as shall from time to time be set
forth and listed as Appendix B following this chapter by the American College
of Surgeons and the American College of Surgeons Bulletin, May 1970, as revised
from time to time.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-14-78) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 VEHICULAR STANDARDS.
   No ambulance shall be operated for ambulance purposes, and no individual
shall drive, attend, or permit it to be operated for such purposes on the
streets, alleys, or any public way or place of the village unless the ambulance
shall meet all vehicular standards promulgated by the Federal Department of
Transportation, KKK-1822 and the Illinois Department of Transportation,
Illinois- A-1822, as revised from time to time.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-14-78) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.05 SERVICE STANDARDS.
   In addition to the requirements of §§
112.02 through
112.04 hereof, each ambulance shall, at all times when in use as such;
   (A)   Be suitable for the transportation of patients from the standpoint of
health, sanitation, and safety, and be maintained in suitable premises;
   (B)   Contain equipment conforming with the standards, requirements, and
regulations provided for herein, which equipment shall be in proper and good
condition for such use;
   (C)   Currently comply with all applicable laws and local ordinances
relating to health, sanitation, and safety;
   (D)   Be equipped with such lights, sirens, and special markings to
designate it as an ambulance as may be prescribed in reasonable regulations
promulgated by the village; and
   (E)   Be equipped with approved safety belts for the driver and for a
passenger in the front seat if a seat is provided.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-14-78) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.06 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The driver of an ambulance, when responding to an emergency call or
while transporting a patient, but subject to the conditions herein stated, and
only when the driver has reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency in
fact exists requiring the exercise of the privileges, may:
      (1)   Park of stand, irrespective of the contrary provisions of law,
ordinance, or regulation;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits permitted by law, ordinance, or
regulation so long as he does not endanger life or property; and
      (4)   Disregard laws, ordinances, or regulations governing direction or
movement or turning in specified directions.
   (B)   The exemptions herein granted shall apply only when the ambulance is
making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of law,
ordinance, or regulation.
   (C)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an ambulance
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons; nor shall
the provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless
disregard for the safety of others.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-14-78)
§ 112.07 EXEMPTIONS.
   None of the provisions herein shall be applicable to an ambulance attendant,
attendant-driver, or person lawfully licensed or regulated by the city of
Springfield, Illinois.
(Ord. 78-4, passed 2-14-78)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $ 500 for each offense.
   (B)   Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of §
112.02 of this chapter and the applicable provisions thereof shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount
not to exceed $ 1,000, or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 180 days, or
be both so fined and imprisoned for each offense. Each day that any violation
of or failure to comply with this chapter is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense under this section, and shall
be punishable as such hereunder; provided, however, that a court may, in
appropriate cases, stay the cumulation of penalties. (Ord. 78-4, passed 2-14-
78)
APPENDIX A: REQUIRED TRAINING
   (1)   Anatomy and Physiology
   (2)   Airway Obstruction and Pulmonary Arrest
   (3)   Mechanical Aids to Breathing and Pulmonary Resuscitation
   (4)   Cardiac Arrest
   (5)   Bleeding, Shock
   (6)   Wounds
   (7)   Fractures of the Extremities
   (8)   Injuries of the Head, Neck, Face, Spine and Eye
   (9)   Lifting and Moving
   (10)   Injuries - Chest, Abdomen, Pelvis, Genitalia
   (11)   Medical Emergencies I
   (12)   Medical Emergencies II
   (13)   Childbirth
   (14)   Problems of Child Patients
   (15)   Environmental Emergencies
   (16)   Extrication from Automobiles
   (17)   Operations and Responding to Ambulance Call
   (18)   Situational Review
APPENDIX B: LIST OF REQUIRED EQUIPMENT
For purposes of general safety:                                                   Minimum
                                                                                  Qty.
(1)   Flares, self igniting, 30 minute                                         12
(2)   Flashlights, battery powered 6V, stand-up lantern type                   2
(3)   Gauntlets, foam insulated, vinyl coated, fluorescent orange              2 pairs
Medical equipment:
(1)   Portable suction apparatus, with wide-bore tubing and rigid pharyngeal   1
suction tip.
(2)   Bag-mask ventilation unit, hand-operated, with adult, child, and infant
size masks. Clear masks are preferable. Valves must operate in cold weather, and  1
unit must be capable of use with oxygen supply.
(3)   Oropharyngeal airways, adult, child, and infant sizes.                   2 each
(4)   Mouth-to-mouth artificial ventilation airways, for adults, and children.
Commonly referred to as “S” tubes, Resusci-Tubes, etc. (May be combined with Item
3 above).
(5)   Portable oxygen equipment (Flynn Valve or Equal) with adequate tubing and
semi-open, valveless transparent masks in adult, child, and infant sizes. (Plus 1 1
extra D or E cylinder.)
(6)   Mouth gags, either commercial or made of three tongue blades taped togeth3r
and padded.
(7)   Sterile solutions, preferably in plastic bags, for wetting dressings,    6
flushing chemicals, etc.
(8)   Universal dressings, approximately 10 inches by 36 inches, compactly fold12
and packaged in convenient size.
(9)   Sterile gauze pads, 4 inches by 4 inches.                                200
(10)   Bandages, soft roller, self-adhering-type 6 inches x 5 yards.           24
(11)   Aluminum foil, roll, 18 inches x 25 feet, sterilized and wrapped.       1
(12)   Adhesive tap, 3 inches wide.                                            2
(13)   Burn sheets, sterile.                                                   2
(14)   Traction splint, lower extremity, hinged half-ring with commercial limb-
support slings, padded ankle hitch, and traction strap. (Hare Traction Splint or  1
Pulsion Traction Splint)
(15)   Padded boards, 4-1/2 feet long by 3 inches wide. Padded boards, 3 feet
long, or material comparable to 4-ply wood for coaptation splinting of leg or     2 each
thigh.
(16)   Padded wooden splints, 15 inches x 3 inches, for fractures of the forearm.
(By local option, similar splints of cardboard, plastic, wire-ladder, or canvas   2
slotted lace-on may be carried in place of the above 36 inches and 15 inches
boards.)
(17)   Inflated splints, uncomplicated, in addition to Item 16 or as substitute2 kits
for the short boards. Arm and leg.
 
CHAPTER 113: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
113.03   Accounting principles
   
113.04   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
113.05   Audits of cable/video service provider
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to activation, installation and repair
charges.
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges.
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges,
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to division (1)(i) below.
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-
cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   SERVICE. The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and 220 ILCS 5/21-
801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public internet.
(Ord. 21-14, passed 4-13-21)
§ 113.02 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder's gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the
village.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under §
113.02(B).
(Ord. 21-14, passed 4-13-21)
§ 113.03 ACCOUNTING PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. 21-14, passed 4-13-21)
§ 113.04 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. 21-14, passed 4-13-21)
§ 113.05 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the municipality's submission of an invoice for the
sum.
   (C)   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by the
Village Code and the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS
45/1 et seq.
(Ord. 21-14, passed 4-13-21)
CHAPTER 114: DISCONTINUING BUSINESS SALES
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   License required; exceptions
   
114.03   Application for license; inventory
   
114.04   License restrictions
   
114.05   Record of application
   
114.06   Bankruptcy sales
   
114.07   Duration of sale; fees
   
114.08   Application, inventory, license to be posted
   
114.09   Substitution of goods
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE. Any sale, whether described by such name or by
any other name such as, but not limited to, “closing out sale”, “liquidation
sale”, “lost our lease sale”, “forced to vacate sale”, held in such a manner as
to induce a belief that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the
business will cease and be discontinued at the premises where the sale is
conducted.
   GOODS. All goods, wares, merchandise and other personal property, excepting
choses in action and money.
   REMOVAL SALE. Any sale held in such a manner as to induce a belief that upon
disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be
discontinued at the premises where the sale is conducted, and thereafter will
be moved to and occupy another location.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall directly or indirectly advertise or cause to be advertised,
represent or cause to be represented, or hold out to the public in any manner
that any sale of goods is an insurance, salvage, removal, going out of
business, insolvent's, assignee's, or creditor's sale of goods, or that it is a
sale of goods which have been damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise,
unless such person shall first have obtained a license to conduct such sale
under one of such descriptive names, from the Clerk of the village in which
such sale is to be conducted; provided, however, that this chapter shall not
apply to any sales directly ordered by any court or referee in bankruptcy, or
to any person acting under the direction or supervision of state or federal
courts in the course of their official duties; provided further, that this
chapter shall not apply to any sales by a person regularly engaged in insurance
or salvage sales of goods, or sale of goods which have been damaged by fire,
smoke, water, or otherwise, who acquired the goods for the account of others as
a result of fire or other casualty.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INVENTORY.
   Any applicant for a license under this chapter shall file an application in
writing and under oath with the Village Clerk setting out the following facts
and information regarding such a proposed sale:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant for the license, who must be the
owner of the goods to be sold; and, if the applicant is a partnership,
corporation, firm, or association, the name and position of the individual
filing such application.
   (B)   The name and style in which such sale is to be conducted, and the
address where such sale is to be conducted.
   (C)   The dates and period of time during which the sale is to be conducted.
   (D)   The name and address of the person or persons who will be in charge of
and responsible for the conduct of such sale.
   (E)   A full explanation with regard to the condition or necessity which is
the occasion for such sale, including a statement of the descriptive name of
the sale and the reasons why such name is truthfully descriptive of the sale.
If the application is for a license to conduct a going out of business sale, it
shall also contain a statement that the business will be discontinued at the
premises where the sale is to be conducted upon termination of the sale. If the
application is for a license to conduct a removal sale, it shall also contain a
statement that the business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale
is to be conducted upon termination of the sale, in addition to the location of
the premises to which the business is to be moved. If the application is for a
license to conduct a sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke, water, or otherwise,
it shall also contain a statement as to the time, location, and cause of such
damage.
   (F)   A full, detailed, and complete inventory of the goods that are to be
sold, which inventory shall;
      (1)   Itemize the goods to be sold and contain sufficient information
concerning each item including make and brand name, if any, to clearly identify
it;
      (2)   List separately any goods which were purchased during a 60-day
period immediately prior to the date of making application for the license; and
      (3)   Show the cost price of each item in the inventory together with the
name and address of the seller of the item to the applicant, the date of the
purchase, the date of the delivery of each item to the applicant, and the total
value of the inventory at cost.
   (G)   A statement that no goods will be added to the inventory after the
application is made or during the sale and that the inventory contains no goods
received on consignment.
   (H)   A statement that the applicant has in the past maintained a place of
business within the jurisdiction of the village for not less than four months
prior to the time of making application for the license. However, this division
(H) shall not apply to any applicant who acquired a right, title, or interest
in the goods as an heir, devisee, legatee, or surviving joint tenant; or as an
executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, or conservator; or pursuant to an
order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (I)   The application for the license shall be subscribed and sworn to under
oath by the applicant and shall, directly above the space reserved for the
signature of the applicant, contain the following legend in at least ten point
type: “Warning to applicant. This application must be fully and accurately
completed. False or misleading statements may subject applicant to the
penalties of perjury in addition to other penalties provided by law.”
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.04 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Clerk, upon receipt of an application giving fully and completely
the information under oath as required by §
114.02 above and upon receipt of the fee hereinafter provided for, shall issue
a license to the applicant therefor, authorizing the applicant to advertise,
represent, and to sell in the village the particular goods so inventoried at
the time and place stated in the application and in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The license shall be issued in duplicate and shall
bear a number and date of its expiration. A license issued under this chapter
shall be granted and valid only for the sale of the inventoried goods which are
the property of the licensee. The license shall apply only to the premises
specified in the application, and it may not be transferred or assigned. If a
licensee under this chapter is engaged in business in other locations, the
advertising or offering of goods on behalf of such locations shall not
represent or imply any participation in or cooperation with the sale on the
premises specified in the license, not shall any advertising or any other
offering of goods on behalf of the premises where the licensed sale is being
conducted represent or imply any participation in or cooperation with the sale
at other locations.
   (B)   No license under this chapter shall be issued to any person:
      (1)   To conduct a sale in the trade name or style of a person in whose
goods the applicant for the license has acquired a right or title thereto
within six months prior to the time of making application for the license;
      (2)   To continue a sale in the name of a licensee under this chapter in
whose goods the person acquired a right or title while the sale is in progress;
or
      (3)   To conduct a sale, other than an insurance sale, a salvage sale, or
a sale of damaged goods, on the same premises within one year from the
conclusion of a prior sale of the nature covered by this chapter. This division
(B) shall not apply to any person who acquired a right, title, or interest in
goods as an heir, devisee, or legatee or pursuant to an order or process of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.05 RECORD OF APPLICATION.
   The Clerk who issues a license under this chapter shall endorse upon the
application the date of its filing and shall preserve it, and the inventory
attached to it, as a public record of their office. The Clerk shall make a
notation of it in a book to be kept for that purpose, properly indexed, showing
the name of the applicant, the date of the application, the descriptive name of
the proposed sale, the place where the sale is to be conducted, its duration,
the date of the license issued thereon, and the total value of the goods to be
sold. A copy of the inventory shall be available for public inspection in the
office of the Clerk who issued a license hereunder.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.06 BANKRUPTCY SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or otherwise to represent
for sale or to sell any goods at a bankruptcy, executor's, administrator's,
receiver's, or trustee's sale, except pursuant to and in compliance with
federal or state statutory authority or judicial process, or at an assignee's
or insolvent's sale except where there is a bona fide assignment for the
benefit of creditors.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.07 DURATION OF SALE; FEES.
   (A)   A license to conduct a sale issued pursuant to this chapter shall not
be issued or valid for a period of more than 60 days from the start of the
sale, and the sale may be conducted only during the period set forth in the
license; provided, however, that the license may be renewed once only for a
period not to exceed 30 days upon affidavit of the licensee that the goods
listed in the inventory have not been disposed of and that no new goods have
been or will be added to the inventory previously filed pursuant to this
chapter by purchase, acquisition on consignment, or otherwise. The application
for renewal of the license shall be made not more than 14 days prior to the
time of the expiration of the license and shall contain a new inventory of the
goods remaining on hand at the time the application for renewal is made, which
new inventory shall be prepared and furnished in the same manner and form as
the original inventory. No renewal shall be granted if any goods have been
added to the stock listed in the inventory since the date of the issuance of
the license.
   (B)   A fee of $ 25 shall accompany an application for a license and for the
renewal of a license.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.08 APPLICATION, INVENTORY, LICENSE TO BE POSTED.
   (A)   A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale under this
chapter including the inventory filed therewith shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in the sales room or place where the inventoried goods are to
be sold, so that the public may be informed of the facts relating to the goods
before purchasing same; provided however, that such copy need not show the
purchase price of the goods.
   (B)   The duplicate copy of a license issued hereunder shall be attached to
the front door of the premises where the sale is conducted in a manner so that
the license is clearly visible from the street.
   (C)   Any advertisement or announcement published in connection with the
sale shall conspicuously show on its face the number of the license and the
date of its expiration.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.09 SUBSTITUTION OF GOODS.
   (A)   Any substitution for or addition to goods described in an inventory
filed pursuant to this chapter, or any change in the time or place for a sale
conducted pursuant to this chapter, shall be unlawful and shall void any
license issued to conduct a sale pursuant to this chapter, and the license
shall cease to apply to the sale. In the case of a sale of goods damaged by
fire, smoke, water, or otherwise, or in the case of an insurance sale or a
salvage sale, the goods to be sold at the sale shall be clearly and distinctly
segregated, marked or identified, and advertised, if at all, so that both on
display and in advertising such goods may be readily distinguished from other
stock and their identity readily ascertained. Any commingling of the goods with
other stocks of the licensee in such a manner to cause the goods to lose their
separate identity, either on display or in advertising, shall be unlawful and
shall void any license issued to conduct the sale pursuant to this chapter, and
the license shall cease to apply to the sale.
   (B)   No person in contemplation of conducting any going out of business,
removal, assignee's, or creditor's sale, or during the continuance of such a
sale, shall order or purchase any goods for the purpose of selling them at the
sale, and any unusual purchase or addition to the stock of the goods within 60
days before the filing of the application for a license to conduct the sale
shall be presumptive evidence that the purchases or additions were made in
contemplation of the sale and for the purpose of selling them at the sale.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, including both the applicant and an individual filing on behalf
of an applicant, who shall procure from the Clerk a license to conduct a sale
under the description of one of the names set out in §
114.02 hereof, which name shall be a misrepresentation of the true description
or character of the sale or of the kind or condition of goods to be sold under
the license, or any person violating any of the other provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor as defined in the Unified Code
of Corrections of the State of Illinois the applicable sections of which are
hereby accepted by this chapter. Each false statement of fact in an application
or inventory required to be filed hereunder shall constitute a separate offense
under this chapter.
(Ord. 80-2, passed 2-12-80)
CHAPTER 115: TAXATION
Section
   
115.01   Service occupation tax
   
115.02   Retailers occupation tax
   
115.03   Police Department Utility Tax Fund
Cross-reference:
   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax, see Ch.
116
§ 115.01 SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of l% of the cost price of all
tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a
sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
   (B)   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for municipal service
occupation tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by § 9 of the “Service Occupation Tax Act,” approved July 10,
1961, as amended.
   (C)   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed.
(Ord. 69-3, passed 9-3-69)
§ 115.02 RETAILERS OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of l% of the
gross receipts from the sales made in the course of the business while this
chapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
   (B)   Every person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal
property at retail in the village shall file on or before the last day of each
calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by § 3
of “An Act in Relation to a Tax Upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption” approved June
28, 1933, as amended.
   (C)   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
(Ord. 69-4, passed 9-3-69)
§ 115.03 POLICE DEPARTMENT UTILITY TAX FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established in the village treasury a designated
special fund to be known as the Police and Public Works Utility Tax Fund.
Twenty percent of all taxes imposed by the village pursuant to Chapter 116 with
respect to telecommunications receipts after May 1, 2006, shall be placed by
the Village Treasurer in such fund, which shall be segregated from all other
funds of the village.
   (B)   Annually, as part of the village appropriation ordinance, the funds in
the Police Department Utility Tax Fund shall be appropriated for Police
Department expenditures and no other purposes. Police Department expenditures
may include, but are not limited to, the following expenditures with respect to
the Police Department:
      (1)   Police Department vehicles and equipment; and
      (2)   Capital improvements.
   (C)   Funds in Police Department Utility Tax Fund may be appropriated and
expended for purposes other than those set forth in division (B) of this
section only with a majority vote of the corporate authorities of the village
then in office.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting additional
appropriations of, or and expenditures by, the General Fund for the purposes
enumerated in division (B) of this section.
(Ord. 03-44, passed 9-9-03; Am. Ord. 06-17, passed 4-25-06)
CHAPTER 116: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
   
116.03   Collection of tax by retailers
   
116.04   Returns to Department
   
116.05   Resellers
Cross-reference:
   Taxation, see Chapter
115
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly implies or indicates a different meaning.
   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in the
municipality regardless of where the amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the municipality and for all services and
equipment provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money
whether paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and
property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction
on account of the cost of the telecommunications, the cost of the materials
used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is
extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS
CHARGES for private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel
point within this state, charges for the channel mileage between each channel
point within this state, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-
office channel provided within Illinois. However, GROSS CHARGE shall not
include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
         (a)   The tax imposed by this chapter;
         (b)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act;
         (c)   The tax imposed by Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (d)   911 surcharges; or
         (e)   Charges added to customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of
the Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/9-221 or 9-222, as amended, or any similar
charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate
regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering
any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of
the Public Utilities Act.
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of
the municipality;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. The equipment includes, but
is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein the charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under the
Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1 to the extent of the exemption and
during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce and Community
Affairs;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this Act has already been paid to a retailer and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation rendering the
service;
      (7)   Bad debts (BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related to
a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards. If the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices; or
      (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER. Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment
of the tax. The retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of the retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
Department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any retailer having
or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or
other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within
this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective
of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act. For air-to-ground
systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees,
or permittees, engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by this chapter.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary two-way radio, paging service, or any
other form of mobile and portable one-way or two- way communications, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this chapter, PRIVATE LINE means a
dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that entitles
the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group
of channels, from one or more specified locations to one or more other
specified locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by the provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered “telecommunications”
subject to the tax imposed under this chapter. For purposes of this definition,
PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS means that term as defined in 35 ILCS
120/2-27 of the Retailers' Occupations Tax Act.
(Ord. 03-42, passed 9-9-03)
§ 116.02 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED.
   The tax is hereby imposed upon any and all of the following acts or
privileges:
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6%
of the gross charge for the telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer.
   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6%
of the gross charge for the telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that
is subject to taxation under this chapter, any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on the event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the
extent of the amount of the tax properly due and paid in the other state which
was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local tax in
this state.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this chapter is not imposed on the act or privilege
to the extent the act or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes
of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the municipality.
(Ord. 03-42, passed 9-9-03; Am. Ord. 04-54, passed 9-14-04; Am. Ord. 10-47,
passed 8-10-10)
§ 116.03 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by the retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be collected
pursuant to or as authorized by this chapter and any tax collected by the
retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall constitute a debt
owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect the tax from the
taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in the manner
prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this chapter shall
constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if unpaid,
is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for the sale at
retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the taxpayer, then the
taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the Department in the
manner provided by the Department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Ord. 03-42, passed 9-9-03)
§ 116.04 RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.
   Commencing on January 1, 2004, the tax imposed under this chapter on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with the appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to 35 ILCS 636/5-50 of the
Illinois Simplified Tax Act and any accompanying rules and regulations created
by the Department to implement this Act.
(Ord. 03-42, passed 9-9-03)
§ 116.05 RESELLERS.
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be
a reseller of telecommunications, the person shall apply to the Department for
a resale number. The applicant shall state facts which will show the Department
why the applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this chapter on any
of the purchases and shall furnish additional information as the Department may
reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive telecommunication tax-free when the actions
in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the person's
having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided in this section, the act or privilege of
originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to the
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Ord. 03-42, passed 9-9-03)
CHAPTER 117: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Purpose and scope
   
117.02   Definitions
   
117.03   Annual registration required
Permits; Required Fees
   
117.23   Permit required; applications and fees
   
117.24   Action on permit applications
   
117.25   Effect of permit
   
117.26   Revised permit drawings
   
117.27   Insurance
   
117.28   Indemnification
   
117.29   Security
   
117.30   Permit suspension and revocation
   
117.31   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
Construction
   
117.41   General construction standards
   
117.42   Traffic control
   
117.43   Location of facilities
   
117.44   Construction methods and materials
   
117.45   Vegetation control
   
117.46   Removal, relocation or modification of utility facilities
   
117.47   Cleanup and restoration
   
117.48   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
117.49   Variances
   
117.99   Penalty
§ 117.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
   (C)    Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   (D)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (E)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (F)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (G)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards, conditions
and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to
regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in 92 Ill.
Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non- recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. Code of Ordinances of the Village.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including track
and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-
of-way under this chapter, except those owned by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Superintendent of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and imminent
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
117.23 and
117.24 of this Chapter.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal-slurry.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the
village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the
location of facilities other than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not
include any real or personal village property that is not specifically
described in the previous two sentences and shall not include village
buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to §
117.10.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Village Superintendent of Public Works
or his or her designee.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall also include wireless telecommunications as
defined in the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act,
35 ILCS 635/1 et seq. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services
in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, content,
code and protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by him or her to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer access charges, right of
access charges, charges for use of intercompany facilities, and all
telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and used as a component
of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be
included in gross charges as sales for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not
include the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC §§ 521 and following) as now or
hereafter amended or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the village through an open video system as defined
in the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and
following) as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Means any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Chatham.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.03 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Village Clerk, providing the utility's name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or
more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-
hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as
required in §
117.27, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see 117.99
PERMITS
§ 117.23 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any
village right-of-way which (1) changes the location of the facility, (2) adds a
new facility, (3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter), or
(4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility
on, over, above, along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first
filing an application with the Superintendent of Public Works and obtaining a
permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
117.27;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
117.29;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (See §
117.49); and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any “Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity” has been issued by the ICC that the applicant is
required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, have been satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $250. In addition, the applicant shall
agree, as a condition of permit approval, to reimburse the village prior to
construction for the actual cost of having the application reviewed by the
Village Engineer, if such a review is necessary in the judgment of the
Superintendent of Public Works. The $250 application fee is waived with respect
to any telecommunications retailer that is paying the municipal or the optional
state telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to this code
or the Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by
any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.24 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Superintendent
of Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does
not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the Superintendent of Public Works shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Superintendent of
Public Works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the Superintendent of Public Works shall issue a permit therefor
as soon as practicable. The Superintendent of Public Works may consult with the
Village Engineer with respect to any application for a permit.
   (B)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to § 4 of the Telephone Company Act (220 ILCS 65/4) a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not less than ten10 days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Superintendent of Public Works
shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Superintendent of Public Works fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either:
          (a)   Ten10 days after service of notice to the village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction; or
         (b)   Twenty-five days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
117.23, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) of this
section.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.25 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.26 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
117.49. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.27 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
divisions (A)(1) and (2) below:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as “X,” “C,” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability;
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property damage for
each accident;
      (3)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
      (4)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages. The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
   “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of
a written notice addressed to the Village Clerk of such intent to cancel or not
to renew.”
   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in no event
later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain and
furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A), or the requirements of divisions (B), (C) and (D)
of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-
insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division
(A) of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self-
insurer” under the Workers Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility liability. The legal
liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the matters
that are the subject of the insurance policies or self- insurance required by
this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance
or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.28 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.29 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (3)    The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form.   The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the village
in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this division shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Superintendent of Public Works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Superintendent
of Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee
to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of
the construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of division (C) of this section for any single
phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The village, upon 14 days' advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the
permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14 day
notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division
(C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.30 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the public rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under §
117.30.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      (1)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation. The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in division (C) of this section.
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) of
this section.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village:
      (1)   Correct the deficiencies;
      (2)   Upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
      (3)   After not less than 30 days notice to the permittee of failure to
cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of
removal.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.31 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the villages right-
of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
GENERAL CONSTRUCTION
§ 117.41 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Superintendent of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of
sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the Superintendent of Public Works shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation
of a facility in the future.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.42 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
117.48, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.43 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of- way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right- of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (B)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.
      (3)   Ninety-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICCs
rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines” (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of- way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
   (C)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (D)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (E)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   (F)   Above ground installation. Above ground facilities may be installed
only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)    The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.44 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits, located at a minimum distance specified by the
Superintendent of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring
or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking
operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and
protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced
and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads
that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved shall be bored under or
around the root system.
      (2)    Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of- way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT's “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.”
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Superintendent of Public Works.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   The utility shall not trench within the drip line of any tree
designated by the village to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's “Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.” When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Superintendent of Public Works, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by
the Superintendent of Public Works.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this paragraph is
permitted under §
117.49, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the Superintendent of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot-type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            (1)   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair, and
            (2)   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                             Minimum Cover
Power or Communication Line (in General)     30 Inches (0.8 m)
                                             
Communication Line Installed by the Plowed    
Method                                       24 Inches (0.6 m)
Gas or Petroleum Products                    30 Inches (0.8 m)
Water Line                                   Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
                                             Protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer or Drainage Line Sufficient Cover to Provide Freeze
                                             Protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 305 (formerly General Order
160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled “Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines,” and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip
augers,” or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of “moles,” “whip augers,” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192-
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction,” and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4.)
      (5)   Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current “Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.”
      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Superintendent of Public Works. With the
approval of the Superintendent of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for
ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of- way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's “Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,” the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior
to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Superintendent of Public
Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are from sunrise to sunset.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.45 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (B)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (C)   Chemical use. Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of Public Works that such spraying is the
only practicable method of vegetation control.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.46 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights-of-way
whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction,
repair, maintenance, or installation of any village improvement in or upon, or
the operations of the village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights-of- way of the village, the utility shall notify the village
within 90 days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Superintendent of
Public Works determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not
direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice
of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to
consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by
another utility or person.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.47 CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.
   Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the
utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in a
timely manner and to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.48 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Superintendent of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.49 VARIANCES.
   (A)    Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or
more of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the
Superintendent of Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Superintendent of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Superintendent of Public
Works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Superintendent of Public Works may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility who does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. 99-03, passed 1-26-99)
CHAPTER 118: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Video gaming permitted
   
118.03   Payment of video gaming fee
   
118.04   Enforcement
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. Any retail establishment which is licensed under the
Liquor Control Ordinance of the village (
Chapter 111), and where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed, or otherwise
served for consumption on the premises.
   LICENSED FRATERNAL ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified fraternal
organization that derives its charter from a national fraternal organization
regularly meets.
   LICENSED VETERANS ESTABLISHMENT. The location where a qualified veterans
organization that derives its charter from a national veterans organization
regularly meets.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized
by the Illinois Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in
which the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for
cash. The term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash
or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
(Ord. 12-29, passed 7-10-12)
§ 118.02 VIDEO GAMING PERMITTED.
   Notwithstanding any provision of any village ordinance heretofore adopted,
including but not limited to §
111.35 of this Code of Ordinances, video gaming from video gaming terminals
licensed by the State of Illinois and operated pursuant to the Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq, is permitted in the village at licensed
establishments, licensed fraternal establishments and licensed veterans
establishments.
(Ord. 12-29, passed 7-10-12)
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverage regulations, see
Ch. 111
§ 118.03 PAYMENT OF VIDEO GAMING FEE.
   (A)   Each licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment and
licensed veterans establishment within the village shall register each licensed
machine annually utilizing forms provided by the Village Administrator, and in
conjunction therewith, shall pay a fee of $250 per video gaming terminal per
year to the village. The machines shall be registered and the fee shall be
paid:
      (1)   Upon initial receipt of a license from the State of Illinois
(prorated for the number of days remaining in the year from the initial date of
licensure); and
      (2)   On or before January 15 of each year thereafter.
   (B)   Upon payment of the fee, the licensed establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment or licensed veterans establishment shall provide the
village with a copy of the establishment's current license from the State of
Illinois.
   (C)   All fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for
enforcement of this chapter and monitoring compliance with the Video Gaming
Act.
(Ord. 12-29, passed 7-10-12; Am. Ord. 21-52, passed 12-28-21)
§ 118.04 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any licensed establishment, licensed fraternal establishment or licensed
veterans establishment which fails to pay the fee and provide a copy of the
state license as set forth in §
118.03 shall be subject to a fine of $500.
(Ord. 12-29, passed 7-10-12)
CHAPTER 119: PROHIBITING CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   Cannabis business establishments prohibited
   
119.03   Public nuisance declared
   
119.99   Violations
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter,
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. An adult-use cannabis craft
grower, adult-use cannabis cultivation center, adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser, adult-use
cannabis processing organization or processor, or adult-use cannabis
transporting organization or transporter.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either  extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 9-24-19)
§ 119.02 CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED.
   The following adult-use cannabis business establishments are prohibited in
the Village of Chatham. No person shall locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to
be operated or aide, abet or assist in the operation of within the Village of
Chatham any of the following:
   (A)   Adult-use cannabis craft grower;
   (B)   Adult-use cannabis cultivation center;
   (C)   Adult-use cannabis dispensing organization;
   (D)   Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser;
   (E)   Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor; and
   (F)   Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 9-24-19)
§ 119.03 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any prohibited cannabis business establishment within the
Village of Chatham in violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available
remedies.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 9-24-19)
§ 119.99 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $750 nor less than
$500. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 19-30, passed 9-24-19)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Weapons
   
130.01 Concealed weapons
   
130.02 Firing and discharge of weapons
Cannabis
   
130.15   Definitions
   
130.16   Possession of cannabis
   
130.17   Possession of drug paraphernalia prohibited
   
130.18   Possession of cannabis paraphernalia by minors prohibited
Morals
   
130.30   Illinois Obscenity Law
 
   
130.99 Penalty
WEAPONS
§ 130.01 CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   Whoever shall within the village wear or carry concealed about the
person any pistol or revolver (without permit), slingshot, metallic knuckles,
Bowie knife, dirk, razor, or other dangerous or deadly weapon, or whoever shall
display any such weapon in a boisterous or threatening manner shall on
conviction be fined as provided in §
130.99.
   (B)   This section shall not be held to apply to any peace officer while in
the discharge of the officer's duties, nor any person summoned by the officer
to aid in making an arrest or preserving the peace, nor any person permitted by
the State of Illinois to carry a concealed weapon.
(Ord. 31, passed 10-13-13; Am. Ord. 14-22, passed 5-13-14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 FIRING AND DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section FIREARM means any device, by whatever
name known, which is designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the
action of an explosion, expansion of gas or escape of gas; excluding, however:
      (1)   Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or
recommended by the United States Coast Guard or the Interstate Commerce
Commission; or
      (2)   Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges,
explosive rivets, or similar industrial ammunition.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any gun,
pistol, or other firearm within the village; provided, that this section shall
not apply to police officers and special commissioned officers in the proper
performance of their lawful duties.
(Ord. 79-31, passed 8-14-79) Penalty, see §
130.99
CANNABIS
§ 130.15 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in §§
130.16,
130.17, and
130.18, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the
context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended:
   CANNABIS. Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and
any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
plant, its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake,
or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination.
   CANNABIS CONTAINER. The original sealed, traceable container or package used
by a duly licensed or permitted cannabis dispensary for the purpose of
containment of cannabis or cannabis-infused product during transportation.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment, products, or materials intended to be
used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting, or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any substance as defined in Article II of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/201 et seq.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY. Actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession of cannabis, with or without consideration, whether or not there is
an agency relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other
than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in Section 10 of the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act and cannabis paraphernalia
as defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, which are
intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, or the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act or
a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act. It includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing a controlled substance;
      (2)   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      (3)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home
for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
      (4)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
a controlled substance by private persons;
      (5)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cocaine or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in
violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act into the human body
including, where applicable, the following items:   
         (a)   Water pipes;
         (b)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (c)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (d)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (e)   Carburetor pipes;
         (f)   Electric pipes;
         (g)   Air-driven pipes;
         (h)   Chillums;
         (i)   Bongs; and
         (j)   Ice pipes or chillers;
      (6)   Any items whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller,
is for use in violation of this Act.
   KNOWLEDGE. Knows, acts knowingly or with knowledge:
      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his/her conduct, described
by the section defining the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that his/
her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances exist. Knowledge of a
material fact includes awareness of the substantial probability that such fact
exists.
      (2)   The result of his/her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he/she is consciously aware that such result is likely to be
caused by his/her conduct.
      (3)   Knowledge may be inferred from the surrounding circumstances.
   MANUFACTURE. The production, preparation, propagation, compounding,
conversion or processing of cannabis, either directly or indirectly, by
extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of
chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging or repackaging of cannabis or
labeling of its container, except that this term does not include the
preparation, compounding, packaging or labeling of cannabis as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, chemical analysis, or sold and possessed as provided
in the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended, and the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, as amended.
   NITROUS OXIDE (N2O). A colorless flammable gas used as an anesthetic and in
aerosols.
   NITROUS OXIDE CARTRIDGE. Any cartridge containing less than 20 ounces of
compressed nitrous oxide (N>0).
   ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW. Within the sight line with normal visual range of a
person, unassisted by visual aids, from a public street or sidewalk adjacent to
real property, or from within an adjacent property.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership or association, or any other entity.
   POSSESSION. Possession may be either actual or constructive.
      (1)   Actual possession means exercising physical dominion.
      (2)   Constructive possession may be inferred if the defendant has intent
and capacity to maintain control and dominion over the cannabis, drug
paraphernalia or cannabis paraphernalia.
   PRODUCE OR PRODUCTION. Planting, cultivating, tending or harvesting.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be
observed by others. This included, but is not limited to, all parts of
buildings owned in whole or in part, or leased, by the state or a unit of local
government and all areas in a park, recreation area, wildlife area, or
playground owned in whole or in part, leased, or managed by the State or a unit
of local government. The term PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence
unless the private residence is used to provide licensed child care, foster
care, or other similar social service care on the premises.
(Ord. 19-39, passed 12-23-19; Am. Ord. 21-4, passed 2-9-21)
§ 130.16 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   Possession, exceeding state limits. It shall be unlawful for and no
person shall possess more than 30 grams of raw cannabis, cannabis-infused
products containing more than 500 milligrams of THC, or five grams of cannabis
product in concentrated form. It shall further be unlawful for and no person
shall possess cannabis at the following locations:
      (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act;
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
      (3)   In any correctional facility;
      (4)   Within any area of any motor vehicle upon a highway in this state
except in a sealed, odor-proof, child-resistant cannabis container; or
      (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or other similar social service care on the premises.
   (B)   Possession, sale or providing to minors prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for and no person under the age of 21 shall
possess, consume, or use any substance containing cannabis or THC, except as
allowed by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for and no person, after purchasing or
otherwise obtaining any substance containing cannabis or THC shall sell, give
or deliver such substance to a person under the age of 21, except as allowed by
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as amended.
   (C)   Unlawful consumption of cannabis. It shall be unlawful for and no
person shall use cannabis or cannabis-infused products at the following
locations:
      (1)   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act;
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school,
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
      (3)   In any correctional facility;
      (4)   In any motor vehicle;
      (5)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
child care or other similar social service care on the premises;
      (6)   In any public place; or
      (7)   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under 21 years of
age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act; or in any place where smoking is
prohibited under the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
   (D)   Unlawful possession of cannabis plant. It shall be unlawful for any
person to possess a cannabis sativa plant, except as provided by the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, as may be amended. It shall further be unlawful to have
a cannabis sativa plant in ordinary public view.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who pleads guilty or liable or is found guilty or
liable by a court of law or administrative tribunal for a violation of this
section shall be fined as follows:
      (1)   Divisions (A) through (C) shall be punished by a fine of $250.
      (2)   Division (D) shall be punished by a fine of $250 per cannabis
sativa plant.
   (F)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Any person who manufactures, distributes, dispenses, or is in
possession of any controlled substance for research purposes, pursuant to 720
ILCS 550/11, as hereafter amended, shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section.
      (2)   Any person in possession of a compassionate use of medical cannabis
card, as provided by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as
amended, may grow up to five cannabis plants within a secured enclosed
facility.
      (3)   Possession and/or consumption by any person in possession of a
compassionate use of medical cannabis card, as provided by the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as may be amended, where said possession
and/or consumption is authorized by and in accordance with said Act.
      (4)   Any person who is licensed and authorized by the State of Illinois
to dispense, cultivate, grow, infuse or deliver cannabis or substances
containing THC to the extent it is permitted and authorized by state law.
   (G)   Admissibility of cannabis. In a prosecution for a violation of this
section, evidence of cannabis shall only be admitted into evidence based upon:
      (1)   A properly administered field test; or
      (2)   Opinion testimony of a peace officer based on the officer's
training and experience as qualified by the court.
   (H)   Relationship to state laws. Except as provided herein, violations of
this section shall be considered civil in nature and prosecuted as local
ordinance violations. The village may however, in its discretion, refer
violations involving the possession or consumption of cannabis under the
Cannabis Control Act, or other applicable law, to the State's Attorney for
charges pursuant to state law instead of bringing charges pursuant to this
section, but no person shall be charged both pursuant to this chapter and State
law for the same offense. If the law requires a charge involving the possession
or consumption of cannabis to be referred to the state's attorney to be charged
criminally pursuant to state law, the village shall make such a referral and
shall not prosecute the violation as a local ordinance violation.
(Ord. 19-39, passed 12-23-19; Am. Ord. 21-4, passed 2-9-21)
§ 130.17 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Violation for possession of drug paraphernalia. No person shall
knowingly possess any item of drug paraphernalia, as defined in §
130.15, where it is evident the purpose is for unlawfully ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing a controlled substance into the human body, or in
preparing a controlled substance for that use within the corporate limits of
the Village of Chatham. In determining evidence or intent of an unlawful
purpose, the frier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the
controlled substances to the drug paraphernalia or the presence of a controlled
substance on the drug paraphernalia.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who pleads guilty or liable or is found guilty or
liable by a court of law or administrative tribunal shall be punished by a fine
of $250.
   (C)   Forfeiture. DRUG PARAPHERNALIA as defined in §
130.15 seized by police officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a notice
to appear for a violation of this section, shall be forfeited to the village
upon a plea of guilty or liability, a finding of guilt or liable and/or a
disposition of court supervision or probation by a court of law or upon the
individual utilizing any administrative remedy allowed by the Village without
further order of the court. Any other items which may be seized or forfeited
pursuant to 720 ILCS 600/5, may be forfeited in the same manner as described
therein for a violation of this section.
   (D)   Exemptions. This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or
other use of a controlled substance as an incident to lawful sale, use,
research, teaching or chemical analysis and not for sale.
      (2)   Items historically and customarily used in connection with the
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance unless such item has the
presence of a controlled substance. Items exempt under this subsection include,
but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes,
and cigarette rolling papers.
      (3)   Items listed in the definition of DRUG PARAPHERNALIA in §
130.15 if said items are used solely for decorative purposes, when such items
have been rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used for any
illicit purposes prohibited by this chapter.
      (4)   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes
or needles under the Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act, 720 ILCS 635/0.01 et
seq.
   (E)   Relationship to state laws. Except as provided herein, violations of
this section shall be considered civil in nature and prosecuted as local
ordinance violations. The village may however, in its discretion, refer
violations involving the possession or use of drug paraphernalia under the Drug
Paraphernalia Control Act, or other applicable law, to the State's Attorney for
charges instead of bringing charges pursuant to this section, but no person
shall be charged both pursuant to this chapter and State law for the same
offense. If the law requires a charge involving drug paraphernalia to be
referred to the State's Attorney to be charged criminally pursuant to state
law, the village shall make such a referral and shall not prosecute the
violation as a local ordinance violation.
(Ord. 19-39, passed 12-23-19)
§ 130.18 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Violation for possession of cannabis paraphernalia by minors. No
person under the age of 21 shall knowingly possess any item of Cannabis
Paraphernalia where it is evident the purpose is for unlawfully ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis into the human body, or in
preparing cannabis for that use within the corporate limits of the Village of
Chatham. In determining evidence or intent of an unlawful purpose, the trier of
fact may take into consideration the proximity of the controlled substances to
the cannabis paraphernalia or the presence of a controlled substance on the
cannabis paraphernalia.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person who pleads guilty or liable or is found guilty or
liable by a court of law or administrative tribunal shall be punished by a fine
of $250.
   (C)   Forfeiture. CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA as defined in § 130.15, seized by
police officers pursuant to an arrest or issuance of a notice to appear for a
violation of this section, shall be forfeited to the village upon a plea of
guilty or liability, a finding of guilt or liable and/or a disposition of court
supervision or probation by a court of law or upon the individual utilizing any
administrative remedy allowed by the village without further order of the
court. Any other items which may be seized or forfeited pursuant to 720 ILCS
600/5, may be forfeited in the same manner as described therein for a violation
of this section.
(Ord. 19-39, passed 12-23-19)
MORALS
§ 130.30 ILLINOIS OBSCENITY LAW.
   It shall be the duty of the Village Police Force to be alert to complaints
by citizens of possible violations of 720 ILCS 5/11-20 and 11-21 and enforce
the laws of the state regarding such matters, as they may be amended from time
to time.
(Res. 13M85, passed 9-10-85)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is otherwise provided shall be fined not more than $ 500.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
130.01 shall be fined not less than $ 10 and not exceeding $ 100. (Ord. 31,
passed 10-13-31)
   (C)   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of §
130.02 shall be punished by a fine of not less than $ 25 and not exceeding $
500.
(Ord. 79-31, passed 8-14-79)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
152.   DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREA
      
153.   [RESERVED]
      
154.   MOBILE HOMES
      
155.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
156.   SWIMMING POOLS
      
157.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
      
158.   ZONING
      
159.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
      
160.   BILLBOARDS
      
161.   ADULT USES
      
162.   MOBILE SIGNS
      
163.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Adoption of Certain Codes by Reference
   
150.01   Adoption of Building Code
   
150.02   Adoption of One and Two Family Dwelling Code
   
150.03   Adoption of Electrical Code
   
150.04   Adoption of Plumbing Code
   
150.05   Adoption of Life Safety Code
   
150.06   Adoption of Property Maintenance Code
   
150.07   Maintenance of records by Clerk
   
150.08   Exceptions to adoption by reference
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.20   Resolution of conflicts among codes
   
150.21   Creation of offices to enforce code
   
150.22   Building Code Board of Appeals
   
150.23   Grievance procedures
   
150.24   Electrical Commission
   
150.25   Inspection and enforcement
   
150.26   Permit fees
   
150.27   Applications for permit
   
150.28   Inspections of new construction
   
150.29   Registration of contractors
   
150.30   Stop work orders
   
150.31   [Repealed]
   
150.32   Grandfather clause
   
150.33   Burning of construction waste prohibited
Erosion Control
   
150.45   Purpose
   
150.46   Jurisdiction
   
150.47   Definitions
   
150.48   Applicability
   
150.49   Permit application
   
150.50   Fees
   
150.51   Permits
   
150.52   Conditions of permit
   
150.53   Erosion control plan completion notice
   
150.54   Erosion control plan requirements
   
150.55   Maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures
   
150.56   Inspection
   
150.57   Notice of violation
   
150.58   Enforcement
 
   
150.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Current codes adopted by reference with additions, insertions and
changes
   
Appendix B:   Fees
ADOPTION OF CERTAIN CODES BY REFERENCE
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   Pursuant to Section 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the edition of the
International Building Code specified in and as amended by Appendix A hereto,
as published by the International Code Council (“the IBC”), is hereby adopted
as the Building Code of the village. The IBC shall control all matters
concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition,
use, location, occupancy, and maintenance of all buildings and structures,
other than one- and two-family dwellings, and shall apply to existing or
proposed building and structures, except if such matters are otherwise provided
for in this chapter or in other ordinances or statutes or rules or regulations
of the village.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 24-22,
passed 6-25-24)
§ 150.02 ADOPTION OF ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING CODE.
   Pursuant to Section 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the edition of the
International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwelling Code, published
by the International Code Council (the “IRC”), specified in and as amended by
Appendix A hereto, is hereby adopted by reference as the One and Two Family
Dwelling Code of the village. The IRC shall control all matters concerning
construction, prefabrication, alteration, repair, use, occupancy, and
maintenance of detached one or two family dwellings and one family townhouses
not more than three stories in height, and their accessory structures.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 24-22,
passed 6-25-24)
§ 150.03 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   Pursuant to Section 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the edition of the
National Electrical Code, specified in and as amended by Appendix A hereto,
published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by
reference as the Electric Code of the village. The National Electric Code shall
control all matters concerning all electrical installations in the village
other than the village’s retail electric distribution system and any electric
system subject to the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94)
§ 150.04 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   Pursuant to Section 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the edition of the
Illinois Plumbing Code specified in and as amended by Appendix A hereto,
published by the Illinois Department of Public Health and promulgated at 77
III. Admin. Code. Section 890, et seq., is hereby adopted by reference as the
Village Plumbing Code. This Plumbing Code shall control all matters concerning
the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, use, location and
maintenance of all plumbing in all buildings and structures.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94)
§ 150.05 ADOPTION OF LIFE SAFETY CODE.
   Pursuant to Section 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the edition of the
NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, specified in and as amended by Appendix A hereto,
published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted by
reference as the Life Safety Code of the village. The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code
shall apply to new construction and to existing buildings as set forth therein.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94)
§ 150.06 ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   Pursuant to Section 1-3-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code, specified in and as amended by
Appendix A hereto, published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the village. This Property
Maintenance Code shall apply to all existing and future structures in the
village.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 14-29,
passed 5-27-14; Am. Ord. 24-22, passed 6-25-24)
§ 150.07 MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CLERK.
   The Village Clerk shall place on file three copies of each of the Codes
which have been adopted by reference in §§
150.01 through
150.06 and shall keep such copies in the office of the Clerk and shall make
such Codes available for public use, inspection and examination.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94)
§ 150.08 EXCEPTIONS TO ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The following sections of the above Codes are not adopted by reference and
shall be of no force and effect:
   (A)   Any provision of the above Codes pertaining to penalties for violation
thereof.
   (B)   Any section of the above Codes pertaining to inspection fees.
   (C)   Any section of the above Codes pertaining to appeals of decisions of
any building, plumbing or electrical inspector.
   (D)   Any provision of any of the above Codes, other than the Illinois
Plumbing Code, relating to plumbing. It is the intent of this chapter that the
State of Illinois Plumbing Code shall control all matters relating to plumbing.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.20 RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS AMONG CODES.
   In the event of conflicts among the Codes adopted pursuant to §§
150.01 through
150.06, or among such Codes and this chapter, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over the provisions of
any Code.
   (B)   The Illinois Plumbing Code shall prevail over the provisions of any
other Code.
   (C)   The IRC shall prevail over the IBC with respect to one- and two-family
dwellings.
   (D)   In the event of any other conflict, the most stringent requirement
shall apply.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04)
§ 150.21 CREATION OF OFFICES TO ENFORCE CODE.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Building Code Administrator. The
Building Code Administrator shall have the powers and duties of the Code
Official as defined in the codes adopted in this chapter, and may have other
duties prescribed by the Village Board not related to his duties as Building
Code Administrator. The Building Code Administrator shall also be the head of
the Electrical Inspection Department of the village, as that term is used is
Section 11-37-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-37-2). The
Building Code Administrator shall supervise all building, electric, plumbing
and life safety inspectors and, where no separate inspectors are appointed and
where permitted by statute, may be a building, electrical, plumbing or life
safety inspector. The Building Code Administrator shall be an officer of the
village appointed by the Village President, with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, for an indefinite term not to exceed the term of office of
the Village President who appointed him or her.
   (B)   In addition to duties set forth in division (A), the Building Code
Administrator shall identify, and subject to the hourly rate limitation
established in Appendix B of this chapter, shall enter into contracts with one
or more persons to serve in the capacity of:
      (1)   Building Inspector, to perform all inspection work other than
plumbing and electrical. Any Building Inspector so contracted shall have
demonstrated competence in application of Building Codes adopted herein, and
may have competence in application of the Plumbing Code and the Electrical
Code.
      (2)   Electrical Inspector, to perform for all electrical inspections.
Any Electrical Inspector shall have demonstrated competence in interpreting the
Electrical Code adopted herein.
      (3)   Plumbing Inspector, to perform all plumbing inspections required by
the Plumbing Code adopted herein. A Plumbing Inspector shall be a licensed
plumber under the laws of the State of Illinois.
      (4)   Life Safety Inspector, to aid in enforcement of the Life Safety
Code. Any such inspector shall have demonstrated competence in life safety
inspections.
   (C)   The Building, Electrical, Plumbing, and Life Safety Inspectors shall
be independent contractors of the village.
   (D)   The Building, Electrical, Plumbing, and Life Safety Inspectors must be
certified and/or licensed to perform such inspections.
   (E)   The Building, Electrical, Plumbing, and Life Safety Inspectors must
maintain liability insurance with a minimum of $2.000,000 of liability
coverage.
   (F)   Contracts entered into between the Building Code Administrator (on
behalf of the village) and the inspectors shall be in writing and be limited to
a maximum term of one year, subject to renewal upon written consent by both
parties. The Building Code Administrator shall have the authority to choose to
renew the contract or to choose to let it expire; however, the Board of
Trustees shall have the authority to terminate any such contract prior to its
termination date.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 14-06,
passed 1–28-14; Am. Ord. 15-43, passed 10-27-15)
§ 150.22 BUILDING CODE BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   General. The provisions of this section are inconsistent in some
respects with Section 112 of the IBC and are intended to replace and prevail
over Section 124 of the IBC.
   (B)   Application for Appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal to
the Board of Appeals from any decision of the Building Code Administrator
refusing to grant a modification to the provisions of any Code adopted pursuant
to this chapter covering the manner of construction or materials to be used in
the erection, alteration, or repair of a building or structure, or electrical,
plumbing, mechanical or other equipment therein, or the refusal to grant a
building permit or a certificate of use and occupancy, or the improper issuance
of a stop work order. An application for appeal shall be based upon the claim
that the true intent of the Codes adopted hereby or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, that the provisions of the Codes
adopted hereby do not fully apply, or an equivalent form of construction can be
used.
   (C)   Membership of the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall consist
of five members appointed by the president who shall serve for five years or
until a successor has been appointed.
   (D)   Qualifications of Board members.
      (1)   One member of the Board shall be a member of the Fire Department of
the Chatham Fire Protection District. Each other member shall be a resident of
the village and a licensed professional engineer or architect, or a building or
superintendent of building construction or an electrical or plumbing contractor
with at least five years experience in responsible charge of work.
      (2)   Not more than two members shall be from the same profession or
occupation, and at least one professional engineer shall be a structural or
civil engineer with architectural or engineering experience. If the president
cannot find persons with these qualifications willing to serve, the president
may appoint some other persons to the Board.
   (E)   Alternate Members. The Village President, with the advice and consent
of the Board of Trustees, shall appoint two alternate members who shall be
called by the Board Chairman to hear appeals during the absence or
disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall possess the
qualifications required for Board membership and shall be appointed for five
years or until a successor has been appointed.
   (F)   Chairman. The Board shall select one of its members to serve as
chairman. A member of the Board shall not hear an appeal in which that member
has any personal, professional or financial interest.
   (G)   Secretary. The Village President shall designate a person, who may be
the Deputy Clerk of the village, to serve as secretary to the Board. The
secretary shall keep a journal and shall file a record of all proceedings with
the Village Clerk.
   (H)   Compensation. Members of the Board shall receive no compensation for
service on the Board, but are entitled to the actual expenses in accordance
with village reimbursement policies.
   (I)   Notice of meetings. The Board of Appeals shall meet upon notice from
the chairman, within ten days of the filing of an appeal.
   (J)   Open meetings. All hearings before the Board, and all proceedings of
the Board, shall be open to the public. The Board shall comply with state
statutes and village ordinances pertaining to open meetings. Its journal and
its records shall be public documents subject to disclosure under state
statutes and village ordinances pertaining to freedom of information. At any
hearing before the Board, the appellant, the appellant’s representative, the
Code Administrator, and any person whose interests are affected, shall be given
an opportunity to be heard. The chairman shall have the discretion to determine
whether a person seeking to be heard is a person whose interests are affected
by the appeal.
   (K)   Procedure of the Board. The Board shall adopt and make available to
the public through the secretary, procedures under which a hearing shall be
conducted. The procedure shall not require compliance with strict rules of
evidence but shall mandate that only relevant information be received. The
procedure shall require that no Board member shall be qualified to hear any
case in which he or she has a financial interest or in which he or she is
related by blood or marriage to the appellant.
   (L)   Postponed hearing. When five members are not present to hear an
appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the
right to request postponement of the hearing.
   (M)   Board decision. The Board may modify or reverse the decision of the
Building Code Administrator only by a concurring vote of at least three
members. The decision of the Board shall be in writing. Certified copies of the
decision shall be furnished to the appellant and the Code Administrator. The
Code Administrator shall take immediate action in accordance with the decision.
   (N)   Administrative review. Decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be
reviewable by the Circuit Court of the Seventh Judicial Circuit, Sangamon
County, Illinois, in accordance with provisions of the Illinois Code of Civil
Procedure relating to administrative review.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04)
§ 150.23 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES.
   In lieu of filing an appeal of an adverse determination by the Building Code
Administrator, a person adversely affected thereby may request within three
business days of the adverse decision an informal grievance conference with a
panel consisting of the Building Code Administrator, Director of Utilities and
Administration, and the chairman of the committee of the Village Board with
jurisdiction over planning, zoning and building. The grievance panel shall have
no authority to force the Building Code Administrator to change a decision, but
shall meet with the aggrieved party and the aggrieved party’s representative in
an effort to resolve the differences between the Building Code Administrator
and the aggrieved party in a quick and expeditious fashion. The grievance panel
shall use best efforts to meet within three business days of the request by the
aggrieved party. The Building Code Administrator shall, within one business day
of the meeting of the grievance board, confirm or modify the decision from
which the grievance has been taken. In the event the aggrieved party avails
himself of the grievance procedures, the time to appeal the decision of the
Building Code Administrator shall run from the date the Administrator confirms
or modifies his decision following the meeting of the grievance panel.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04)
§ 150.24 ELECTRICAL COMMISSION.
   (A)   In accordance with Section 11-37-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, the
village hereby establishes an Electrical Commission consisting of six members
appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. The Building Code Administrator shall be a member of and the
Chairperson of the Commission. Of the other five members, one shall be a
registered professional engineer, one an electrical contractor, one a
journeyman electrician, one a representative of an inspection bureau maintained
by the Fire Underwriters, and one representative of an electricity supply
company. All members of the Electrical Commission shall be residents of the
village; if there is no person residing in the village who is qualified under
any one of these descriptions and willing to serve, the Village President may
appoint some other person to fill the position. Members shall serve for three-
year terms.
   (B)   The Electrical Commission shall:
      (1)   Recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the
installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment designed to meet the
necessities and conditions of the village.
      (2)   Recommend reasonable rules and regulations governing the issuance
of permits by the Electrical Inspection Department.
      (3)   Recommend reasonable fees to be paid for the inspection by the
Inspection Department of all electrical equipment installed or altered within
village limits.
      (4)   Review the National Electric Code and make recommendations to the
Village Board as to which, if any, of the provisions of the National Electric
Code shall be altered with respect to construction in the village.
      (5)   Meet at least once per calendar year to consider the matters set
forth in division (B)(1) through (4) of this section.
   (C)   No electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except upon a
permit issued by the Building Code Administrator as head of the Electric
Inspection Department.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94)
§ 150.25 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No structure, fence, swimming pool or satellite dish in the village
shall be constructed, enlarged, altered or repaired without a permit being
issued by the Building Code Administrator. Upon application and approval, the
Building Code Administrator shall issue a permit. All work performed pursuant
to any permit issued hereunder shall meet the requirements for workmanship,
methods and materials as set forth in the Codes adopted in this chapter and all
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable ordinances of the
village. The permit shall be posted on the premises at the time the work is
commenced. Inspection shall be performed pursuant to §
150.28.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, a building permit shall not be required for
the following:
      (1)   Cases, counters and partitions not over five feet high;
      (2)   Painting, papering, window replacement without removing frames, and
similar finish work;
      (3)   Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery;
      (4)   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall when projecting out
not more than 54 inches;
      (5)   Alterations and remodeling, the cost of which is less than $1,000
and does not constitute or affect corridors, exit ways, and load-bearing
members of those structures;
      (6)   Replacing shingles and applying siding.
   (C)   Unless otherwise exempted by this chapter, separate plumbing,
electrical, building and mechanical permits shall be required for the above-
exempted items.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04)
§ 150.26 PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees shall be as determined from time to time by the Board of
Trustees.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94)
§ 150.27 APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT.
   Applications for permits other than for one- and two-family dwellings shall
be governed by Section 105 of the IBC, which requires, among other things,
submission of the plans and engineering details of the work. Applications for
permits for one- and two-family dwellings shall be governed by Section R-105 of
the IRC. The Building Code Administrator is authorized in his or her discretion
to utilize the services of the village engineer or of the services of the
International Code Council in connection with his or her review of the plans.
Plan review fees are set forth in Appendix B of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04)
§ 150.28 INSPECTIONS OF NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Inspections of the work are governed by Section 109 of the IBC and
Section R-109 of the IRC. Section 109.3 of the IBC requires the Building Code
Administrator to “conduct inspections from time to time during and upon
completion of the work for which a permit has been issued.” Section R-109 of
the IRC calls for “necessary inspections.” The village shall conduct
inspections pursuant to IRC and IBC, and shall also inspect electric service
installations, during the following phases of the work:
      (1)   Site or stakeout;
      (2)   Footing;
      (3)   Framing;
      (4)   Rough-in (mechanical, electrical and plumbing);
      (5)   Fireplace (if applicable);
      (6)   Electric meter base and outdoor electrical equipment installation
inspection; and
      (7)   Final.
   (B)   The Building Code Administrator shall respond or shall ensure that his
or her inspectors respond to inspection requests made by contractors as follows
– the response time for inspection of one- and two-family dwelling units shall
be two business days after notification, with the exception of footing
inspections, which shall be four hours after notification, so long as
notification for a footing inspection is given before 1:00 p.m. on any business
day. Inspections for all other structures shall be within three business days
after notification. In no event shall the Building Code Administrator or
building, plumbing or electrical inspectors be required to make inspections on
Saturdays and Sundays, or after business hours, although they may do so in
their discretion and upon payment by the contractor or owner of a $50 surcharge
to the village. Plumbing and electrical inspections shall be made within two
business days of notification for one- and two-family dwellings, and three
business days for other structures.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above, only a site or stakeout inspection shall be
required for the following:
      (1)   One story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses, and similar uses, provided the projected roof area does not
exceed 120 square feet;
      (2)   Fences not over six feet high;
      (3)   Retaining walls which are not over four feet in height, measured
from the top of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a
surcharge or impounding flammable liquids;
      (4)   Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons and the ration of height to diameter or width does not
exceed 1:2.
      (5)   Stoops, 5 feet x 5 feet or less; walks, ramps, less than 20 feet
long; and driveways not more than 30 inches above grade and not over any
basement or story below.
      (6)   Pre-fabricated swimming pools in which the pool walls are entirely
above the adjacent grade and if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons.
   (D)   Final inspection certificates.
      (1)   Upon successful completion of a final inspection in accordance with
division (A)(7) of this section, the Building Code Administrator shall issue a
final inspection certificate.
      (2)   No Person shall occupy new construction prior to the issuance of a
final inspection certificate unless the Building Code Administrator: has made
express findings: (i) that the deficiencies noted in the final inspection do
not present a safety hazard, (ii) that the contractor or owner has made best
efforts to remedy the deficiencies but cannot promptly make repairs due to
unavailability of materials or special tools; and (iii) the contractor or owner
has scheduled a firm date for re-inspection not more than 60 days after the
initial final inspection. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building
permit to ensure that this provision is complied with.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their
duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for
inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and
means for inspections of such work that are required by this Code.
      (4)   The Building Administrator may withhold action on any new building
permit application submitted by any contractor or owner if the Building Code
Administrator determines that the contractor or owner has completed an earlier
construction job but (i) has failed to apply for a final inspection certificate
with respect to such other job or (ii) the premises have been occupied in
violation of division (D)(2) of this section.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 13-01,
passed 1-8-13; Am. Ord. 14-43, passed 8-26-14; Am. Ord. 16-34, passed 6-28-16)
§ 150.29 REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   All building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical and fire suppression
contractors performing work in their respective trades in the village must be
registered with the village, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Contractors registered with another municipality in the state are
exempt upon making the proper showing as set forth in division (B) of this
section.
      (2)   Homeowners who are performing work on their own dwellings.
   (B)   Persons registering as contractors, having a registration renewed, or
seeking an exemption from registration because of a registration in another
municipality shall fill out an application form furnished by the Building Code
Administrator, supply proof of contractors’ general liability and workers
compensation insurance, supply, if applicable, proof of registration in another
municipality, and pay the Village Treasurer an application fee of $ 20. Every
contractor who has received a registration or exemption shall be entitled to
renewal thereof upon making application to the Building Code Administrator and
paying the fee. All registrations and exemptions shall expire on the last day
of December of each year; renewals may be made at any time between November 1
and the last day of December in any year.
   (C)   Any contractor may have his, her or its registration suspended or
revoked by the Building Code Administrator for any misrepresentation in
obtaining the registration, for failure to comply with the provisions of the
Building Code, or for failure to comply with village ordinances pertaining to
open burning of construction wastes. A notice of revocation shall be served
personally or by certified mail upon the holder. The notice shall state the
time and place of a hearing before the Building Code Board of Appeals and the
reason for the contemplated suspension or revocation. The notice shall advise
the holder of his, her or its rights to appear at the hearing in person, or in
the case of a corporation, by its agent, and to be represented by counsel. The
notice shall be served upon the holder at least 15 days prior to the hearing
before the Building Code Board of Appeals. Upon finding of due cause, the
Building Code Board of Appeals may suspend or revoke the registration. A person
whose registration has been revoked may not reapply for a new registration
within one year after the revocation. Thereafter, an application to be
registered shall be processed in the same manner as an original application.
The suspension or revocation of a registration shall entitle the holder to a
refund of any part of the fee which has been paid.
   (D)   If the law is changed to allow the village to require registration of
contractors who are registered in other municipalities, this chapter shall be
deemed so modified.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 95-10, passed 3-14-95) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.30 STOP WORK ORDERS.
   Upon notice from the Building Code Administrator that work on any building
or structure or any electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire prevention work is
being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of the Codes adopted in this
chapter or in any unsafe and dangerous manner, or in violation of village
ordinances prohibiting open burning of construction waste, such work shall be
immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in writing, shall be given to
the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person
doing the work; it shall state the conditions under which work will be
permitted to resume. If the stop work order is as a result of open burning of
construction waste, such conditions shall include provisions satisfactory to
the Building Code Administrator for proper future disposal of construction
waste. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable
to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during on or which the violation occurs or
continues. In addition to this penalty, the village may utilize other statutory
or common law remedies, including but not limited to, injunctive, preliminary
injunctive and temporary restraining order relief, deemed appropriate by a
court of law.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 95-10, passed 3-14-95)
§ 150.31 [REPEALED].
§ 150.32 GRANDFATHER CLAUSE.
   (A)   No existing building or structure not in compliance with any of the
Codes adopted herein as of the effective date of this chapter or of any
amendment hereto, and no building, the foundation of which has been laid as of
the effective date of this chapter or any amendment hereto which is completed
within six months of the effective date of this chapter or the amendment, shall
be deemed to be in violation of this chapter by reason of continuation of the
non-complying condition; nor is any owner required to bring any such structure
into compliance with any Code adopted hereunder, except as stated in divisions
(B) through (G) below.
   (B)   Existing structures shall be brought into compliance with the Life
Safety Code Chapters pertaining to existing structures within 90 days of the
effective date of this chapter.
   (C)   Existing structures shall be brought into compliance with the
International Property Maintenance Code within 90 days of the effective date of
this chapter.
   (D)   As Exhibit A is amended from time to time, existing structures shall
be brought into compliance with any amendments of the Life Safety Code
pertaining to existing structures and with the International Property
Maintenance Code and the Plumbing Code amendments pertaining to backflow and
back siphonage, within 90 days of the effective date of the amendments.
   (E)   Where the owner of an existing structures believes that compliance
with the Life Safety Code or Property Maintenance Code cannot be accomplished
by the effective date of this chapter or the effective date of any amended
Exhibit A, such owner may, upon a showing of hardship to the Building Code
Administrator, obtain an extension of time of up to 90 days to comply.
   (F)   Where the owner of an existing structure believes it will be
impossible or would cause economic hardship to comply with the Life Safety Code
or the Property Maintenance Code, such owner may apply to the Building Code
Board of Appeals for a variance. Such a variance shall be granted if and only
if the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The requested variance will not endanger the life, health or safety
of any person;
      (2)   The requested variance meets the spirit of the Codes adopted
herein; and
      (3)   The requested variance does not violate regulations of the Illinois
State Fire Marshal (NFPA 101, current edition).
   (G)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a building was in violation of this
chapter or any of the Codes adopted pursuant to chapter or any amendment, or in
violation of any other village ordinance pertaining to building, zoning or
utilities that were in effect as of the effective date of this chapter or the
amendment, and the Codes adopted herein are no more stringent than the prior
ordinances with respect to the condition which violated the prior ordinance or
code, then the owner of the building is not entitled to the grandfather
provisions of division (A).
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94; Am. Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04)
§ 150.33 BURNING OF CONSTRUCTION WASTE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The open burning of construction waste is prohibited within the
village and is hereby declared a nuisance.
   (B)   Persons convicted of violating division (A) of this section shall be
liable to a fine of $500. Each fire, and each day or portion thereof a fire
continues, shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Persons cited by the Village Police Department for violating division
(A) of this section may, at the sole discretion of the Village Board or
designated committee thereof, compromise the citation by paying, at least five
days before a court date, the sum of $250 to the village and providing
reasonable evidence to the Building Code Administrator that satisfactory
arrangements have been made for future disposal of construction waste from the
construction site.
(Ord. 95-10, passed 3-14-95)
EROSION CONTROL
§ 150.45 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Findings. The village finds that during construction, soil is highly
vulnerable to erosion and that runoff from construction sites can carry a
significant amount of sediment and other pollutants to the waters, rights-of-
way and adjoining properties of the state, county and this village.
   (B)   Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to
promote and protect the property, health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of Chatham and associated downstream tributaries by:
      (1)   Managing and controlling the amount of pollutants in storm water
discharges, soil erosion, sediment discharge, and mud and dirt deposits on
public roadways caused by or as a result of construction activities, land
disturbing activities or floodplain development activities;
      (2)   Ensuring that adequate drainage, storm water management and soil
conservation measures are utilized at the site of any construction activity;
      (3)   Protecting storm water, ground water, water bodies, watercourses,
and wetlands pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act and the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit granted to the
Village of Chatham for discharges from small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems (MS4);
      (4)   Enhancing and preserving the quality and value of our resources by
minimizing erosion and sedimentation from construction sites.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.46 JURISDICTION.
   These sections of the village's Building Regulations apply to land
development and land disturbing activities on lands within the corporate
boundaries of the village and within one and one- half miles of said corporate
boundaries.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.47 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL LAND USE. Use of land for planting, growing, cultivating, and
harvesting of crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding
of livestock.
   APPLICANT. Builder or builder's designee.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP). Those practices as described in the most
current edition of the "Illinois Urban Manual" to control erosion and
sedimentation.
   CLEARING. Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any land development, land disturbing or floodplain
development activity.
   CONTROL MEASURE. A practice or combination of practices to control erosion
and sedimentation pollution.
   DRAINAGE WAY. Any natural or artificial watercourse, storm sewer, trench,
channel, ditch, swale or similar depression into which surface water flows.
   EMERGENCY ACTIVITY. Any activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or natural resources.
   EROSION. The detachment and movement of soil, sediment or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice, gravity and mechanical/construction activities.
   EROSION CONTROL PLAN. A written description and drawing of the number,
location, and size of BMPs and other pertinent information designed to meet the
requirements of this chapter submitted by the applicant for review and
approval.
   FINAL INSPECTION CERTIFICATE. A document issued by the Village of Chatham's
Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, which states that all final
inspections of a residential building have been completed.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. The occurrence of all of the following: (1) all land
disturbing activities at the site have been completed; (2) no areas of active
erosion are evident; (3) all temporary erosion control measures are removed;
(4) the plan of final site conditions has been met; and (5) a permanent
perennial vegetative cover with a uniform density of 75% of the cover for the
area has been established or equivalent permanent stabilization measures have
been employed.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. An activity in a special flood hazard area
as defined in the Village of Chatham Code of Ordinances, including, but not
limited to, construction, filling and excavating.
   ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL. The manual prepared by the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service for the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency as
technical reference for developers, planners, engineers, government officials
and others involved in land use planning, building site development, and
natural resource conservation in rural and urban communities and developing
areas.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any earth moving activity that results in the
stripping of at least 25% of the permanent perennial vegetative cover density
for the area.
   PERMITTEE. The applicant in whose name a valid erosion control permit is
duly issued pursuant to this chapter and any agents, employees, or others
acting under the direction of the applicant.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person(s) or legal entity that holds title to the
underlying real estate.
   RUNOFF. The rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water or ground water flowing
over the ground surface.
   SITE. The entire area included in the legal description of the land upon
which the disturbing or land development activity is proposed.
   STOP WORK ORDER. An order issued by the Code Enforcement Officer or his or
her designee when work is being performed without an erosion control permit or
when a notice of violation of corrective action has not been completed in the
specified time.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Chatham, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The consulting engineer assigned to the village.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.48 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to the following types of land development or
land disturbance activities. The following activities require an erosion
control permit:
      (1)   Any land disturbing activity affecting a surface of 2,500 square
feet or more, but less than one acre, including building, driveways and other
paved surfaces.
      (2)   Excavation and/or filling 100 cubic yards or more of ground, sand,
or other excavation or fill material.
      (3)   Any land disturbing activity occurring on any size of land area for
which a flood development permit is required.
      (4)   Street, highway, road or bridge construction, enlargement,
relocation or reconstruction.
      (5)   Laying, repairing, replacing or enlarging an underground pipe,
wire, cable, or facility for a distance of 300 feet or more.
      (6)   Disturbing any size land area on slopes greater than 12% grade.
      (7)   Other activities that pose a serious erosion or water pollution
risk as determined by the village's Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply, and no erosion control permit is
required for the following activities:
      (1)   Agricultural land use.
      (2)   Gardening.
      (3)   Landscaping modifications except as part of a project for which a
permit is required.
      (4)   Harvesting of trees.
      (5)   A land disturbing activity affecting less than 2,500 square feet.
      (6)   Excavation or filling of less than 100 cubic yards.
      (7)   Underground pipe and cable work for a distance of less than 300
continuous feet.
      (8)   Emergency activities.
      (9)   Village construction activities affecting less than 2,500 square
feet.
      (10)   Land disturbing activities greater than one acre in size.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.49 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Areas under one acre. Before acquiring a building permit the applicant
must submit an erosion control plan. The plan should be a drawing or sketch of
the erosion control best management practices (BMPs) on the available form as
required by this chapter, and pay the permit fee to the village. The erosion
control general guidelines are listed in "Attachment A" of Ord. 17-44, passed
9-12-17. Within one week of receipt, the Village of Chatham Code Enforcement
Officer, shall approve the plan, or notify the applicant by phone, email or
mail, the deficiencies that must be corrected concerning the erosion control
plan. The review time will be one week for each re-submittal until such time
the erosion control plan is approved. A building permit shall not be issued
until such time that the erosion control plan is approved.
   (B)   Areas one acre or more. Owners and developers of one acre or more of
real property within the village limits, of which land disturbing activities
are anticipated, are required to apply for and receive the required NPDES
permit through the IEPA. This is covered specifically within the Village of
Chatham's Land Subdivision Ordinance book (revised 2016), under §
155.094 Erosion and Sediment Control and §
155.096 Surface Water Drainage.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.50 FEES.
   Upon submittal of the erosion control plan (sketch/drawing) for one acre or
less, a fee of $75 must be paid to the village. This fee may be modified from
time to time by approval of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.51 PERMITS.
   The erosion control plan, once it is improved, will be valid for the
entirety of the construction of said lot and may be revoked and/or suspended
for failure to comply with the Village Building Code Ch. 150 as amended.
Revocation and suspension shall be in accordance with the Village Code of
Ordinances, as amended.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.52 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   All erosion control plans require the permittee to:
   (A)   Provide erosion control plans for disturbance areas less than one
acre; the plans may be hand-sketched, but must be legible.
   (B)   Install all erosion control measures as identified in the erosion
control plan in proper sequence.
   (C)   Install and stabilize all erosion control measures before beginning
any clearing, land development or land disturbing activities.
   (D)   Submit documentation of any modifications to the erosion control plan
to the Code Enforcement Officer.
   (E)   Allow for a visual inspection by the village of in place perimeter
BMPs. This will take place concurrently with the lot stake out inspection. The
BMP requirements are listed in "Attachment A" of Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17.
   (F)   Immediately repair any damaged or deficient erosion control measures.
   (G)   Inspect and complete a record of the site conditions and the
constructed erosion and sediment control measures at least once a week, and
after each rain event of one-half inch or more within a 24-hour period. Records
of inspections and repairs shall be kept on site by the permittee and shall be
provided for inspection immediately upon request by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Village Engineer or their designees.
   (H)   Allow the Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her designees, to enter
the site for the purpose of inspecting compliance with the erosion control plan
or directing the permittee to perform any work necessary to bring the site into
compliance with the approved erosion control plan.
   (I)   Maintain a copy of the erosion control plan on site, which is
accessible to the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designees.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.53 EROSION CONTROL PLAN COMPLETION NOTICE.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer or designee shall issue an erosion
control completion notice in accordance with the following procedures when
disturbed areas have achieved final stabilization.
   (B)   The permittee or landowner shall notify the Code Enforcement Officer
or designee, in writing, that construction and final stabilization is complete.
The written notification shall request an inspection. Within two working days,
weather permitting, the Code Enforcement Officer or designee, shall inspect the
site to determine if all of the conditions of the erosion control plan have
been met and if final stabilization is complete. If the site is satisfactory,
an erosion control plan completion notice shall be issued. If conditions are
not satisfactory, the inspector shall list the deficiencies and the required
corrective action. Once corrective actions have been completed, the permittee
shall request, in writing, another inspection. Within two working days, weather
permitting, the site shall be inspected and if the deficiencies are corrected
satisfactorily an erosion control plan completion notice shall be issued. If
the erosion control measures have been implemented correctly throughout the
project, and the weather conditions associated with the time of year prevent
establishment of final stabilization, a temporary Final Inspection Certificate
may be issued.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.54 EROSION CONTROL PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Erosion control plans for areas less than one acre. The erosion
control plan does not require signature and seal of a licensed design
professional. The erosion control plan shall include the following items:
      (1)   Site location and boundary, including dimensions.
      (2)   Location of existing features, including but not limited to,
waterways, drainage swales, roadside ditches, curb and gutter or edge of
pavement and sanitary and storm sewer structures.
      (3)   Location of proposed structures.
      (4)   Spot elevations, existing and proposed, at a minimum, for the
following: edge of pavement or curb and gutter, property corners, slope changes
and finished floor elevation of structures.
      (5)   Location and dimensions of erosion control measures, including but
not limited to, perimeter erosion control barrier, inlet protection, stabilized
construction entrance and concrete washout/containment area.
      (6)   Name, address and phone number of the permittee.
   (B)   General criteria, standards and specifications. All erosion control
measures required as part of any erosion control plan shall comply with the
design criteria, standards and specifications identified in the most recent
addition of the Natural Resources Conservation Service Illinois Urban Manual
and most recent edition of Illinois Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications of Road and Bridge Construction. The following standards and
design elements are required and should be addressed in all erosion control
plans:
      (1)   Erosion control sequence plan. All land disturbance activities
including temporary erosion control best management practices, permanent
vegetative cover and the various stages or phases of earth disturbance and
construction shall follow a chronological sequence as shown on the erosion
control plan.
      (2)   Phasing plan. A phasing plan of land development shall be required
for all sites. The area and schedule for each phase shall be shown.
      (3)   Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building
materials (including garbage, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, or
hazardous materials) shall be disposed of following all federal, state, and
local regulations.
      (4)   Stabilized construction entrance. Each site shall have a stabilized
construction entrance installed to prevent sediment from being tracked onto
public and private roadways.
      (5)   Culvert and inlet protection. All on site storm culverts and
inlets, and the impacted off-site downstream culverts and inlets shall be
protected with appropriate best management practices.
      (6)   Runoff control. Runoff from the entire disturbed area from the site
shall be controlled by all appropriate best management practices. If a channel
or area of concentrated runoff passes through or adjacent to the site, silt
fences shall be placed along the channel edges. Attention shall be given to the
land area and slopes to be controlled before choosing an appropriate best
management practices.
      (7)   Sediment cleanup. All off-site sediment deposits occurring as a
result of land disturbing activities shall be cleaned up by the applicant
before the end of each work day. Flushing may not be used as a cleanup method.
      (8)   Disturbance timing. Removal of existing vegetation shall be at a
minimum. Existing vegetation shall be maintained until removal is necessary
based upon each phase of construction. Appropriate best management practices
shall be constructed prior to any land disturbance. Permanent vegetation shall
be established as soon as practical after each phase of work on the site.
      (9)   Soil and material storage pile(s). Soil and material storage pile
(s) containing more than 10 cubic yards of material shall not be located in a
100-year floodplain and must be at least 25 feet from a roadway ditch or
drainage channel. If the storage pile(s) remain(s) for 14 or more calendar
days, the perimeter shall be stabilized utilizing appropriate best management
practices. At no time should soil or material piles block sight lines at
roadway intersections or sidewalks, or run out into street(s), ditch(es) or
adjacent property(s).
      (10)   Channelized and sheet flow drainage. Channelized and sheet flow
runoff from adjacent areas passing through the site shall be diverted around
disturbed areas, if practical, and the channel shall be protected. Diverted
runoff shall be conveyed in a manner that will not erode the conveyance and
receiving channels. If diversion of channelized flow and/or sheet flow is
impractical, the flow shall be controlled through appropriate best management
practices to prevent erosion and carrying off of sediment and pollutants.
      (11)   Steep slope conditions. Sites with slopes of 12% or more shall
require the use of additional best management practices, i.e., erosion blanket
(s)/pipe drain(s).
      (12)   Site de-watering. Water pumped from the site shall flow to a
temporary sediment basin or other appropriate control designed for the highest
de-water pumping rate to prevent sediment from leaving the sight. Water shall
not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion of the site or receiving
channels, nor should silt-laden water be pumped off-site.
      (13)   Final stabilization. The methods of final stabilization shall be
identified. If seeding is to be used, the type of seed, rates and amount of
seed shall be provided.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.55 MAINTENANCE OF EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
requirements of these sections shall be maintained by the applicant during the
period of land disturbance and land development activities in accordance with
the standards of the Illinois Urban Manual in a satisfactory manner to ensure
adequate performance of the erosion and sediment control measures until an
erosion control plan completion notice is issued.
   (B)   The permittee shall immediately repair any sedimentation or erosion
damage to property and drainage ways adjacent to the site resulting from land
development and land disturbance activities.
   (C)   The permittee shall maintain and protect all on-site and off-site
storm water drainage systems, drainage ways, floodplain and drainage easements
as identified on the erosion control plan.
   (D)   The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining all erosion
and sediment control measures necessary to meet the requirements of these
sections.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.56 INSPECTION.
   The Village Code Enforcement Officer, engineers and/or designees will make
inspections based on the following schedule:
   (A)   The erosion control plan will be checked for accuracy during the
initial stake out inspection of the lot. If the erosion control BMPs are
inadequate and do not coincide with the erosion control plan, the inspection
will be failed and the permittee will need to remedy any deficiencies and have
the site re-inspected before any land disturbance activity begins.
   (B)   Before the rough-in inspections (electrical, plumbing, mechanical,
framing) are called in to the Village Utility office, the site will be checked
for erosion control compliance. If the inspector finds inadequate erosion
control BMPs, the village will delay the notification of the inspectors for the
rough-ins until the deficiencies have been remedied.
   (C)   Before the final inspections (electrical, plumbing, mechanical,
framing) are called in to the Village Utility office, the site will be checked
for erosion control compliance. If the inspector finds inadequate erosion
control BMPs, the village will delay the notification of the inspectors for the
final inspections until the deficiencies have been remedied.
   (D)   Periodic inspections will be made throughout the life of the erosion
control plan, including every time after a one-half inch or greater rainfall.
Precipitation amounts in the village will be verified from the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration website at www.weather.gov., "central Illinois
Springfield Spaulding Dam 24 hour precipitation". At any time the erosion
control BMPs are inadequate, the Code Enforcement Officer can issue a ''Stop
Work Order" until such time that the deficiencies are remedied.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.57 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   The Code Enforcement Officer shall issue a notice of violation if the
erosion control plan is not being implemented or the conditions of the permit
are not being met. The notice of violation shall state the violation, the
corrective action necessary and the day by which the correction must be
completed.
   (B)   If the corrective action specified in the notice of violation is not
completed within three calendar days, a stop work order may be issued. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine the extent of the order, which may include
all work at the site except for the corrective action.
   (C)   If no reasonable effort at a corrective action is made within the
specified time limit, or if immediate corrective action is necessary, the Code
Enforcement Officer may cause the corrective action to be performed by village
employees and shall assess the actual and administrative costs of such
performance against the permittee.
   (D)   A "Stop Work Order" may be issued at any time if work is being done
without a valid, current or approved erosion control plan, or contrary to this
code.
   (E)   Failure to obtain an approved erosion control plan for a land
disturbance or land development activity, or a failure to comply with the
requirements of the approved erosion control plan or the provisions of this
chapter, shall be deemed a violation.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.58 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The village corporate authorities may bring an action to enforce
compliance with the requirements of this chapter through either the
administrative adjudication process in Chapter 39 of this Code, or by filing an
action in the circuit court. Such action may request an injunction requiring
conformance with this chapter and such other order as the administrative
hearing officer or court deem necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2018 S-22
   (B)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from seeking such other legal
remedies available to prevent or remedy any violations of this chapter,
including suspension and/or revocation of the approved erosion control plan.
   (C)   Final inspections of the structure and Final Inspection Certificates
will not be issued:
      (1)   If there is any noncompliance with this chapter;
      (2)   If there is an injunction or other court order; and,
      (3)   If any fines are due and owing to the village.
   (D)   No additional building permit for any property shall be issued to any
applicant when the applicant is not in compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 17-44, passed 9-12-17)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter or any
code adopted by reference herein shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
penalty not less than $ 50 per day nor more than $ 500 per day. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. In addition to this penalty, the village may utilize other
statutory or common law remedies deemed appropriate by a court of law,
including but not limited to injunctive relief, preliminary injunctive relief,
and obtaining a temporary restraining order.
   (B)   The Building Code Administrator may in his discretion compromise minor
violations of this chapter where the offender promptly corrects the condition
constituting the violation; pays a fine of $ 25; and pays the cost of a
reinspection fee as set forth in Appendix A.
   (C)   Any structure, fence, swimming pool or satellite dish, or any part
thereof, constructed or maintained not in accordance with this chapter is
hereby declared a nuisance, subject to abatement in accordance with law.
(Ord. 94-07, passed 3-24-94)
APPENDIX A: CURRENT CODES ADOPTED BY REFERENCE WITH ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS AND
CHANGES
   (A)   Adopted Codes. The following Codes are adopted by reference, with the
insertions, deletions, modifications and supplementations set forth in
divisions (B) through (F) of this Appendix. Collectively, these codes are
referred to herein as the “Adopted Codes”.
      (1)   International Building Code, 2018 Edition (“IBC”).
      (2)   International Residential Code - One and Two Family Buildings, 2018
Edition (“IRC”).
      (3)   National Electric Code, 2017 Edition (“NEC”).
      (4)   The current State of Illinois Plumbing Code, and Part 890 Illinois
Administrative Code (“IPC”).
      (5)   Life Safety Code, NFPA 101, 2000 Edition, except Chapter 24
thereof.
      (6)   International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition.
   (B)   Insertions common to several Adopted Codes. The term “Village of
Chatham” will be inserted in the Adopted Codes wherever there is a reference
therein to the adopting jurisdiction, including but not limited to Section
101.1 of the IBC, Section R101.1 of the IRC and Section 101.1 of the IPMC.
   (C)   Exclusions, deletions and modifications common to Adopted Codes.
      (1)   All provisions the Adopted Codes expressly or impliedly requiring
sprinkler systems in one and two family dwellings are deleted, including but
not limited to Section RR313 and Section P2904 of the IRC.
      (2)   All provisions in the Adopted Codes pertaining to inspections
during construction of structures are modified as follows:
         (a)   The village shall conduct inspections pursuant to IRC and IBC,
and shall also inspect electric service and plumbing installations, during the
following phases of construction:
            1.   Site or stakeout;
            2.   Footing;
            3.   Framing;
            4.   Rough-in (mechanical, electrical and plumbing);
            5.   Fireplace (if applicable);
            6.   Electric meter base and outdoor electrical equipment
installation inspection;
            7.   Final.
         (b)   The village shall not inspect structures for compliance with the
International Energy Efficiency Code, which is incorporated by reference in the
IRC and IBC. However, owners and contractors are reminded that compliance with
the International Energy Efficiency Code is required by the IRC and IBC, and by
state law.
      (3)   Section 1809 of the 2018 International Building Code - Shallow
Foundations shall be modified to allow free-standing buildings 900 square feet
or less for light frame construction to be excepted from the frost protection
provisions of Section 1809.5 of the 2018 International Building Code Section
1809, provided that the free-standing building has a 4" monolithic slab with
turn down footings as set forth in the provided "Figure A" and provided further
that the free-standing building meets the other two requirements for exception
under Section 1809.5.
   (D)   Supplement to National Electric Code.  
      (1)   Sections 210.52 and 220.3 of the National Electric Code are
supplemented with the following provisions, which shall control over any
conflicting provisions in Sections 210.52 and 220.3:
      (2)   No more than two 20 ampere duplex receptacle outlets shall be
served in kitchen under cabinet or over countertop applications per 20 ampere
circuit. However, an additional 440 watts could be used to feed lighting and
other equipment in the vicinity if necessary, but the feed also has to be 20
amperes (#12 Awg. Wire).
      (3)   Information Note:  All circuits must be fused for smallest size
conductor of that particular circuit and Article 220-3 must be adhered to
regarding number of boxes allowed on circuit.
   (E)   Insertions in International Property Maintenance Code.
      (1)   Section 304.14: May 1 through October 31.
      (2)   Section 602.3: October 1 through April 30.
      (3)   Section 602.4: October 1 through April 30.
   (F)   Deletion from IRC: Section R501.3, “Fire protection of floors”.
(Ord. 13-19, passed 7-9-13; Am. Ord. 14-11, passed 3-11-14; Am. Ord. 20-35,
passed 12-8-20; Am. Ord. 24-22, passed 6-25-24)
APPENDIX B: FEES
   (A)   Building permit fee.               $.20 per square foot, or $85,
whichever is greater.
   (B)   Mechanical permit fee.             $85.
   (C)   Electrical permit fee.             $85.
   (D)   Plumbing permit fee.            $85.
   (E)   Building permit electric meter fee.         $140.
   (F)   Contractor annual registration.         $25.
   (G)   Tree trimming permit.            $30.
   (H)   Plan review fee. If conducted for the village by IRC or consultants –
$150 deposit required; balance to be billed to owner at cost plus 5%
administration fee, to be paid before final inspection. If conducted by the
Building Code Administrator, no additional charge.
   (I)   Re-inspection fee. If a structure or other work fails an inspection,
necessitating a re-inspection, the re-inspection fee shall be $70.
   (J)   Additional fee for non-residential inspection. The foregoing fee
structure is for one and two family structures with an inspection schedule as
set forth in §
150.28 of the Village of Chatham Code of Ordinances. For other structures,
e.g., apartments, commercial, industrial, hotel, and nursing home construction
governed by IRC, the village normally must retain the services of an outside
experts, e.g., structural engineers, architects, etc. For such structures and
work, the owner shall be responsible for paying the greater of the fees set
forth above, or the actual cost to the village of such outside services, plus a
5% administration fee. At the time of application, the owner shall pay to the
village the Building Code fees as set forth above. However, if the village’s
actual cost is greater than the fees specified above, then the owner shall be
liable to pay the village the difference at or before the final inspection. The
owner, the Building Code Administrator, and the Village Engineer or the other
outside expert, should confer as soon as possible after the building permit
application is made to discuss the scope and schedule of plan reviews and
building inspections so as to minimize the inconvenience and expense to the
owner.
   (K)   Rates for inspectors. The Building Code Administrator is authorized to
contract with inspectors at up to a $35 flat fee per inspection. Inspectors
shall be paid $23 per hour for assisting the village with plan reviews. Prior
to payment, inspectors shall provide the village with an invoice detailing the
date, time, and location of each inspection. Frequency of payment shall be
specified in the contract. Effective September 1, 2018, the Village Manager may
authorize the Building Code Administrator to increase the flat and hourly fees
of inspectors by no more than $3 per year.
(Ord. 04-43, passed 7-13-04; Am. Ord. 10-28, passed 5-11-10; Am. Ord. 10-35,
passed 5-25-10; Am. Ord. 15-43, passed 10-27-15; Am. Ord. 18-38, passed 7-10-
18; Am. Ord. 18-46, passed 8-14-18)
CHAPTER 151: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
151.01 Adoption
§ 151.01 ADOPTION.
   The comprehensive plan dated September, 1994 is adopted as the official
comprehensive plan of the village and shall be the document upon which planning
activities in the village shall be based, and is hereby made a part of this
code as if set out in full herein.
(Ord. 94-62, passed 10-11-94)
CHAPTER 152: DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
Section
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Base flood elevation
   
152.04   Duties of the Zoning Administrator
   
152.05   Development permit
   
152.06   Preventing increased flood heights and resulting damages
   
152.07   Protecting buildings
   
152.08   Subdivision requirements
   
152.09   Public health and other standards
   
152.10   Carrying capacity and notification
   
152.11   Variances
   
152.12   Disclaimer of liability
   
152.13   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.14   Severability
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
village by the Illinois Municipal Code, including but not limited to 65 ILCS 5/
1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, and 11-31-2 thereof, in order to accomplish
the following purposes:
   (A)    To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)    To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)    To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)    To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riperian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
152.03 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below the
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING.  A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more
than 180 days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY.  
      (1)   Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of the
population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster.
Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital services,
can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community or can put special
populations at risk.
      (2)   Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be
required include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police
stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities,
major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations
or electrical transformers) and hazardous material storage facilities
(chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT.   
      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;
         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls, or fences;
         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating,
paving, or other alterations of the ground surface;
         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks; and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective of the floodplain regulations adopted by a
community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surfacewaters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS (SFHA).  
      (1)   These two terms are synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction
of the village, the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village, or that may
be annexed into the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood.
The floodplains of the village are generally identified as such on panel number
(s) 0404F, 0405F and 0410F of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Sangamon County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
2007. FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by
the community.
      (2)   The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Sangamon County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed into the village are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map prepared for Sangamon County by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated 2007.
   FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOODWAY. That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the village shall be as
delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Sangamon County
prepared by FEMA and dated 2007. The floodways for each of the remaining
floodplains of the village shall be according to the best data available from
federal, state, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminary determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements
for individual listing on the National Register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR.  Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or  storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
152.07 of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed in or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage during the life of the building equals 50%
of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred regardless of
actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must be included in
this determination. The term includes repetitive loss buildings. See definition
of REPETITIVE LOSS.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a
structure taking place during the life of the building in which the cumulative
percentage of improvements:
         (a)   Equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started, or
         (b)   Increases the floor area by more than 20%.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure. The term includes structures which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
done. The term does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.03 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best available
base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best
available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed
to replace the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and
IDNR/OWR for approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of applicable rivers,
creeks and streams shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the
countywide Flood Insurance Study of Sangamon County prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in 2007.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an “AH
Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Sangamon County, Illinois.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an “A Zone” on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Sangamon County shall be according to the best data available from federal,
state or sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be
financed to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Sangamon County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the village, or that may be annexed into the village, shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of
Sangamon County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated
2007.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.04 DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the general administration
of this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the
floodplains under the jurisdiction of the village meet the requirements of this
chapter. Specifically, the Zoning Administrator shall:
   (A)    Process development permits in accordance with §
152.05;
   (B)    Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
152.06;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to §
152.07 are met and maintain a record of the “as-built” elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
   (D)   Ensure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
§
152.08;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of §
152.09;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
152.11 are met and maintain documentation of any variances granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all actions outlined
in §
152.99 as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state, and federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a modification
of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to
the floodplain map.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.05 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator
shall not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet
the requirements of this chapter.
   (A)    The application for a development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
152.07 of this chapter; and
      (5)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)    (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the
Zoning Administrator shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by survey data to
be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled
after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the
floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood
Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance
Rate Map identification.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for obtaining from
the applicant copies of all other federal, state and local permits, approvals
or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this type of activity.
The Zoning Administrator shall not issue a permit unless all other federal,
state and local permits have been obtained.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.06 PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES.
   Within any floodway identified on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map,
and within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development, will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat
to public health and safety. The following specific development activities
shall be considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
         (a)   1.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water
surface profile elevation in excess of one foot, and
            2.   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half foot at a point 1,000 feet upstream of
the proposed structure.
         (b)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile.
         (c)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging or relocating the existing channel.
         (d)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the State of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/
OWR permit.
         (e)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 3:
         (a)   The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells or other
similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers.
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge.
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream.
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris.
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades
and re-vegetated.
         (f)   All Illinois Commerce Commission National Electrical Safety Code
and federal requirements must be met.
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than 50 feet into a waterway
and no more than one-quarter of the width of the waterway and shall not extend
beyond the navigational limits established by the IDNR and Corps of Engineers.
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet.
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed 50% of the landowner’s shoreline
frontage nor 50 feet.
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet of the projected
property line.
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water.
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill.
         (i)   Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow.
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corps of Engineers.
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6. The following activities (not involving
fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit.
         (a)   The construction of underground utility lines, wells or septic
tanks not crossing a lake or stream.
         (b)   The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar
structures.
         (c)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios and similar structures.
         (d)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports.
         (e)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70
square feet in size, nor 10 square feet in any dimension. Only one such
building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
         (f)   The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made
to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank projection.
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures.
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall e kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet of cover shall be provided. The
river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act, being 415 ILCS 5,
shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten days prior to
the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of 1DNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban
areas are defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten years. (The Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.)
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in division (A)(8)(a) above,
other materials (e.g. tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided
all other conditions of this permit are met.
         (c)   The following materials are NOT to be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act, being 415 ILCS 5.
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, 1,000 feet.
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action.
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
of the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project.
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank.
         (h)   1.   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-
width and cross- sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site.
            2.   For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along
the bank, toe of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the
cross-sectional area of the natural channel be reduced by more than 10% nor the
volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream
bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and to
lessen the quantity of material required.
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area.
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (k)   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            1.   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s), and
            2.   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure of building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain chapter.
         (b)   The principal structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition:
            1.   Must not exceed 500 square feet in size and must not deflect
floodwaters onto another property; and
            2   Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
         (d)   No construction shall be undertaken in or within 50 feet of the
bank or stream channel.
         (e)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions.
         (f)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review.
         (g)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed 1,000 feet.
         (b)   1.   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel; and
            2.   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform
to that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
         (c)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            1.   Removed from the floodway;
            2.   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would
be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than 10% nor the
volume of material placed exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot of streambank;
            3.   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area
such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            4.   Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of the
levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            5.   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            6.   Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            1.   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater
induced by the existing structure, and
            2.   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge.
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads. (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by INDR/OWR.)
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the Department’s Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, Channel and
Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (Minor
Maintenance or Dredging Activities).
         (e)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
      (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 13:
         (a)   No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the
individual permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which
the work is being performed has receive all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
         (b)   The term "temporary" shall not mean more than one construction
season. All temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream
and floodway within one year of their placement and the area returned to the
conditions existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired
subsequent or repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review
and approval of the IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not
cause erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
         (d)   This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of
any solid embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee or dike across any
channel or floodway.
         (e)   No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or
stream channel until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents
that the temporary structure will meet the requirements of Special Condition
Number 3 of this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a
minimum, confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the
backwater induced by the temporary structure.
         (f)   The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by
this permit necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
         (g)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
         (h)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act, being 415 ILCS 5.
      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt form state floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)    Other development activities not listed in division (A) may be
permitted only if:
      (1)   A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); and
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.07 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)    In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
152.06, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection
requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet.
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively during
the life of the building. If substantially improved, the existing structure and
the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during the life of the building. If substantially
damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this
section.
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage).
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year.
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
152.02.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse materials.
         (e)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management
techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (2)   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace or other foundation that is permanently open to flood waters.
         (b)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot above grade with a minimum of two openings. The
openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation.
         (d)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
            1.   All structural components below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            3.   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space.
            4.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (3)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met.
      (4)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting from the
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (5)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade.
      (6)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
      (7)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawlspace to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four
feet to any point.
      (8)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event.
      (9)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
      (10)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and the
impact from debris and ice.
      (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this division.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with division (B) of this section; and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by
being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for the Illinois
Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 ILCS Adm. Code § 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days shall meet the elevation requirements of division (D) of this section
unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck.
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      (5)   The vehicle’s largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet.
      (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain.
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model.
      (10)   The vehicle must be either:
         (a)   Entirely supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground, and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)    Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits.
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every square foot of floor area.
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $10,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 500 square feet.
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning.
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.08 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The village shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   (A)    New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protection standards
of §§
152.06 and
152.07. Any proposal for such development shall include the following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      (3)   A signed statement by a Registered Professional Engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (B)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks of
other public grounds.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.09 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)    Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development.
In addition to the requirements of §§
152.06 and
152.07, the following standards apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
152.07 of this chapter.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation, whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)    All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.10 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (B)   In addition, the village shall notify adjacent communities in writing
30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of
the watercourse.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.11 VARIANCES.
   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the village for a variance.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant’s request for a variance
and shall submit its recommendation to the Village Board. The Village Board may
attach such conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to
further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health or safety, or
creation of a nuisance.
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      (6)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP.
      (7)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in writing that
a variance from the requirements of the building protection standards of §
152.07 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per
$100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Variances to the building protection requirements of §
152.07 of this chapter which are requested in connection with the
reconstruction, repair or alteration of a historic site or historic structure
as defined in §
150.02, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
§§
152.06 and
152.07 of this chapter.
      (1)   The repair of rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   This degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.13 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other chapters adopted by the village to
fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. However, this
chapter does not repeal the original resolution or chapter adopted to achieve
eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate or impair
any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and
other chapter easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.14 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and
the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of
the remainder.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify the owner in writing of such
violation.
   (A)    If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
      (1)   The village shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter.
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 or each offense.
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
      (4)   The village shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore
may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals is authorized to issue an order
requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall
be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance and shall order the action,
if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work order. The
stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (3)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written notice
of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
         (a)   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
         (b)   The time and place of the hearing.
      (4)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or
revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 07-27, passed 6-12-07)
CHAPTER 153: [RESERVED]
 
CHAPTER 154: MOBILE HOMES
Section
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Mobile homes parks; exemption
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INDIVIDUAL UTILITIES. The provision for each mobile home of a separate meter
connection to electrical service, separately tapped water service from an
approved public water supply or a separate private water supply, and a
separately tapped connection to an approved public sewer system or a separate
private sewage disposal system.
   MOBILE HOME or TRAILER.  A structure designed for permanent habitation and
so constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or
subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more
persons, whether or not the structure is served by individual utilities, and
whether or not the structure rests on a permanent foundation with wheels,
tongue, and hitch permanently removed.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of land
upon which five or more independent mobile homes are located for permanent
habitation either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and shall include any
building, structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a
part of the equipment of the MOBILE HOME PARK.
   PERMANENT HABITATION. Habitation for a period of two or more consecutive
months.
   REVENUE PURPOSES. Includes but is not limited to monies or other valuable
consideration paid by a tenant or lessee or paid by a contract purchaser
pursuant to a contract for title or deed and sale or purchase prior to the
delivery of the deed or other document conveying legal title.
   SITE. The lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent habitation.
(Ord. 80-37, passed 12-9-80)
§ 154.02 MOBILE HOME PARKS; EXEMPTION.
   (A)   No person shall maintain, keep, hold, or occupy any trailer or mobile
home for his own use or the use of another upon any plot of ground within the
corporate limits of the village unless the trailer or mobile home is situated
within a mobile home park, which is duly licensed under the provisions of “An
Act to provide for, license, and regulate Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks
and to repeal an act named herein”, approved and effective September 8, 1971,
210 ILCS 115/1 et seq., as amended and as hereafter amended.
   (B)   No person shall maintain, keep, or hold any trailer or mobile home for
revenue purposes within the village except in a mobile home park licensed under
the provisions of the Mobile Home Act.
   (C)   Mobile homes which are not located within mobile home parks are
considered nonconforming uses and structures in accordance with Chapter 158,
and specifically §
158.090 et seq. and are subject to the regulations contained therein.
(Ord. 80-37, passed 12-9-80; Am. Ord. 82-30, passed 11-9-82; Am. Ord. 83-1,
passed 1-25-83; Am. Ord. 86-11, passed 6-24-86; Am. Ord. 03-05, passed 1-114-
03)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   Any person firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $ 10 nor more than $ 500 for each offense; and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each date during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. The village, in addition to the penalty, may
bring an action for injunction to restrain the violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 80-37, passed 12-9-80)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Jurisdiction
   
155.003   Purpose
   
155.004   Severability
   
155.005   Plat; when required
   
155.006   Definitions
   
155.007   Duties of Zoning Administrator
   
155.008   Traffic studies
   
155.009   Street access management
   
155.010   Subdivision street and sidewalk
Location and Sketch Maps
   
155.020   Purpose
   
155.021   Submission requirements
   
155.022   Subdivision site suitability
   
155.023   Location and sketch maps review process
   
155.024   Validity of location and sketch maps approval
Preliminary Plan
   
155.030   Purpose
   
155.031   Submission requirements
   
155.032   Preliminary plan review process
   
155.033   Commission action
   
155.034   Village Board action
   
155.035   Validity of preliminary plan; reaffirmation of preliminary plan
Construction Plans
   
155.040   Purpose
   
155.041   Construction plans in the event there is more than one final plat
   
155.042   Submission requirements
   
155.043   Construction plan review process
   
155.044   Engineering plan review fees
Construction and Bonding of Subdivision  Improvements
   
155.050   Beginning construction of Subdivision Improvements
   
155.051   Notification of construction
   
155.052   Review and inspection fees
   
155.053   Inspection and testing during construction
   
155.054   Security for Subdivision Improvements
   
155.055   Partial reduction of security
   
155.056   Length security in effect; forfeiture
   
155.057   Approval of Subdivision Improvements
Final Plat
   
155.070   Purpose
   
155.071   Submission requirements
   
155.072   Final plat review process
   
155.073   Submission of final plat to Village Board
   
155.074   Village Board approval
   
155.075   Recording the final plat
   
155.076   Acceptance of public improvements
   
155.077   Effect of final acceptance
Design Standards and Specifications for Required Subdivision Improvements
   
155.090   Specific specifications
   
155.091   Right-of-way streets
   
155.092   Street design
   
155.093   Lot and block design
   
155.094   Erosion and sediment control
   
155.095   Utility easements; location of utilities
   
155.096   Surface water drainage
   
155.097   Backfill over underground utilities
   
155.098   Sidewalks
   
155.099   Sewage disposal
   
155.100   Water supply
   
155.101   Electric distribution
   
155.102   Street lighting
   
155.103   Public areas and open space
Minor Subdivision
   
155.110   Purpose
   
155.111   Location map
   
155.112   Final plat submission requirements
   
155.113   Review process
   
155.114   Submission of minor subdivision plat to the Village Board
   
155.115   Village Board approval
   
155.116   Recording the minor subdivision plat
   
155.117   Limitations on minor subdivisions
Large Scale Developments
   
155.130   Purpose
   
155.131   Submission requirements
   
155.132   Standards and requirements
   
155.133   Review process
   
155.134   Commission action
   
155.135   Review by the Village Board
   
155.136   Construction plans
   
155.137   Construction and securities
Tract Survey
   
155.150   Purpose
   
155.151   Submission requirements
   
155.152   Review process
   
155.153   Recording the tract survey
Procedure at Public Hearing; Variations;
Review of Adverse Decisions; Penalty
   
155.160   Procedure at public hearings
   
155.161   Variance of subdivision requirements
   
155.162   Review of adverse Commission decision
   
155.999   Penalty
Appendices
   
A-1   Village of Chatham Subdivision Jurisdiction
   
A-2   Facilities Plan (on file with Springfield Metro Sanitary District)
   
A-3   Arterial Roadway Network Plan
   
A-4   Bill of Sale for Public Improvements
   
A-5   Typical Residential Street Section
   
A-6   Paved Ditch Detail
   
A-7   Parallel Tee/Hydrant
   
A-8   Typical Cul-de-sac ROW and Lot Layout
   
A-9   Typical Corner Elbow ROW and Lot Layout
   
A-10   Typical Sanitary Manhole Location in Easement
   A-11   Typical Trench Detail
   A-12   Residential Valley Gutter
 
SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCEDURE
 # of Prints Reviewed By Payment Approval Valid For
                 # of Prints Reviewed By      Payment          Approval Valid
                                                               For
Location Map                 CPC
Minor            12          Village Board    None             1 Year
Subdivision
Location and     12          CPC              None             1 Year
Sketch Maps                  Village Board
Preliminary Plan 13          CPC              $200             3 Years
                             Village Board
Construction                                  Fees described   As long as
Plans            4           Village Engineer in Notes 1, 2, 3 Prelim Plan is
                                              and 4            Current
                             CPC              $200 plus Fee
Final Plat       13          Village Board    described in     2 Years
                                              Note 5
Preliminary Plan 13          CPC              None             3 Years
Reaffirmation                Village Board                     Renewable Time
Minor            12          CPC              $200             2 Years
Subdivision                  Village Board
Large Scale      13          CPC              $200              
Development                  Village Board
 
CPC - Chatham Planning Commission
NOTES:
   (1)   Plan Review and Inspection Fee - 2.5% of estimated construction cost
of Subdivision Improvements.
   (2)   Street Sign Fee - actual cost of new sign assemblies (See §
155.092(L)(2)).
   (3)   Electric Infrastructure Fee - fee identified in current electric
ordinance.
   (4)   Early Warning Siren Fee - fee identified in current electric
ordinance.
   (5)   Plan Review and Inspection Fee - fee described in note (1), if not
already paid.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as "The 1994 Land Subdivision Ordinance of the
Village of Chatham, Illinois."
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.002 JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The subdivision jurisdiction of the village shall include all land
within the corporate limits of the village and all unincorporated land within
one and one-half miles of the corporate limits of the village.
   (B)   When the one and one-half mile subdivision jurisdiction of the village
and that of another municipality overlap, a contractual agreement between the
village and the other municipality may be established which designates
subdivision jurisdiction boundaries in the overlap area. In the absence of such
an agreement, the jurisdiction shall extend to a median line equidistant from
the village's boundary and the boundary of the other municipality nearest to
the boundary of the village at any given point on the line.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.003 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote growth and development and to
regulate and control the division of land within the subdivision approval
jurisdiction of the village in order to provide for the legal and orderly
division of land by requiring proper description, monumentation and recording
of subdivided land and to promote growth of the community which protects the
public health and safety and provides essential public services to existing and
future residents. The goals of this chapter shall be to promote:
   (A)   Conformance with the Chatham Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   Provision of adequate public services including public water and
sewer, electricity, and police and fire protection to land to be developed.
   (C)   Prevention of development on unsuitable land.
   (D)   Provision of safe and efficient street network.
   (E)   Prevention of agricultural/residential conflicts.
   (F)   Conservation and protection of natural resources.
   (G)   Prevention of inappropriate development in or filling of the 100 year
floodplain.
   (H)   Establishment of lots that are of a practical size and shape.
   (I)   Enhancement and preservation of aesthetic qualities.
   (J)   Providing for perpetual maintenance of private drainage works.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10)
§ 155.004 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, provision or portion of this chapter is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of the ordinance shall not be affected by that decision.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.005 PLAT; WHEN REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for a subdivider of land within the subdivision
jurisdiction of the village to subdivide land into lots, blocks, streets,
alleys, or public open space unless by plat in accordance with the laws of the
state and the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to divide land
without obtaining tract survey approval, when required.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply, except as noted with
respect to tract surveys, and no plat is required in any of the following
instances (Plats Act, 765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.)
      (1)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
      (2)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access, including but not limited to the division of a single lot to form a
zero lot line duplex, as that term is defined in §
158.004 of this code, subject to the following additional requirements:
         (a)   The tract survey shall show that duplex structure is or shall be
bisected by the lot line, and each dwelling unit is or shall be located
exclusively on one lot, except for a party wall which is bisected by the lot
line;
         (b)   A party wall agreement or other appropriate covenant, perpetual
in duration and running with the land, has been recorded with the Recorder of
Deeds of Sangamon County with respect to both lots, or will be recorded
contemporaneously with the tract survey, which provides for the perpetual
maintenance of the party wall and reconstruction of the structure in event of
fire or casualty, and a copy of such party wall agreement or other appropriate
covenant has been provided to and approved by the Plat Officer of the village;
         (c)   The tract survey includes on its face the recording information
for the party wall agreement and other covenants;
         (d)   A lot which has been subdivided into two lots pursuant to this
division (A)(2) shall not be further subdivided;
      (3)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land except where the transfer results in the creation of
another buildable lot;
      (4)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for the use
as a right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other
pipe lines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      (5)   The conveyance of land owned by a railroad or other public utility
which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      (6)   The conveyance of land owned for highway or other public purposes
or grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
      (7)   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
      (8)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two parts of a particular parcel or tract of land
existing on July 17, 1959 and not involving any new streets or easements of
access. If a division is made prior to 10-1-73 for which an exemption is
claimed pursuant to this subdivision, and the division results in one part
being greater than five acres and the other part being less than five acres,
then the subsequent division of the part greater than five acres shall qualify
for the exemption set forth in subdivision (A)(9) of this section. If a
division is made on or after 10-1-73 for which an exemption is claimed pursuant
to this subdivision, and the division results in one part being greater than
five acres and the other part being less than five acres then the subsequent
division of the part greater than five acres shall not qualify for the
exemption set forth subdivision (A)(9).
      (9)   The sale of a single lot less than five acres from a tract of five
acres or larger when a survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided,
however, that this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots
from the same larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and
configuration of the larger tract on October 1, 1973, and provided that this
exemption does not invalidate any other local requirements applicable to the
subdivision of the land.
      (10)   The division of a lot of record as of August 10, 1993, if the new
lots created by such division, together with any structures existing as of the
date of the division, meet all requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the
Village of Chatham with respect to the Zoning District in which such new lots
are located, and not involving any new streets or easements of access.
Provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to the further division
of any lots created thereby.
   (B)   A tract survey shall be required for a division or subdivision of land
for which no plat is required under division (A) of this section. All tract
surveys shall be approved and recorded in accordance with §§
155.150 through
155.153 of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 12-06, passed 2-28-12)  Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public way used primarily as a service access to the rear or side
of a property which abuts on a street.
   ARTERIAL ROADWAY NETWORK PLAN. The portion of the Official Village Plan
providing and planning for the present and future system of streets for the
village.
   AS BUILT PLANS. Final plans showing any changes from the construction plans,
indicating in detail how the project was constructed. Such plans show all
public facilities as built on the surface and underground, both on public
property and on easements and also indicate all private utility locations that
are known. Details shown include: sanitary and storm sewers, manholes, invert
grades, bench marks, location of sanitary sewer laterals, street inlets,
hydrants, general flow of surface water, and grades for drainage swales on the
lot. The AS BUILT PLANS carry the seal of a registered professional engineer
certifying that construction was completed in conformance with the plans and
specifications.
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets,
parks, railroad rights-of-way or bodies of water.
   COLLECTOR STREETS. Streets penetrating neighborhoods collecting traffic from
local streets and channeling it into the arterial street system. A minor amount
of through traffic may be expected, but collector streets primarily provide
land access service and carry local traffic movements within residential
neighborhoods and commercial and industrial areas. Refer to Illinois Department
of Transportation Bureau of Design and Environment Manual for additional
characteristics of Local Streets.
   CONSTRUCTION PLANS. The drawings prepared in the manner and containing the
data, documents and information required by §§
155.040 through
155.043.
   COVENANTS. A private agreement written into the deed in which property
owners of the development promise to do or refrain from doing certain acts.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A permanent street with a single access point that ends in a
turnaround and cannot be further extended without taking property not dedicated
as a street. A cul-de-sac begins at its point of intersection with a street
with multiple access.
   DEDICATE. To transfer ownership of land, either fee simple or a partial
interest, for a public use, and for a public body to accept it for that public
use.
   DRAINAGE COURSE. A natural watercourse, swale, depression or ditch for the
drainage of surface waters and storm waters.
   EASEMENT. A liberty, privilege or advantage which a party or the general
public may have regarding the land of another. The remainder of the rights in
the land remain in the hands of the owner who retains the legal title.
   ELECTRONIC COPY. A plan, sketch or print required by this chapter which is
submitted in electronic format (CD, DVD or thumb drive) or by email in CAD, PDF
or GIS software formats, and tied to the following geo-referencing system - AD
1983 State Plane Illinois West FIPS 1202 Feet (all coordinates of the system
are expressed in feet).
   EXISTING TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY. Any public road in the township which is owned
and maintained by the township.
   FINAL PLAT. The drawing of a subdivision prepared in the manner and
containing the data, documents and information required by this chapter showing
lots of record and which is to be recorded.
   FLAG LOT. A lot located behind another lot or parcel with access to a public
street only by a narrow strip of land extending from the buildable area of the
lot to the street.
   HARD COPY. A plan, sketch or print required by this chapter which is drawn
on paper.
   LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT. A form of land subdivision which involves the
construction of a multifamily or commercial building on a lot or parcel of land
one acre or more in size or two or more principal multifamily or commercial
buildings on a lot or parcel of land of any size served by an internal street
and utility distribution.
   LOCAL STREETS. Streets not classified in a higher system which primarily
provide direct access to abutting land and access to higher types of roadways.
They offer the lowest level of mobility being the narrowest and shortest
streets in the street system. Service to through traffic is deliberately
discouraged. Refer to Illinois Department of Transportation Bureau of Design
and Environment Manual for additional characteristics of Local Streets.
   LOCATION MAP. A preliminary drawing or map of a proposed subdivision
containing the data and information required by this chapter.
   LOT. The tract within a subdivision marked by the subdivider as a numbered
tract to be offered as a unit of land for sale or transfer of ownership.
   MAJOR ARTERIAL STREETS AND ROADWAYS. The highest traffic volume corridors
serving major activity centers and the longest trip desires. Service to
abutting land is subordinate to the provision of travel service to major
traffic movements. They are normally spaced on a one mile grid pattern and may
include expressways. Refer to Illinois Department of Transportation Bureau of
Design and Environment Manual for additional characteristics of Major
Arterials.
   MINOR ARTERIAL STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. Streets and roadways which interconnect
with and augment the major arterial street system and provide service trips of
moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than major
arterials. Minor arterials place more emphasis on land access and distribute
travel to geographic areas smaller than those identified with major arterials.
Refer to Illinois Department of Transportation Bureau of Design and Environment
Manual for additional characteristics of Minor Arterial Streets and Highways.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. The creation of a total of up to four lots (counting the
original tract from which the lots are created) which front along a public
road.
   OFFICIAL PLAN or COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Chatham, Illinois, Comprehensive
Plan.
   OWNER. Any or all persons, entities, trusts, or corporation holding legal
title to the land to be subdivided. If the owner is a trust, all beneficiaries
shall be listed as owners. If the owner is a corporation, all principals and
officers shall be listed as owners.
   PAVEMENT WIDTH. The distance from the edge of the pavement to the edge of
the pavement but not including curb and gutter.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A form of land subdivision that allows the
development of ten or more acres of land with variations of some of the
restrictions of standard zoning and subdivision regulations.
   PLANNING COMMISSION or COMMISSION. The Chatham Planning Commission.
   PLAT. The action of officially subdividing land or the final plat which is
approved by the village and recorded.
   PLATS OFFICER. The executive director of the Springfield-Sangamon County
Regional Planning Commission or his or her duly authorized representative.
   PRELIMINARY PLAN. A plan of proposed subdivision or greater area prepared in
the manner and containing the data, documents and information required by this
chapter.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING. A building in which the principal use of the lot on
which it is located is conducted.
   PRIVATE STREET. A purported street, way or strip of land reserved for the
use of a limited number of persons or purposes and which is not a publicly
dedicated street.
   PUBLIC CROSSWALK. A ten foot right-of-way through the interior of a block in
which a sidewalk meeting the construction standards of this chapter is built.
   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT. Subdivision Improvements that are either owned or are to
be dedicated to the village or other governmental unit for maintenance and
operation, including but not limited to streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
water mains, sidewalks, and street lights.
   PUBLIC STREET. A street owned and maintained by a governmental body.
   RECORD. To file a final plat approved by the village with the Sangamon
County Recorder of Deeds.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land which has been dedicated in fee simple to a
public body for streets, alleys and other public improvements as determined by
the public body.
   SANITARY SEWER. A constructed conduit connected with the sewer system that
is designed to carry liquids and solids other than storm water to the
Springfield Metro Sanitary District sanitary sewer treatment plants.
   SERVICE ACCESS STREET. A street parallel to and adjacent to a major arterial
which provides access from the arterial to abutting properties.
   SETBACK. The minimum horizontal distance required between the building and
the lot line adjoining the street right-of-way.
   SHALL means something is mandatory; MAY means something is discretionary.
   SKETCH PLAN. A general layout of a proposed subdivision prepared in the
manner and containing the information required by this chapter.
   STORM SEWER. A constructed conduit for carrying storm water to a drainage
course.
   STORM WATER. Water from roof downspouts, basement footing perimeter drains
and yard drains as well as surface runoff.
   STUB STREET. A street which is intended to be extended but which temporarily
ends.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any or all owners, agents or persons controlling land who
commence proceedings under this chapter by submitting location and sketch maps
to the Planning Commission office or by making land improvements in the form of
buildings, drives, and utilities, but not necessarily involving the actual
division of land.
   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT. Public improvements and any non-public improvements
that are privately maintained but are essential elements to serve the residents
of the subdivision, including but not limited to detention ponds, erosion
control systems, paved ditches and unpaved swales and channels.
   SUBDIVISION OF LAND. The division of land into two or more parts, any of
which is less than five acres is size (see §
155.005(A) for exemptions), dedication of streets or easements of access, or
creation of a Planned Unit Development. In the event a subdivision is a Planned
Unit Development, the standards and regulations of this chapter shall govern.
   SUPERINTENDENT OF HIGHWAYS. The Sangamon County Engineer.
   SURETY. A bonding agency that is financially qualified to do business in the
State of Illinois.
   THROUGH LOT. Any lot which is not a corner lot and which adjoins two streets
that are parallel or within 45 degrees of being parallel to each other.
   TOWNSHIP HIGHWAY COMMISSIONER. The Township Highway Commissioner for the
township in which the subdivision is located.
   TRACT SURVEY. A land survey, made by an Illinois Professional Land Surveyor,
complying with the requirements of Section 1 of "An Act to revise the law in
relation to plats." (765 ILCS 205/0.01) as now or hereafter amended, and
Section 35 of the "Revenue Act of 1939" (35 ILCS 205/35) as now or hereafter
amended.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. Any sign, signal marking or device placed on or
adjacent to a street or highway by authority of the village, the State of
Illinois Department of Transportation or the Sangamon County Engineer.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Chatham, Illinois.
   VILLAGE CLERK. The Village Clerk of the Village of Chatham, Illinois.
   VILLAGE'S CONSULTING ENGINEER. The professional engineer appointed or
designated by the Village Board of Trustees.
   WATER DEPARTMENT. The Water Department of the village.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator of the village.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 98-69A, passed 12-22-98; Am. Ord. 10-01,
passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16; Am. Ord. 17-45, passed 9-12-17)
§ 155.007 DUTIES OF ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator of the village shall be the staff person primarily
responsible for administering this chapter. The Zoning Administrator shall
accept all plats and other documents for filing with the village; insure that
the proper number of plats and other documents as required by this chapter are
filed by the subdivider; insure the timely and proper dissemination of all
plats and other documents to interested parties; perform whatever staff work is
required by the Planning Commission; assure collection of all fees required by
this chapter; pay all such fees over to the General Fund of the village; and
insure, prior to the approval and signing of any final plat, that all necessary
fees have been paid by the subdivider. In addition to these general duties, the
Zoning Administrator shall have all other duties required by this chapter.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.008 TRAFFIC STUDIES.
   Developers of all industrial, business and commercial sites and all
residential subdivisions that will create more than 20 dwelling units shall
conduct a traffic study to determine the impact of the traffic generated by the
proposed development on the transportation network. Network connectivity and
capacity for both vehicular and non-vehicular traffic shall be analyzed. A copy
of the traffic study shall be provided to the village in conjunction with the
initial submittal required by this chapter, such as for a regular subdivision,
the initial submittal is a “location and sketch map” but the “preliminary plan”
is often submitted at the same time; for a large scale development, the initial
submittal is a “site plan”.
(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10)
§ 155.009 STREET ACCESS MANAGEMENT.
   Developers of proposed non-residential developments shall explore
opportunities for creating cross property access easement and developing shared
driveway access points with abutting properties. Cross access easements and
combined driveway access points between abutting properties shall be
implemented whenever feasible.
(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10)
§ 155.010 SUBDIVISION STREET AND SIDEWALK.
   All proposed subdivisions shall be required to extend stub streets and
sidewalks to adjacent undeveloped property whenever feasible. The number and
location of stub streets shall be subject to approval by the village.
(Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10)
LOCATION AND SKETCH MAPS
§ 155.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the location and sketch maps is to determine the suitability
of the site for subdividing and subsequent development. Suitability shall be
measured by the conformance with the comprehensive plan, effect on natural
resources and natural systems, ability to provide adequate essential services
to the site and conformance with the goals of this chapter set forth in §
155.003.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.021 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   Information filed with the Planning Commission shall be of sufficient detail
so that the Commission can determine whether and how essential services will be
provided and if the site is suitable.
   (A)   Location map. The location map shall consist of data added to an
existing base map of a suitable scale, covering an area of at least one mile
radius from the tract proposed for development. The location map shall show the
following information:
      (1)   North point, scale and date.
      (2)   Outline of the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider
with approximate boundary dimensions and total acreage.
      (3)   Existing streets and roads expected to serve the area to be
subdivided.
      (4)   Existing utility lines expected to serve the area to be subdivided.
   (B)   Sketch map. The sketch map shall show the general layout and character
of the proposed development. The scale shall be no more than 100' to the inch.
Exact dimensions or engineering plans are not required. The sketch map shall
show the following information:
      (1)   North point, scale and date.
      (2)   Area to be subdivided with general dimensions.
      (3)   Proposed street network and alignments with existing streets.
      (4)   General lot layout.
      (5)   Potential open space - public parks, existing waterways, drainage
or retention areas, etc.
      (6)   Outstanding or unusual natural features and vegetation.
   (C)   Additional information. In addition to the information required below,
any other information necessary for the Planning Commission to determine site
suitability or adequacy of mitigating factors as outlined in §
155.022 shall be submitted:
      (1)   Title of the proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider,
engineer and land surveyor. A contact person should be designated.
      (3)   Proposed use and approximate number of housing units.
      (4)   Existing and proposed zoning.
      (5)   Method of sewage disposal.
      (6)   Method of water supply.
      (7)   Electric service provider.
      (8)   Fire protection district.
      (9)   School district.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.022 SUBDIVISION SITE SUITABILITY.
   (A)   Essential utilities and public services. Land proposed to be
subdivided shall have essential utilities and public services available within
a reasonable distance and time period. Land to which these essential utilities
and services will not be so provided shall be deemed unsuitable for
subdividing. Essential utilities and services and criteria for determining if
they can adequately be provided shall include the following:
      (1)   Sewage disposal:
         (a)   Sanitary sewer service provided by the Springfield Metro
Sanitary District shall be the preferred method of sewage disposal. If sanitary
sewer service is currently available to the land proposed to be subdivided, it
shall be the sewage disposal method used.
         (b)   If sanitary sewer service is not currently available but the
land is within the ultimate service area as identified in the Springfield Metro
Sanitary District's Facility Plan and the Sanitary District determines that
sewer service will be available within a reasonable period, the land may be
deemed suitable for subdividing if:
            1.   Sanitary sewers shall be installed by the subdivider for
future service to each building site; and
            2.   On-site sewage disposal facilities can and will be provided.
         (c)   If the land cannot be served with sanitary trunk sewers within a
reasonable period, or if the land is not within the ultimate service area as
identified in the Springfield Sanitary District's Facility Plan and therefore
shall be unsuitable for subdividing unless it can be shown that adequate
private sewage systems can be provided.
      (2)   Water supply:
         (a)   An Illinois Environmental Protection Agency approved public
water supply shall be the preferred method of water supply.
         (b)   Private wells may be permitted for developments outside the
village if the developer can demonstrate that it is not feasible to extend
water mains to the land proposed to be subdivided. As a minimum guideline, the
extension of 120' +- of water main per lot of the preliminary plan shall be
deemed feasible. This distance shall be measured between the nearest suitable
public water main and the proposed development. Mains within the development
shall not count toward this extension footage.
      (3)   Fire protection: Land proposed to be subdivided shall meet the
following conditions in order to be deemed suitable for subdividing:
         (a)   Land shall be within a fire protection district, if possible;
         (b)   There shall be a public road providing adequate access for
emergency vehicles to the site, in accordance with the criteria outlined in §
155.022(A)(4)(a) below.
         (c)   There shall be a system of water mains or other source of water
adequate for fire fighting purposes. Specific fire flows shall be determined by
the Chatham Fire Protection District using a standard published by the
Insurance Service Office entitled “Guide for Determination of Required Fire
Flow”.
         (d)   A full sprinkler system installed with adequate water available
as determined by the National Fire Protection Association Standards 13 or 13D
depending on the occupancy of the building shall also satisfy this requirement.
      (4)   Streets:
         (a)   The suitability of existing streets for access to the proposed
subdivision and/or for incorporation into the proposed subdivision’s street
system shall also be considered. A street shall be considered suitable if:
            1.   The street is constructed of all weather material (concrete,
asphalt, oil mat);
            2.   For low volume residential development (less than 250 vehicles
per day), the pavement has the strength to carry fire trucks (minimum two-inch
asphalt on six-inch crushed rock or equivalent);
            3.   For higher volume residential developments (greater than 250
vehicles per day) and non-residential developments, a traffic impact study and
pavement evaluation/design may be required to assess the suitability of
adjacent existing streets to support the anticipated traffic volume and loading
for the intended use. Pavements shall be designed for the 10 year traffic
projections for the anticipated future development in the area. The paved area
is at least 20 feet wide with a road bed 24 feet wide;
            4.   There is a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet, six inches;
            5.   The street has adequate cross slope and roadside ditch or
storm sewer capacity; and
            6.   Access roads and access road intersections that serve the
development must meet safety standards, including sight distance.
         (b)   If only a portion of the criteria set forth in division (A)(4)
is met, the village’s consulting engineer, a representative of the Chatham Fire
Protection District, and a representative of the Planning Commission shall make
the recommendation as to whether the street is suitable for the proposed
development or what improvements must be undertaken to make it suitable.
      (5)   Police protection: In determining the suitability of land for
subdivision purposes, the distance that police would have to travel to respond
to a call for service shall be considered.
   (B)   Other requirements. Land proposed to be subdivided shall meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   Site must be in conformance with the Chatham Comprehensive Plan;
      (2)   Development must not be located in a 100 year floodplain or flood
prone area.
      (3)   Development must not be located in any environmentally sensitive
area including sites adjacent to Lake Springfield and its tributaries unless
the subdivider can show that environmental concerns can be mitigated.
      (4)   Site must be of a shape, size and terrain so that usable lots and
streets in conformance with this chapter can and will be created.
      (5)   Development must not have a major conflict with existing use of
adjacent property (waste water treatment plants, power plants, major industrial
plants, landfills, certain agricultural uses, etc.) unless it is shown that
factors which cause the conflict can and will be mitigated.
      (6)   Development must not cause major off-site impacts and problems
relating to, but not limited to, streets, drainage, water supply and
distribution system, sanitary sewer collection system, parks. If it is
determined by the Planning Commission that major off-site impacts will result,
the subdivider must agree to mitigate the portion of the impact caused by the
subdivision. A traffic impact study, water network model, and/or a hydraulic
loading analysis of the sanitary collection system may be required to evaluate
the degree of off-site impacts, and to evaluate improvements that may be
required to mitigate impacts.
      (7)   When soils in the area to be developed have severe limitations for
building site development or sanitary facilities as determined by the USDA Soil
Conservation Service, the subdivider shall submit information indicating how
these limitations will be addressed.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.023 LOCATION AND SKETCH MAPS REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall submit 12 hard copy prints and one electronic
copy of the location and sketch maps and support data to the Zoning
Administrator. The subdivision documents must be submitted seven calendar days
prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting to be considered by
the Commission at that meeting.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain one print on file and distribute
the location map and sketch maps and support data as follows:
      (1)   Two prints to the Planning Commission;
      (2)   One print to the Water Department and Electric Department;
      (3)   One print to the village's consulting engineer;
      (4)   One print to the Village Clerk;
      (5)   One print to the Chatham Fire Protection District;
      (6)   One print to the Springfield Metro Sanitary District
      (7)   One print to the Sangamon County Engineer, if applicable;
      (8)   One print to Sangamon County Soil and Water Conservation District;
      (9)   One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable; and
      (10)   One print to the appropriate school district.
   (C)   The entities listed in division (B) above shall transmit any comments
on suitability of the site in writing to the Planning Commission within seven
calendar days of receipt.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the Village
Board with respect to the suitability of the site and the proposed layout no
later than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with
the Village Clerk. Lack of action within the allotted time period shall
constitute a negative recommendation to the Village Board.
   (E)   After receiving the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Village
Board shall, at its next regularly scheduled board meeting, approve or
disapprove the location and sketch maps based on the suitability criteria
outlined in §
155.022.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.024 VALIDITY OF LOCATION AND SKETCH MAPS APPROVAL.
   The location and sketch maps shall be valid for a period of one year after
Village Board approval. If a preliminary plan has not been submitted within the
one year period, approval of the location and sketch maps shall expire. If
interest is renewed in subdividing the site at a later time, the entire
location and sketch maps review process and submission requirements shall be
repeated.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
PRELIMINARY PLAN
§ 155.030 PURPOSE.
   The preliminary plan is intended to provide a detailed layout of the
proposed subdivision showing the location of public improvements, lots,
drainage and open space areas.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.031 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The preliminary plan shall show the information required by
division 1(B) on plan sheets no larger than 24 x 36 inches with matching lines
if two or more sheets are necessary. The scale shall be no more than 100' to
the inch. All dimensions shall be to the nearest foot.
      (2)   The preliminary plan shall be consistent with the current zoning
district classification of the property.
   (B)   Information to be shown on the plan sheets shall include:
      (1)   The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded;
the names and addresses of the engineer, registered land surveyor, subdivider
and owner of the tract with the name and address of the contact person with
whom any notice is to be sent.
      (2)   North point, scale and date of preparation and any revisions.
      (3)   A notation stating "Preliminary Plan - Not to be recorded by
Recorder of Deeds".
      (4)   Total acreage.
      (5)   Location of all present property lines and section lines.
      (6)   The location of all streets, watercourses, and other existing
features within the area to be subdivided and within 200 feet of the site.
      (7)   Location and dimensions of existing buildings and their proposed
disposition.
      (8)   The existing utilities, drainage courses and culverts including the
location and size of water mains and sewer outlets within the area to be
subdivided and on the adjacent land.
      (9)   Contours referring to the United States Geological Survey datum
with intervals of two feet or less unless a greater interval is required
because of terrain.
      (10)   The elevation of the 100 year floodplain if any portion of the
land to be subdivided would be submerged by the flood. Adequate buildable area
must be provided above the elevation of the 100 year floodplain.
      (11)   Lot numbers.
      (12)   Proposed location of sewer mains (may be shown on a supplemental
sheet).
      (13)   The proposed storm drainage system including preliminary drainage
computations when detention or retention is likely to be needed (may be shown
on a supplemental sheet). An assessment of long term erosion, sedimentation and
runoff changes caused by the subdivision should be included.
      (14)   Proposed location of water mains and fire hydrants.
      (15)   Location and width to the nearest foot of all proposed streets,
alleys and their associated rights-of-way.
      (16)   Location and width to the nearest foot of lots.
      (17)   Location and width to the nearest foot of all utility easements.
The subdivider shall determine the correct location of all easements to be
shown on the preliminary plan from the utility companies.
      (18)   The location of areas to be reserved for public use.
      (19)   The minimum setback requirements for the appropriate zoning
district.
      (20)   Proposed staging of final plats if more than one final plat will
be submitted based on traffic, utilities and other factors which would
determine the sequence of development with the lease impact on existing
residents of the village.
      (21)   Draft of subdivision covenants relating to the requirements of
this chapter.
      (22)   If subdivision road access is to a state, county or township road,
written approval of the access by the Illinois Department of Transportation,
County Highway Department or Township Road Commissioner.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.032 PRELIMINARY PLAN REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall file 13 hard copy prints and one electronic copy
of the preliminary plan of the proposed subdivision in the office of the Zoning
Administrator with a filing fee of $200 to be deposited in the appropriate
village account. The subdivision documents must be submitted seven calendar
days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting to be
considered by the Commission at that meeting.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain one print on file and
distribute the prints as follows:
         (a)   Five prints to the Planning Commission;
         (b)   One print to the Water Department and Electric Department;
         (c)   One print to the village's consulting engineer;
         (d)   One print to the Sangamon County Engineer;
         (e)   One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
         (f)   One print to the Village Clerk;
         (g)   One print to the Chatham Fire Protection District; and
         (h)   One print to the Springfield Metro Sanitary District.
      (2)   The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements
in writing to the Planning Commission within one week of receipt.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall recommend to the Village Board that it
approve or disapprove the preliminary plan no later than the Planning
Commission’s second regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with
the Zoning Administrator. However, no review will take place and no
recommendation will be made by the Planning Commission until the Village Board
has approved the location and sketch maps. Failure by the Planning Commission
to act by the end of said second regularly scheduled meeting shall constitute a
recommendation of disapproval of the plan.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 10-01,
passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.033 COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   Recommendation of approval. If the Planning Commission finds that the
preliminary plan meets the requirements of this chapter, the Planning
Commission shall forward three prints of the preliminary plan to the Village
Board, together with minutes of all meetings at which the preliminary plan was
considered. The Chairman shall indicate its recommendation of approval on the
plan in substantially the following language:
      "The Planning Commission of the Village of Chatham recommends that this
preliminary plan of subdivision be approved. This is not an approval of the
final plat and is not to be recorded."
                  By:______________________
                  Date:_____________________
   (B)   Recommendation of disapproval. If the Planning Commission finds that
the preliminary plan does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, it
shall inform the subdivider of its recommendation of disapproval at the meeting
when a vote is taken, followed within seven calendar days by a written
recommendation of disapproval stating the non-compliance found. Unless the
subdivider indicates its desire to amend the preliminary plan in accordance
with division (C), either verbally at the Plan Commission meeting (which shall
be reflected in the minutes) or in writing within seven calendar days of
receipt of the written recommendation, then three prints of the proposed
preliminary plan with the written findings of the Planning Commission
recommending disapproval shall be submitted to the Village Board, together with
minutes of all meetings at which the preliminary plan was considered. The
Chairman shall indicate the Planning Commission's recommendation of disapproval
on the plan in substantially the following language.
      "The Planning Commission of the Village of Chatham recommends that this
preliminary plan of subdivision be disapproved."
                  By:______________________
                  Date:______________________
   (C)   If the subdivider desires to amend the preliminary plan prior to its
being considered by the Village Board, the subdivider shall submit 13 prints of
the amended plan to the Zoning Administrator, which shall be reviewed according
to the filing deadline and review schedule established by the Planning
Commission. No filing fee shall be necessary if the amended preliminary plan is
filed within two calendar months of the date the Planning Commission recommends
disapproval. The Village Clerk shall transmit copies of the amended plan as
described in §
155.032, and review or proceed as indicated in that section.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.034 VILLAGE BOARD ACTION.
   Not later than the second regularly scheduled meeting after its receipt of
the prints of the preliminary plan recommending approval or disapproval by the
Planning Commission and of the minutes of the Planning Commission meetings
considering the preliminary plan, the Village Board shall consider approval or
disapproval of the preliminary plan. At such meeting, the subdivider may appear
and be heard by the Village Board if it so desires. The Village Board shall by
resolution approve or disapprove the preliminary plat and shall appropriately
endorse the prints of the preliminary plan, and if the preliminary plan is
approved, the original of the preliminary plan, as follows:
      [Dis)approved by resolution of the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Chatham this ____ day of ______________ 20__
                                                 
                        Village President
         Attest:
                                        
            Village Clerk
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.035 VALIDITY OF PRELIMINARY PLAN; REAFFIRMATION OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   (A)   The preliminary plan shall be valid for a period of three years after
Village Board approval. If the final plat has not been submitted to the
Planning Commission within said three year period, or if submitted, no final
plat is approved, the preliminary plan shall expire.
   (B)   If the subdivider will not have submitted a final plat within three
years after preliminary plan approval, but wishes to avoid expiration of the
plan, the subdivider shall seek reaffirmation of the plan by submitting 13
prints to the Village Clerk for review according to the review schedule
established by the Planning Commission in accordance with §§
155.032,
155.033 and
155.034 no later than 35 months after the initial Village Board approval. If
the subdivider has submitted a final plat within said three year period, but it
is not approved during or after said three year period, the subdivider may
avoid expiration of the preliminary plan by making the same preliminary plan
reaffirmation submission described above, provided that if the disapproval of
the final plat occurs during or after the 35th month, the submission required
shall be made within one month of such disapproval. In such event, the review
process in §§
155.032,
155.033 and
155.034 shall be followed.
   (C)   Where reaffirmation of the preliminary plan is sought the Planning
Commission shall recommend, and the Village Board shall require, any changes in
the plan it deems necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. If the
subdivider has not resubmitted the preliminary plan with the required changes
to the Village Board within 30 days after the Village Board meeting requiring
changes, or if the resubmitted plan is disapproved, the plan shall expire at
that time or at the end of any appeal process provided for in this chapter,
whichever is later.
   (D)   A preliminary plan may be reaffirmed one time. If a final plat has not
been submitted to the Planning Commission within three years from the date of
the reaffirmation, or if submitted, is not approved, the plan shall expire.
   (E)   Final plat approval shall extend the validity of the preliminary plan
for three years from the date of final plat approval, provided that the
Planning Commission may require any changes necessary to meet the requirements
of this chapter, and in such an event, the provisions of division (C) of this
section with respect to resubmission shall apply. The preliminary plan may be
reaffirmed one time after each final plat approval. If another final plat has
not been resubmitted within three years from the date of the reaffirmation, the
preliminary plan shall expire. In the event a preliminary plan expires, a
subdivider wishing to proceed with subdivision of the land involved must
resubmit a location and sketch map for review and proceed as in the case of an
original submittal.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
CONSTRUCTION PLANS
§ 155.040 PURPOSE.
   Construction plans are intended to show the design of Subdivision
Improvements for the subdivision so that a determination can be made as to
whether village standards are met and whether the improvements are compatible
with existing public improvements.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.041 CONSTRUCTION PLANS IN THE EVENT THERE IS MORE THAN ONE FINAL PLAT.
   Notwithstanding anything else in this chapter to the contrary, whenever the
subdivider anticipates more than one final plat arising from an approved
preliminary plan, the subdivider shall submit, along with the construction
plans for any final plat, the drainage and detention plans for each watershed
that is affected by the construction of this final plat. If a watershed is
partially affected by any final plat, then the subdivider shall submit drainage
and detention plans for the entire watershed irrespective of whether the
watershed is located partially outside the plat. No final plat shall be
approved until all construction work is completed, or security is given for
construction, of drainage and detention works for all watersheds affected by
the final plat. Until all drainage works for the entire subdivision are built,
provisions shall be made in the construction plans if necessary for temporary
detention works for each plat as each plat is built.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-60, passed - -96; Am. Ord. 94-70,
passed 11-29-94)
§ 155.042 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   Construction plans shall be submitted on sheets not larger than 24 x 36
inches and to a scale of not more than 100' to the inch. Construction plans
shall include the following information:
   (A)   Cover sheet showing the location of the development; scales and
symbols that are used; index to sheets; summary of quantities; appropriate
place for approval of the village's consulting engineer; and the signature and
seal of a registered professional engineer.
   (B)   North arrow and bench marks with their elevations noted. Bench marks
shall be referenced to mean sea level datum as determined by the United States
Geological Survey.
   (C)   Plan sheets showing the locations of all existing streets, right-of-
way lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, drainage ditches,
easements, rear lot drainage, direction of storm drainage flow, survey
monuments, water mains, fire hydrants, and any other appurtenance or structure
that might influence design considerations.
   (D)   Profile sheets indicating the existing ground line and proposed grades
and elevations for all proposed streets, sanitary sewers, drainage structures,
drainage ditches, and rear lot drainage. Elevations shall be referenced to the
United States Geological Survey datum.
   (E)   Typical sections showing the right-of-way lines, proposed pavement
widths, pavement thickness, base thickness, sub-base thickness, subgrade,
crown, curbs and gutters, sidewalks and design data when required.
   (F)   Detail sheets showing the details of manholes, inlets, catch basins,
curbs and gutters, drainage structures and any other structure or appurtenance
to be constructed, or reference made to the Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction in Illinois or Highway Standards published by the
Illinois Department of Transportation.
   (G)   Design computations for storm sewer design, for special structures and
pavement designs when required and for anticipated fire flow.
   (H)   Detailed description of erosion control measures to be taken during
construction.
   (I)   Proof of application for an access permit from the County Highway
Department when access to a county highway is involved.
   (J)   Proof of application for a 404 permit if any dredging, riprapping,
fill work or similar activities will be conducted in or around streams.
   (K)   Proof of application for a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP) permit, if applicable.
   (L)   Other specific additional information may be requested by the
village's consulting engineer.
   (M)   Permits for sanitary sewer and water main construction, if required.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05)
§ 155.043 CONSTRUCTION PLAN REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   After receiving approval of the preliminary plan, the subdivider shall
submit four sets of hard copy construction plans and one electronic copy to the
Zoning Administrator. The IEPA Log Numbers for sewer and water permits shall be
displayed on the cover sheet of the construction plans submitted to the
village. In addition, the IEPA Log Numbers shall be included in all
correspondence regarding IEPA reports. The Zoning Administrator shall retain
the electronic copy and one hard copy on file and distribute the remaining hard
copies as follows:
      (1)   One set to the village's consulting engineer;
      (2)   One set to the County Engineer when the subdivision is located
outside the corporate limits of Chatham; and
      (3)   One set to the Springfield Metro Sanitary District.
   (B)   Construction plans shall be submitted a minimum of 30 calendar days
before the final plat is to be submitted for review.
   (C)   The village's consulting engineer shall complete his review within 30
calendar days after all items of information required by §
155.042 have been submitted in writing.
   (D)   Within 30 calendar days after complete submission, the village's
consulting engineer shall notify the subdivider's engineer of approval of the
plans or of any required changes unless the review time is extended for no more
than 14 calendar days by the village's consulting engineer in a letter to the
subdivider's engineer listing reasons for the extension. If plans must be
resubmitted, the village's consulting engineer shall also inform the engineer
of the number of sets of plans to be submitted.
   (E)   When construction plans are resubmitted with the required changes,
they shall be re- reviewed within 14 calendar days unless the review time is
again extended by the village's consulting engineer in the manner set forth in
division (D) above.
   (F)   The village's consulting engineer shall notify the subdivider's
engineer and the Zoning Administrator of the approval of the construction
plans. Construction plans shall not be approved until proof of acquisition of a
county access permit or 404 permit, if applicable, is submitted. The Village
Clerk shall also send a notice of the approval to the:
      (1)   Planning Commission;
      (2)   Electric Department;
      (3)   Water Department;
      (4)   Springfield Metro Sanitary District;
      (5)   County Engineer, if applicable; and
      (6)   Other utility companies involved.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.044 ENGINEERING PLAN REVIEW FEES.
   (A)   The fee for subdivision construction plan review and inspections is
based on the final estimated cost of all of the required public improvements.
The fee will be assessed at 2.5% of the estimated cost of the public
improvements.
   (B)   The above noted fee covers the first submittal and one review
submittal of the construction plans. An additional review fee of 0.05% of the
engineer's cost estimate will be applied for each additional submittal. The
additional review fee may be waived by the City Engineer for minor revisions.
The 2.5% fee and any required additional review fees will be collected prior to
the final plat being recorded. All other fees for construction permits are as
set forth in the Village Code.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the estimated cost of construction
shall be prepared and sealed by the developer's Illinois Registered
Professional Engineer for the subdivision, and the estimate shall be subject to
the approval of the City Engineer. If the parties cannot agree on the estimate,
the Village Manager may approve utilization of the actual bids for the cost
estimates.
   (D)   The fees set forth herein shall also apply to the review of planned
unit developments.
(Ord. 16-14, passed 3-22-16)
CONSTRUCTION AND BONDING OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.050 BEGINNING CONSTRUCTION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
   Approval of the construction plans shall give the subdivider the right to
begin construction of the Subdivision lmprovements, but only after scheduling a
pre-construction conference with the village's consulting engineer, engineer of
record, construction superintendent, and the resident observer for the project.
Construction must be started within one year of approval of the construction
plans. If construction is not started within the year, re-approval by the
village’s consulting engineer shall be required before construction is started.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.051 NOTIFICATION OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The village's consulting engineer shall be notified at least 24 hours before
construction begins. Construction shall begin only after approval of
construction plans and payment of the review and inspection fee as set forth in
§
155.052 of this chapter. Whenever construction stops for 24 hours or longer,
the village's consulting engineer shall be notified 24 hours before
construction begins again.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.052 REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES.
   (A)   Before starting construction of any Subdivision Improvements, the
subdivider shall be assessed and shall deposit with the Zoning Administrator
for the village an amount equal to two and one half percent (2.5%) of the
estimated construction cost (including but not limited to grading, drainage,
roadway, sidewalk, sewer, waterline and other improvements which are to be
dedicated to public use or which benefit the subdivision generally) as approved
by the village engineer. The Zoning Administrator shall cause such funds to be
deposited in the General Fund of the village.
   (B)   The foregoing fee is intended to reimburse the village for charges of
the village engineer in connection with the review and inspection of the
preliminary and final plats and the construction of the Subdivision
Improvements. In the event that the engineering expenses incurred by the
village are in excess of the amount initially paid by the subdivider, the
village shall bill the subdivider for the difference, and such amount shall be
paid by the subdivider prior to acceptance by the village of the final plat.
However, the subdivider shall not be entitled to any refund in the event the
fees actually charged to the village by the village engineer is less than 2.5%
of the estimated construction costs.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 16-14,
passed 3-22-16; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.053 INSPECTION AND TESTING DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Presence of subdivider's observer. The subdivider's engineer shall
have a full-time, qualified resident observer present on the construction site
for the following:
      (1)   Approval of the subgrade prior to paving; and
      (2)   Continuous observation of all phases of the paving operation,
construction of sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances and construction of
storm sewer and appurtenances and construction of water mains.
   (B)   Presence of subdivider's contractor superintendent. The subdivider's
contractor shall have a superintendent on the job site at all times while
construction is in progress. The superintendent shall be responsible for the
entire construction procedure. In his absence, the superintendent shall
indicate to the subdivider's observer, the person temporarily responsible for
the conduct of the work.
   (C)   Inspection by village’s consulting engineer. All required improvements
to be installed under the provisions of this chapter shall be checked during
the course of construction by the village’s consulting engineer. The cost of
any re-inspection of any required improvement found to be faulty or not in
accordance with the approved plans and specification shall be paid by the
subdivider to the village. The testing of any concrete, asphalt, soil,
backfill, other materials or workmanship shall be done at the expense of the
subdivider, at the frequency outlined in IDOT's Project Procedure Guide, June
1, 2009 or latest edition. Test results shall be forwarded to the village's
consulting engineer upon receipt by the subdivider or subdivider's engineer.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.054 SECURITY FOR SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   If construction has not been completed and approved by the village
engineer before the final plat is submitted to the Village Board, security in
the amount equal to 110% of the estimated construction costs (including but not
limited to grading, drainage, detention ponds, paved and unpaved swales,
roadway, sidewalk, sewer, waterlines and appurtenances, erosion control devices
and vegetative cover, and other improvements which benefit the subdivision
generally) of the Subdivision Improvements shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator in order to insure completion of the Subdivision Improvements as
required by this chapter within a reasonable length of time without cost to the
village. The form and sufficiency of security shall be subject to the approval
of the village attorney and the village's consulting engineer. Security may be
in the form of a bond issued by a commercial surety licensed to do business in
the State of Illinois, or it may be in the form of an irrevocable letter of
credit issued by an Illinois or national bank of at least one year in duration,
which provides for automatic annual renewals thereof unless at least 60 days
prior to the expiration of its term or any renewal thereof, written notice of
non-renewal is sent by certified mail to the village.
   (B)   The bond or letter of credit shall by its terms secure payment not
only the construction of the Subdivision Improvements but also of any
additional review and inspection fees charged by the village engineer and
imposed by the village pursuant to §
155.052 of this chapter.
   (C)   Upon acceptance of Subdivision Improvements by the village, a one-year
warranty period shall be in effect during which period security shall be
provided to insure that latent defects in materials and workmanship will be
corrected at the subdivider's expense.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 12-21, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.055 PARTIAL REDUCTION OF SECURITY.
   (A)   If at the time a final plat is submitted for approval or at any time
thereafter, the subdivider has already constructed a portion of the Subdivision
Improvements therein, the subdivider may request that the security for the
subdivision be based on 110% the estimated cost of the unconstructed portion.
This basis for establishing the amount of the security shall be used only if
the village’s consulting engineer has inspected the completed portion of the
Subdivision Improvements and certified that the improvements have been
constructed in accordance with the approved construction plans.
   (B)   No partial reduction or security shall be construed as final
acceptance by the village of any portion of the Subdivision Improvements; all
Subdivision Improvements constructed by the subdivider are subject to
reinspection and re-evaluation at any time prior to final acceptance thereof in
accordance with §
155.076 of this chapter, and the subdivider has a continuing obligation until
final acceptance to construct all Subdivision Improvements to the standards of
this chapter and the construction plans. In no event prior to final acceptance
shall the security for Subdivision Improvements be reduced to an amount less
than 12.5% of the initial estimated construction costs of all Subdivision
Improvements to be constructed for the final plat, net of any outstanding
separate security for sidewalks.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-60, passed - -96; Am. Ord. 05-05,
passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 12-21, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.056 LENGTH SECURITY IN EFFECT; FORFEITURE.
   The security shall remain in effect until the Subdivision Improvements are
accepted by the Village Board (§
155.076), at which time the security shall be reduced to a minimum of 5% of the
original security amount. All Subdivision Improvements must be completed within
two years from the date when the security was approved. If Subdivision
Improvements (other than sidewalks subject to separate security) have not been
completed within said two years, the subdivider shall at the village’s option,
to be exercised at any time after expiration of the two-year period, forfeit
the security in the amount necessary for the village to carry out the
construction or repairs so that the Subdivision Improvements meet the standards
of this chapter, plus administrative costs involved.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 12-21, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.057 APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.
   After the village’s consulting engineer informs the village that the
following conditions have been met, the Subdivision Improvements shall be
accepted by the village:
   (A)   The village’s consulting engineer has inspected the construction and
all necessary repairs and corrections and certifies that the Subdivision
Improvements required by this subchapter have been constructed.
   (B)   “As Built Plans” have been prepared by the subdivider’s engineer and
delivered to the village’s consulting engineer.
   (C)   The village’s consulting engineer has received a signed statement of a
registered professional engineer stating that the Subdivision Improvements have
been observed during construction and installed to the specifications shown on
the construction plans.
   (D)   The Subdivision Improvements, including but not limited to paved and
un-paved drainage swales, detention facilities, and permanent erosion control
measures, which are not to be dedicated to public use but which benefit the
subdivision generally, have been built to specification shown in the
construction plans.
   (E)   If the subdivider has constructed all public improvements except
sidewalks but has provided separate security for sidewalks in accordance with §
155.054(C), the village can accept all public improvements except the remaining
sidewalks, as provided in §
155.076.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 12-21, passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
FINAL PLAT
§ 155.070 PURPOSE.
   The final plat is intended to provide the accurate location of lots,
monuments and property dedicated to public use.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.071 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   The final plat need not cover the entire preliminary plan area. It may cover
only the portion which the subdivider presently wishes to record and develop in
accordance with the staging approved with the preliminary plan. The final plat
submission shall include the following information on the plat and accompanying
documents:
   (A)   Final plat. The final plat shall be drawn in black india ink on a
reproducible material to a scale of not more than 100' to the inch. Maximum
size of the plan sheets shall be 24 x 36 inches. If more than two sheets are
used, an index sheet with component areas on the remaining sheets shall be
included. The final plat shall show:
      (1)   The name of the owner and subdivider.
      (2)   North point, scale and date of preparation and latest revisions.
      (3)   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles.
      (4)   General land legal description of the plat with total acreage.
      (5)   All lots designated by numbers and other grounds designated by
names and numbers.
      (6)   Location of all survey monuments and their descriptions.
      (7)   The location of all easements provided for public use, services or
utilities. Easements shall include anchor space for pole lines.
      (8)   An accurate outline of any portions of the property intended to be
dedicated for public use.
      (9)   Lines of all proposed streets with their widths and names.
      (10)   The line of departure of one street from another.
      (11)   The names and widths of adjoining streets.
      (12)   All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating
the boundaries of the subdivision, lots, streets, easements, and other areas
for public or private use. Linear dimensions shall be given to the nearest 1/
100 of a foot.
      (13)   Radii, arcs, chords, points of tangency and central angles for all
curvilinear streets and radii for rounded corners.
      (14)   If applicable, a note on the final plat stating: "Approval of this
final plat by the Village of Chatham does not constitute a guarantee that well
water is of adequate quantity or quality for residential needs or that a
suitable sewage disposal system can be constructed on each lot." Any guarantees
are the subdivider's responsibility.
      (15)   A statement indicating whether or not any part of the plat is
located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
      (16)   A notation stating any setbacks required through covenants if the
setbacks are different from those of the appropriate zoning district.
   (B)   Accompanying documents. The following documents shall accompany the
final plat:
      (1)   Letter from the village's consulting engineer approving the
construction plans.
      (2)   Proof of acquisition of an access permit from either the State of
Illinois or the County Highway Department, whichever applies.
      (3)   The certificate of a registered Illinois land surveyor attesting to
the accuracy of the survey and the location of all monuments shown. The
certificate may be filed as a supplement to the final plat.
      (4)   Notarized acknowledgment of the plat by the owner or a duly
authorized attorney. This item may be a separate document or on the plat
itself.
      (5)   Certification of perpetual maintenance of drainage areas and common
areas.
      (6)   Exhibit showing the location of wells and seepage field areas (must
be large enough to accommodate two seepage fields) on each lot.
      (7)   Any covenants or restrictions relating to the requirements of this
chapter.
      (8)   A signed statement of a registered professional engineer and the
owner of the land or his duly authorized attorney as required by the state
statutes concerning drainage.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.072 FINAL PLAT REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall submit 13 hard copy prints and one electronic
copy of the final plat of the proposed subdivision to the Village Clerk with a
filing fee of $100 plus, if it has not already been paid, the review and
inspection fee established pursuant to §
155.052 of this chapter. The documents shall be submitted seven calendar days
prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting to be considered by
the Commission at that meeting. A final plat shall be reviewed only after
approval of the preliminary plan by the Planning Commission and the Village
Board and approval of the construction plans by the village's consulting
engineer. Preliminary plans and final plats will not be reviewed at the same
meeting. However, if the preliminary plan is being reaffirmed, the preliminary
being reaffirmed and its final plat may be reviewed and approved at the same
meeting if there are no major changes to the preliminary plan.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain one print and shall
distribute the final plats as follows:
         (a)   Five prints to the Planning Commission;
         (b)   One print to the Water Department and Electric Department;
         (c)   One print to the village's consulting engineer;
         (d)   One print to the Village Clerk;
         (e)   One print to the Springfield Metro Sanitary District;
         (f)   One print to the Sangamon County Engineer;
         (g)   One print to the Chatham Fire Protection District; and
         (h)   One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable.
      (2)   The reviewing entitles shall transmit any comments or requirements
in writing to the Planning Commission within one week of receipt.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall review the final plat to determine if it
meets the requirements of this chapter and conforms to the preliminary plan
previously submitted.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the
final plat no later than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plat
was filed. Failure to act by the end of said second regularly scheduled meeting
shall constitute a recommendation of disapproval.
      (1)   Disapproval. If the Planning Commission finds that the final plat
does not meet the requirements of this chapter, the subdivider shall be
notified in writing of the Planning Commission's disapproval and of the
noncompliance found.
      (2)   Approval. If the Planning Commission finds that the final plat
meets the requirements of this chapter, the following shall be printed or
stamped on the original plat and three prints and signed by the Chairman of the
Planning Commission.
"The Final Plat of this subdivision is recommended to the Village Board for
approval by the Chatham Planning Commission subject to the certifications set
forth in §
155.073."
                     By:_________________________
                        Chairman
                     Dated:______________________________________
                           Chatham Planning Commission
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall transmit the endorsed original plat and
two prints to the Zoning Administrator for immediate reference to the Village
Board. One print of the endorsed final plat shall remain on file with the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.073 SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT TO VILLAGE BOARD.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the endorsed original final plat and two prints, the
Zoning Administrator shall retain one print on file and shall deliver one print
to the village's consulting engineer.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall deliver the original final plat to the
Village Board at its next regular session after receiving the documents from
the Planning Commission, along with the applicable minutes of the Planning
Commission and any reports or other written documents generated by the Planning
Commission with respect to the final plat.
   (C)   The final plat shall remain pending on the agenda of the Village Board
and shall not be approved by the Village Board until the following have been
received:
      (1)   Written certification from the village’s consulting engineer that
the Subdivision Improvements required by this chapter have been approved as
described in §
155.057 or, in lieu of construction, a security has been provided as described
in §
155.054.
      (2)   A certificate provided by the subdivider from the Sangamon County
Clerk indicating that payment of taxes is not delinquent.
   (D)   If the requirements of this section have not been met within two years
from the final plat approval by the Planning Commission, the existing final
plat shall expire and must be resubmitted and reviewed as a new final plat.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.074 VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL.
   When the requirements of §
155.073 have been met, the Village Board may by resolution approve the final
plat, accept the security, if any, and authorize the Mayor to sign the plat for
and in the name of the Village of Chatham, with the Village Clerk attesting to
it. The Village Clerk shall retain one print on file.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.075 RECORDING THE FINAL PLAT.
   When the final plat has been approved by the Village Board and signed by the
Mayor and the Village Clerk, the original tracing shall be recorded in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County, Illinois by the subdivider,
who shall subsequently deliver a copy of the recorded final plat (containing
the document number assigned by the county) to the Village Public Works/Zoning
Department. If the final plat is not recorded within two years after approval
by the Village Board, the plat must be resubmitted to the Planning Commission
to determine if any changes in the final plat are needed to meet the
requirements of this chapter. No title to any lots shall be conveyed until the
original tracing is recorded.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 10-01,
passed 1-12-10)
§ 155.076 ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   After the village's consulting engineer has approved the public
improvements as described in §
155.057, the village's consulting engineer shall issue a letter to the
subdivider and the Village Board stating that the public improvements meet the
village's standards.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the letter from the village’s consulting engineer the
subdivider shall execute and deliver to the village a Bill of Sale transferring
title to public utility improvements to the village in a form exemplified by
Appendix A-4 to this chapter. Upon receipt of the document the Village Board
shall by resolution accept the public improvements and the Bill of Sale.
   (C)   In areas within the village’s subdivision but outside the village’s
corporate limits, the village’s consulting engineer and County Engineer and
Springfield Metro Sanitary District, if appropriate shall jointly determine
whether the standards of this chapter have been met. If met, the village
engineer shall so indicate in a letter to the subdivider and the Village Board,
and the subdivider shall execute the Bill of Sale, modified as necessary to
indicate transfer of title to the Springfield Metro Sanitary District of the
sanitary sewers and to the appropriate governmental entity of the water system.
The County Engineer, as a representative in a letter to the village engineer
approval of the streets to Sangamon County standards which shall constitute
acceptance of the streets by the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner; the
Executive Director of the Springfield Metro Sanitary District shall indicate in
a letter to the village engineer approval of applicable sanitary sewer
facilities, but acceptance of the dedication by the Springfield Metro Sanitary
District be by ordinance. Upon receipt of satisfactory evidence that the public
improvements are accepted, the dedication shall be recorded.
   (D)   Upon adoption of the Resolution of Acceptance, the village shall
reduce the security as referenced in §
155.056, and the warranty period will commence.
   (E)   Where the subdivider has provided separate security for sidewalks in
accordance with §
155.054(C) of this chapter, the village will later release the separate
security for the sidewalks by resolution upon request of the subdivider and
satisfactory inspection by the village’s consulting engineer, and in such event
shall be deemed to have accepted the sidewalks.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-60, passed - -96; Am. Ord. 12-21,
passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.077 EFFECT OF FINAL ACCEPTANCE.
   The final acceptance by the village of public improvements and recordation
thereof shall constitute acceptance by the village of title to and maintenance
responsibilities for the public improvements. This in no way releases the
subdivider from responsibilities to correct latent defects in materials and
workmanship that arise during the one year warranty period. No acceptance by
the village of public improvements shall be deemed to be acceptance by the
village of maintenance responsibility with respect to drainage swales,
detention ponds, or common areas within the subdivision. No acceptance of
public improvements shall be deemed acceptance of sidewalks that remain subject
to separate security pursuant to §
155.054(C) of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-60, passed - -96; Am. Ord. 12-21,
passed 6-12-12; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
DESIGN STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
FOR REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
§ 155.090 STATE SPECIFICATIONS.
   Unless stated otherwise in this chapter, all construction of public
improvements shall be performed in accordance with the latest revised edition
of the State of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction and associated Highway Standards, adopted by the Illinois
Department of Transportation and the Standards Specifications for Water and
Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. If an engineering design or construction
situation arises not covered by the above cited standard specifications or in
the following sections, the decision of the village’s consulting engineer shall
be followed.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.091 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF STREETS.
   (A)   The location and width of all streets shall conform to the Arterial
Roadway Network Plan. The minimum width of a street right-of-way (R-O-W) shall
be not less than the following:
      (1)   Major arterial         110-210 feet R-O-W
      (2)   Minor arterial         80-100 feet R-O-W
      (3)   Collector street      60 feet R-O-W
      (4)   Local street         60 feet R-O-W
      (5)   Alley            20 feet R-O-W
      (6)   Existing township highway   80 feet R-O-W
   (B)   Additional rights-of-way may be required for drainage, slope,
maintenance or other reasons not directly related to street classification. The
minimum ROW radius in cul-de-sacs and corner “elbows” will be 60 feet as shown
on Appendix 8 and 9 respectively.
   (C)   For subdivisions that adjoin existing streets, additional rights-of-
way shall be dedicated, as needed, to meet the above requirements. This shall
be done as follows:
      (1)   The entire additional right-of-way shall be provided when the
subdivision is located on both sides of the existing street.
      (2)   One-half of the required right-of-way shall be provided when the
subdivision is located on only one side of the existing street. However, in no
case shall the resulting right-of-way width be less than 50 feet.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10)
§ 155.092 STREET DESIGN.
   The following requirements shall be incorporated into the design of all
streets:
   (A)   Vertical alignment.  Grades. The maximum grade on a major or minor
arterial shall be five percent. The maximum grade on all other streets shall be
eight percent. The minimum grade on all streets shall be 0.40 percent. All
street-grades shall be subject to the approval of the village's consulting
engineer.
   (B)   Horizontal alignment.
      (1)   Horizontal curves. When a center line deflection angle is greater
than one degree, the following curves shall be required in the street: major
and minor arterials and collector streets shall have a minimum center line
radius of 300 feet and a minimum length of curve of 100 feet; arterials and
collectors having a design speed and/or expected posted speed greater than 30
miles per hour shall be consistent with the latest revision of the horizontal
curvature requirements of ASSHTO. A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets for the appropriate roadway classification; all other types of streets
shall have a minimum center line radius of 100 feet. The pavement in all cases
shall be wide enough to allow the movement of a WB-50 Design vehicle, as
described in the State of Illinois, Department of Transportation Design Manual.
      (2)   Intersections. Intersections of major and minor arterials and
collectors with roadways of the same classes shall not be closer than one-
quarter of a mile from any other such functionally classed roadways'
intersections. These intersections shall be located at the quarter mile grid
points.
      (3)   Street offsets. Street centerline offsets shall not be less than
125 feet, unless otherwise warranted to the satisfaction of the village's
consulting engineer.
      (4)   Curb corners. All curb corners shall have a minimum radius of 25
feet.
   (C)   All local and collector streets shall be installed in accordance with
the following pavement standards:
      (1)   Subgrade:
         (a)   Subgrade shall be processed and compacted in accordance with
Section 301 of the IDOT standard specifications
      (2)   Base Course:
         (a)   geotextile fabric for ground stabilization, meeting the
requirements of AASHTO M288
         (b)   6" Compacted Aggregate Sub base (CA-6). For Asphalt Alternate.
         (c)   4" Compacted Aggregate Sub base (CA-6). For Concrete Alternate.
      (3)   Asphalt: pavement alternate:
         (a)   The pavement design will consist of 4" of bituminous concrete
binder course and 2" of bituminous concrete surface course, in accordance with
the latest edition of the IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction. Mix designs shall be submitted to the subdivider's engineer and
the village's engineer for approval prior to paving, and shall be appropriate
mix designs for the forecasted traffic volume and anticipated vehicle
composition.
         (b)   All subgrades shall be inspected by the village’s consulting
engineer. If the engineer deems necessary, subgrades will be proof rolled prior
to paving,
         (c)   If the street is a minor arterial, the above binder and surface
shall be increased to six inches and two inches. All major arterial roadways
will be designed in accordance with Illinois DOT pavement design standards and
as described in the division (4), Pavement design, below.
         (d)   All asphalt material testing shall conform to the latest
Illinois DOT quality control/quality assurance procedures for documentation.
      (4)   Concrete: pavement alternate:
         (a)   A minimum of six-inch, un-reinforced Portland cement concrete
pavement, according to Section 420 of IDOT specifications, shall be employed.
All transverse contraction joints shall be 15 feet and sealed per ASTM D3405.
         (b)   If the street is a minor arterial, the pavement shall be
increased to eight inches. All transverse contraction joints shall be 20 feet
and sealed per ASTM D3405.
      (5)   Pavement design.
         (a)   All major arterial pavements shall be designed in accordance
with the requirements contained in the latest, revised edition of the State of
Illinois DOT Design Manual, and shall be designed for a 20-year period. The
minimum requirements listed in the tables of the Design Manual shall govern at
all times.
         (b)   An Illinois Bearing Ratio of 3.0 (IBR = 3.0) shall be used in
pavement design unless the subdivider’s engineer submits soil tests justifying
a different IBR.
         (c)   Vehicular traffic volumes and vehicle classification percentages
used in the design shall be approved by the village’s consulting engineer,
based on approved traffic projections for the design year.
         (d)   In all cases the minimum street will govern if the above major
arterial design is less.
   (D)   Pavement width.
      (1)   All streets shall be improved with pavements to an overall width in
accordance with the following general guidelines, which are subject in every
case to the discretion of the Village.
   Type of Street            Pavement Width
                  (edge of pavement to edge of pavement)
   Major Arterial            40 feet minimum and
                   as required by IDOT
   Minor Arterial            32 feet minimum
   Collector Street         27 feet minimum
   Local Street            27 feet minimum
      (2)   The minimum pavement width shall be 27 feet from the edge of
pavement to edge of pavement, not including the curb and gutter. Different
widths may be used depending on the anticipated traffic volumes and parking
demand. These widths of pavement shall be determined by the Planning Commission
and the village’s consulting engineer in consultation with the engineer for the
subdivider. If a pavement width narrower than the above stated minimum results
from this consultation, the subdivider shall install "No Parking" signs at his
expense.
   (E)   Curb and gutter.
      (1)   The standard curb and gutter required adjacent to flexible pavement
shall be a valley gutter type constructed of Portland cement concrete with the
following dimensions: 24" wide, 8" thick on the front face (pavement side), 10"
thick on the back face, 7" thick at center line (flow line), and a 10" radius
in the flow line, in accordance with Appendix A-12. The curb and gutter
adjacent to concrete pavement, if poured monolithically, may be limited to the
thickness of the pavement.
      (2)   All arterial roadways shall be constructed with a barrier type curb
and gutter similar to Type B6.18 as described in the State of Illinois,
Department of Transportation Highways Standards. Other locations where a
barrier type curb and gutter are required shall be determined by the engineer
for the subdivision and the village's consulting engineer.
      (3)   Expansion and contraction joints shall be constructed at the
intervals identified and in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois DOT
standard specifications.
   (F)   Pavement crown. The minimum crown used on all pavements shall be one
quarter inch per foot measured from the edge of the pavement to the centerline
of the street.
   (G)   Cul-de-sac streets. Local streets that are also cul-de-sac streets
shall be no more than 600 feet long unless necessitated by topography in which
case they shall be no longer than 1,000 feet unless provision is made for an
interim turnaround with a radius sufficient to accommodate emergency vehicles
and/or a median entrance (See division (J) of this section). A turnaround shall
be provided at the closed end having an outside roadway diameter of at least 86
feet edge to edge of pavement and a street right-of-way diameter of 110 feet.
No obstructions shall be permitted in the cul-de-sac turnaround.
   (H)   Corner "Knuckles". Widened areas or "knuckles" constructed at the
corners of local streets shall have a minimum edge of pavement radius of 45
feet.
   (I)   Stub streets. Access shall be provided to adjoining property not yet
subdivided. Proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of
such unsubdivided property. At the end of all temporary stub streets, a
barricade meeting the provisions of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices shall be installed by the subdivider. Stub streets in excess of
250 feet shall be provided with a temporary cul-de-sac with an outside roadway
diameter of at least 90 feet. The type of construction shall be determined by
the village's consulting engineer. The subdivider shall dedicate a temporary
easement to the appropriate street authority in the amount needed in excess of
the normally required right-of-way for the temporary turnaround. When the
street is extended in the future, the extra turnaround pavement shall be
removed and curb and gutters and sidewalks constructed by the subdivider who
constructed the temporary pavement or by the subsequent lot owner.
   (J)   Multiple access. Any area of development containing 70 or more single
family lots (or equivalent population) shall be served by two functioning
points of access. Where higher densities of development are proposed, a divided
type entrance roadway may suffice with a median of adequate width to ensure
continued emergency access lanes on one side. Depending on location and height
of nearby poles or trees, the required median width shall range between 12 and
30 feet. This type of roadway construction is intended to accommodate higher
density developments and not to lengthen the overall length of a cul-de-sac.
   (K)   Restriction of access. When a subdivision or a portion of it adjoins a
major or minor arterial, no lot shall have direct access to the arterial. The
lot shall have adequate depth for screen planting on the portion of the lot
contiguous to the major or minor arterial.
   (L)   Street names and street signs.
      (1)   A proposed street that is in alignment with and/or joins an
existing named street shall bear the name of the existing street. In no case
shall the proposed name of a street duplicate the name of an existing street
within the plat jurisdiction of this chapter. The use of the suffix "street",
"avenue", "boulevard", "driveway", "place", "court" or similar description
shall not be a distinction sufficient to constitute compliance with this
requirement.
      (2)   Street names signs shall be erected at all intersections within the
village's jurisdiction at the expense of the subdivider and shall be subject to
the specifications of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
The actual costs to install the street sign assemblies will be collected from
the developer at the time the developer requests village acceptance of the
streets.
   (M)   Private streets. There shall be no private streets platted in any
subdivision. Every subdivision lot shall be served from a publicly dedicated
street.
   (N)   Alleys. Alleys are not recommended in residential subdivisions unless
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.
   (O)   Ramps. Where sidewalks cross a barrier type curb and gutter as
described in division (G) of this section, ramps shall be constructed to
accommodate the handicapped. These ramps shall be constructed to the lines and
grades shown on the standard sidewalk ramp example as shown in
Appendix A-5. Inlets for storm drainage shall not be located so that a
pedestrian way will be interrupted by the inlet grates.
   (P)   Typical street section. Refer to
Appendix A-5 for typical residential street section. For non-residential
streets, a pavement design shall be provided based on the anticipated loads
based on the projected average annual traffic volume.
   (Q)   Medians and islands.
      (1)   Where medians or islands are proposed they shall be constructed
with barrier curbing. All medians and islands shall be the responsibility of
the subdivider and/or a subdivision association to maintain. No sign may be
installed in the median which blocks the sight distance at the intersection. If
such a sign is to be installed, detailed plans for the sign shall be submitted
with the construction plans for approval. In no case shall an island or median
contain any other sign or structure except as may be placed for traffic control
under the direction of the village's consulting engineer.
      (2)   The subdivider or subdivision association may landscape medians or
islands. Ground cover may not exceed a maximum height of 12". Any additional
living plant material must be maintained to allow visibility across, over or
through medians and islands at a height of 3-10 feet above the adjacent roadway
pavements.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-60, passed - -96; Am. Ord. 05-05,
passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 15-03, passed 1-27-15;
Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.093 LOT AND BLOCK DESIGN.
   (A)   Size of lots. Minimum lot sizes shall be the minimum for the
applicable zoning district of Chatham or Sangamon County, except when a private
sewage disposal system is necessary. When a private sewage disposal system will
be used for any length of time, lots shall be a minimum of 20,000 square feet.
   (B)   Lot arrangement.
      (1)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or
substantially radial to curved street lines. However, for purposes of solar
orientation, side lot lines need not be at right angles to straight street
lines or radial to curved street lines provided that side lot lines run within
20 degrees east or west from due north to due south. If side lot lines are
being varied for solar orientation, layout and building setbacks shall also be
oriented with their long axis running from east to west, with a possible
variation of 20 degrees to the southwest or 20 degrees to the southeast.
      (2)   Each lot shall front upon a public street.
      (3)   Flag lots shall be permitted only if the Planning Commission
determines that no public health and safety problems or additional costs or
difficulties providing municipal services will result.
      (4)   Through lots shall be permitted only when access is prohibited to
one street as described in §
155.092(J).
      (5)   All lots must contain sufficient buildable area.
      (6)   A minimum lot frontage requirement of 50 feet on all cul-de-sac and
corner “elbow” lots will be applied at the property line. The typical lot
layouts for cul-de-sacs and corner elbows are shown in Appendix 8 and Appendix
9 respectively.
   (C)   Sizes of blocks. Blocks shall not be less than 250 feet, nor more than
1,200 feet, in length measured along the greatest dimension of the enclosed
block area. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the Planning Commission may
require one or more public crosswalks with a right-of-way of not less than ten
feet in width to extend entirely across the block at locations deemed necessary
at intervals not closer than 400 feet.
   (D)   Survey monuments. All survey monuments shall be located and be made of
the appropriate material as required by state law.
   (E)   Lot grading.
      (1)   Trees that cannot be saved, stumps, boulders, and similar items
shall be removed.
      (2)   All grading in the subdivision shall be related to the topography
of the surrounding area. All street embankments shall be raised at least one
and one-half feet above the high water elevation.
      (3)   All building lots shall be graded or have natural slopes that will
properly allow surface drainage to flow away from the principal structures to
be located on the lot.
      (4)   Grading in the subdivision shall provide alternate drainage ways
for the purpose of carrying water away from homes and preventing damage during
periods of heavy rainfall.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 10-01,
passed 1-12-10)
§ 155.094 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL.
   (A)   During construction of public improvements, measures shall be taken to
control erosion and sedimentation to insure that sediment will not be
transported from the site by a storm event of two- year frequency or less. The
erosion and sediment control plan shall include measures to stabilize and
protect disturbed areas, keep runoff velocities low, retain sediment on site
and protect disturbed areas from runoff. The location, type and configuration
of controls such as swales, berms, dams, sediment basins and release mechanisms
shall be included with the construction plans,
   (B)   Temporary or permanent soil stabilization measures, whichever is
applicable, shall be applied within 15 days after final grading to all areas
where the soil has been disturbed or the vegetative cover removed. Seeding
mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seed bed preparation, expected
seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application and kind and
quantity of mulch for temporary or permanent vegetative control measures shall
be included with the construction plans.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.095 UTILITY EASEMENTS: LOCATION OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   Utility easements.
      (1)   Utility easements shall be provided along front, rear or side lot
lines for the purpose of erecting and maintaining one or more of the following
facilities: storm sewers, sanitary sewers, surface drainage, gas mains,
underground electric lines, telephone lines, cable TV and such other utilities
reasonably required for an urban structure.
      (2)   Easements shall be a minimum of ten feet in width. A utility may be
located in the street right-of-way if the respective company so desires and
appropriate permits have been obtained.
      (3)   Alternate locations for various utilities shall be decided upon by
the appropriate utility companies, subject to the approval of the village's
consulting engineer. In no case shall streets, permanent buildings, or other
man-made improvements that obstruct surface drainage be placed on rear or side
lot easements.
      (4)   It is the responsibility of the subdivider to notify all utility
companies in writing when the land to be developed has been graded in
accordance with the construction plans and is ready for installation of a given
utility.
   (B)   Location of utilities
      (1)   Utilities (sewers, electric, water and gas), whenever possible,
shall be located in the public right-of-way or front lot easement in the
following manner: water and electric lines shall be located on the south and
east sides; sanitary sewer and gas lines shall be located on the north and west
sides. In some cases, however, electric lines may also be located on the north
and west sides. Sanitary sewers shall be located in the front easement to allow
the placement of sanitary manholes as shown in
Appendix 10. In the event that a storm sewer manhole needs to be located in the
front easement, it will also be located as shown in
Appendix 10.
   FRONT YARD EASEMENT SOUTH OR EAST SIDE
   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/605a957cb9d14bc352add1a8046c187b1f98d6cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2114.jpg]
 
   FRONT YARD EASEMENT NORTH OR WEST SIDE
      (2)   The placement of storm sewers or electric lines in the rear of a
lot is not acceptable unless circumstances determined by the village's
consulting engineer require their placement in the rear, in which case the
following easement diagrams indicate placement:
         (a)   Ten-foot easements. When an easement will not include sanitary
sewer or surface drainage systems, a ten foot easement width shall be
sufficient and the utilities shall be located as follows:
   REAR YARD EASEMENT-10' NORTH OR EAST SIDE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/605a957cb9d14bc352add1a8046c187b1f98d6cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2117.jpg]
 
         (b)   Fifteen-foot easements. When an easement will include either a
sanitary sewer system or a surface drainage system, but not both systems, a 15
foot easement shall be required and the utilities shall be located as follows:
   REAR YARD EASEMENT WITH SURFACE DRAINAGE SYSTEM - 15' NORTH OR EAST SIDE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/605a957cb9d14bc352add1a8046c187b1f98d6cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2120.jpg]
 
   REAR YARD EASEMENT WITH SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM - 115' NORTH OR EAST SIDE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/605a957cb9d14bc352add1a8046c187b1f98d6cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2123.jpg]
 
         (c)   Twenty-foot easements.
            1.   When a utility easement will include both a sanitary sewer
system and a surface drainage system, a 20 foot easement shall be required and
the utilities shall be located as follows:
   REAR YARD EASEMENT WITH SANITARY SEWER AND SURFACE DRAINAGE FACILITIES
   NORTH OR EAST SIDE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/605a957cb9d14bc352add1a8046c187b1f98d6cb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2126.jpg]
 
            2.   When sanitary or storm sewers are located in the rear of a
lot, a ten foot easement in the side yard shall be required from the street
right-of-way to each manhole or inlet.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-53, passed 8-9-94 ; Am. Ord. 10-01,
passed 1-12-10 )
§ 155.096 SURFACE WATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   All subdivisions shall be developed with adequate surface drainage.
Surface water drainage improvements shall consist of storm sewers and/or open
channels, inlets, catch basins, and manholes designed and constructed to
conform with standards established by the village’s consulting engineer and
shall adequately drain the area being developed, including drainage from other
areas which naturally drain through the areas being developed. Inlets and/or
catch basins shall be spaced so that water will not flow overland more than 500
feet and shall be located so that in no case will water be required to flow
across a street. Water shall not be retained outside the center ten feet of
drainage -- utility easement. Inlets covered by a metal grate shall have a
grate of a type that will not be hazardous to a bicyclist. All concrete end
sections for pipes less than 36 inches shall employ a grated cover to keep
animals and/or children from entering the pipe.
   (B)   If, as the result of subdivision development, surface water is
deposited in existing roadside ditches in quantities exceeding their capacity,
the developer shall improve the ditches and replace culverts as needed to
handle the flow.
   (C)   Unless engineering evidence is presented to the village's consulting
engineer warranting exceptions, storm sewers which will drain 20 acres or less
for residential development shall be designed and constructed to meet the
following criteria:
      Major and minor arterials - 10 year storm frequency
      All other areas - 5 year storm frequency
Storm sewer and pipe culvert materials shall be Class A reinforced concrete per
IDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, latest edition.
Exceptions may be allowed only in instances where the storm sewer is located
beneath a paved ditch and not subject to damage by utility installation, fence
posts or other anticipated construction activities on private properties.
Exceptions must be approved by the village's consulting engineer.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide grade
control for rear lot drainage to each lot owner. At locations where back yards
abut other back yards or potential future back yards, a concrete swale shall be
constructed in an easement along the rear property line to provide grade
control and accommodate discharge from sump pumps. At locations where back
yards abut public roads, underdrains will be installed in an easement along the
rear or side property line to accommodate the discharge from sump pumps. At all
locations, the swales and the underdrains required by this section are will
rain into the storm sewer system constructed by the developer for the
subdivision. These swales and underdrains are not public works and they will
not be dedicated to an accepted by the village. Nevertheless, no construction
surety shall be fully released until the village’s consulting engineer has
approved the underdrains and/or the swales in the subdivision. Upon approval by
the village’s consulting engineer, it shall be the responsibility of each
adjoining lot owner to maintain the underdrains and swales to keep them free
from features that restrict natural drainage. All swales in residential
subdivisions shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete, five inches
thick, as indicated on the drawing entitled "paved ditch detail", Appendix
A-6. Exceptions may be made only when rear yard swales have longitudinal slopes
of 1% or greater. Swales in commercial subdivisions shall be approved by the
village engineer on a case-by-case basis based upon the characteristics of the
site. The underdrains installed will be six- inch to eight-inch pipe as
indicated on the drawing entitled “underdrain detail”, Appendix
A-6a.
   (E)   The controlled release and storage of excess storm water runoff shall
be required in combination for all of the areas indicated on the preliminary
plan.
      (1)   The controlled release of storm water runoff shall not exceed the
release or discharge rate which existed at the site prior to development. This
rate shall be known as the predeveloped discharge rate. In the case of multiple
discharge locations, no location shall discharge at a rate higher than the pre-
developed discharge rate for that location under any set of conditions. The
controlled release rate in any case shall not exceed the rated capacity of the
existing natural downstream outlet channel or storm sewer system as determined
by the village's consulting engineer. The rate at which storm water runoff is
transported into a designated storage area may be as determined by the design
engineer and is unrestricted.
      (2)   A natural or surface channel system shall be designed with adequate
capacity to convey the storm water runoff from all tributary upstream areas
through the development. This by- pass channel shall be designed to carry the
peak rate of runoff from a 50-year storm assuming all storm sewers are blocked
and that the upstream areas are fully developed and have been saturated with
antecedent rainfall. No habitable structures shall be constructed within this
channel, however, streets and parking or playground areas and utility easements
shall be considered compatible primary uses.
      (3)   Storm water runoff capacity of detention facilities and discharge
rates from such facilities shall be calculated by analyzing volume and rate of
runoff during pre- and post-development conditions for the 10-year and the 100-
year recurrence intervals.
      (4)   Storage capacity and discharge rates shall be based on the maximum
calculated volume and peak flow of storm waters, respectively.
      (5)   Storage facilities shall be designed using the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS) method of calculating runoff discharge rate and total volume of
storage. The rational method of calculating runoff may be used for subdivisions
less than 20 acres.
      (6)   The storage volume shall be provided for the fully developed
watershed that is tributary to the area designated for detention purposes. The
control structure for discharge shall maintain the release rate at or below the
rate established in subdivision (1) for all rainfall events of 100-year or less
frequency.
      (7)   Detention reservoirs or bottom storm water storage areas shall be
designed to serve a secondary purpose for recreation, open space or other types
of uses that will not be adversely affected by occasional or intermittent
flooding. A method of carrying the low flow through these areas shall be
provided in addition to a system of drains, and both shall be provided with a
positive gravity outlet to a natural channel or other storm sewer facility with
adequate capacity. The combination of storage of the water from a 100-year
storm and the design release rate shall not result in a storage duration in
excess of 72 hours. Maximum depths of planned storm-water storage shall not
exceed four feet unless the existing natural ground contours and other
conditions lend themselves to greater storage depth, which shall be approved by
the village's consulting engineer. Minimum grades for turf areas shall be 0.6%
and maximum slopes shall be ten percent. Storage area side slopes shall be kept
as close to the natural land contours as practical and a ten percent slope or
less shall be used whenever possible. If slopes greater than ten percent are
necessary to meet storage requirements or area restrictions, approval shall be
obtained from the village's consulting engineer, and suitable erosion control
shall be provided in addition to the protection required to insure public
health and safety.
      (8)   Outlet control structures shall be designed as simply as possible
and shall require little or no maintenance and/or attention for proper
operation. Each storm water storage area shall be provided with a method of
emergency overflow in the event that a storm in excess of the 100-year return
frequency storm occurs. The emergency overflow facility shall be designed to
function without maintenance and/or attention and shall become part of the
natural or surface channel system described in a preceding paragraph. Hydraulic
calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design features. Both
outlet control structures and emergency overflow facilities shall be designed
and constructed to fully protect the public health and safety. Storm water
runoff velocities shall be kept to a minimum and turbulent conditions at an
outfall control structure will not be permitted without complete protection for
the public safety. The use of restrictive fences shall be kept to a minimum and
shall be used only as a last resort when no other method is feasible.
      (9)   Retention reservoir or wet bottom storm water storage areas shall
be designed with all of the items required for detention reservoir storage
areas except that a low flow conduit and a system of drains with a positive
gravity outlet shall not be required. However, the following additional
conditions shall be complied with:
         (a)   Water surface area shall not exceed one-tenth of the tributary
drainage area.
         (b)   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion from
wave action.
         (c)   Minimum normal water depth shall be four feet. If fish are to be
used to keep the pond clean, a minimum of one-fourth of the pond area shall be
a minimum of ten feet deep.
         (d)   Facilities shall be available, if possible, to allow the pond
level to be lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline
maintenance.
         (e)   Control structures for storm water release shall be designed to
operate at full capacity with only a minor increase in the water surface water
level. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted to substantiate all design
features.
         (f)   Aeration facilities to prevent pond stagnation shall be
provided, if necessary. Design calculations to substantiate the effectiveness
of these aeration facilities shall be submitted with construction plans.
Agreement for the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities
shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the village's consulting engineer and
Planning Commission.
      (10) Where developments form only a portion of the watershed or contain
portions of several watersheds, the requirements for providing storage shall be
based upon that proportion of the area being developed as compared to the total
watershed tributary to the storage area. Compensating storage will be
acceptable whenever it is justified and feasible. As a watershed is developed
with a series of storm water storage facilities, due consideration will be
given for calculations of the allowable release rate and capacity of the
natural or surface channel system as described in §
155.096(E)(2).
      (11) Where development of a property presents the threat of flooding or
damage by flash flood runoff to downstream residents, the facilities for storm
water runoff control shall be constructed prior to any earthmoving or drainage
construction on the project site.
      (12) The construction of the storm water control systems shall be
accomplished as part of the cost of land development. If the amount of storage
capacity can be increased to provide certain benefits to the surrounding
properties, negotiations for public participation in the cost of such
development may be feasible.
      (13) The ability to retain and maximize the ground water recharge
capacity of the area being developed is encouraged. Design of the storm water
runoff control system as provided in §
155.096(E)(7) shall give due consideration to providing ground water recharge
to compensate for the reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground
surface is paved and/or roofed over. The use of natural gravel deposits for the
lower portions of storm runoff storage areas, the flattening of drainage slopes
and the retention of existing topography are samples of possible recharge
methods.
      (14) During the construction phase of land development, facilities shall
be provided by appropriate stock-pile design, to prevent the erosion and
washing away of the earth. Silting of downstream areas shall be prevented
through the strategic use of silting basins, sodding of runoff channels, and by
limiting the period of time during which the earth is stripped of vegetation.
      (15) Final engineering plans shall show complete details for all items
covered in this Section. Plans, specifications and all calculations for storm
water runoff control and storm sewers shall be submitted for review and
approval as part of the construction plan submittal or as part of the site plan
submittal for large scale developments.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-53, passed 8-9-94; Am. Ord. 05-05,
passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.097 BACKFILL OVER UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.
   (A)   Underground utilities shall be backfilled in accordance with Appendix
A-8.
   (B)   As an alternate to the backfill materials specified in Appendix A-11,
the use of “flowable fill” will be permitted. This mix shall consist of a lean
concrete mix with no less than 50 pounds of cement per cubic yard, 200 to 600
pounds of fly ash, 2,000 to 3,000 pounds of fine aggregate, and 35 to 65
gallons of water. Minimum 28-day compressive strength shall not be less than
150 psi.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 15-03,
passed 1-27-15; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.098 SIDEWALKS.
   Concrete sidewalks at least four feet wide and four inches thick shall be
constructed on both sides of each street in the subdivision at least none and
one-half feet from and at least nine inches above the back of the curbs.
Sidewalks shall be located one foot inside the street right-of-way. Sidewalks
shall also be constructed along the side adjacent to the subdivision on all
streets bordering the subdivision. Along arterials and minor arterials, five-
foot wide sidewalks or ten-foot wide asphalt bike trails shall be required. The
determination to construct either sidewalks or bike trails along arterials and
minor arterials will be at the village’s sole discretion based, among other
things, upon anticipated vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic, planned
future bike trails and safety considerations. All walks at corner lots shall be
extended out to gutter(s) as per IDOT latest edition of the Illinois Department
of Transportation Highway Standards. The developer shall construct the ADA
sidewalk ramps as per IDOT latest edition of the Illinois Department of
Transportation Highway Standards on all corners at the time of street and curb
and gutter construction. If allowed and approved, the developer shall also
construct all mid-block and cul-de-sac sidewalk connections (running
perpendicular to the street and/or between two properties) at the time of
street and curb and gutter construction.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-53, passed 8-9-94; Am. Ord. 05-05,
passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.099 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Sanitary sewers.  
      (1)   When a subdivision is located within the service area of a public
sanitary sewerage system, sanitary sewers shall be constructed throughout the
entire subdivision in such a manner as to serve adequately each building lot.
         (a)   Public sanitary sewers shall be located in the north or west
boulevard (between curb and sidewalk) within the street right-of-way or in a
15' easement behind the sidewalk within the house setback area. Parallel sewer
lines along the street may be used. Sanitary sewers shall not be located in the
rear yard.
         (b)   Under no circumstance shall the entrance of storm water or
ground water to the sanitary sewers be permitted.
         (c)   All sanitary sewer collections and disposal systems shall comply
with the ordinances of the Village of Chatham, the Springfield Metro Sanitary
District and the requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      (2)   Acceptable sanitary pipe materials shall be acceptable to the
Springfield Metro Sanitary District and shall consist of:
         (a)   PVC composite sewer pipe conforming to ASTM D 2680 with solvent
weld or gasketed joints; or
         (b)   Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) sewer pipe conforming to ASTM D 3034,
type PSM for sizes 4" - 15" and ASTM F-679 for sizes 18" - 27". Minimum
acceptable SDR shall be 35; or
         (c)   PVC corrugated sewer pipe with a smooth interior. This pipe
shall conform to the requirements of ASTM Standard F794 and Uni-bell Uni-P-9.
Pipe shall be made of PVC material having a cell classification of 124-54-B as
defined in ASTM D 1784. Pipe stiffness at 5% deflection shall be 46 psi for all
sizes (8" - 30") when tested in accordance with ASTM 2412. PVC pipe meeting
ASTM F-942 is not acceptable.
         (d)   Where lateral sewers have less than five feet of cover, Class 52
ductile iron pipe shall be used within public right of way beyond back of curbs
and within utility easements. The developer shall supply and use proper
adaptors to connect the ductile iron pipe.
   NOTE: All sanitary laterals will be marked by using a 2" x 4" (painted
orange) board 4' above the ground to denote location of service lines.
      (3)   The developer or contractor shall record a video of each sanitary
sewer line, upon completion and testing thereof, and shall provide the video to
the village and the Village Engineer on a DVD, or in such other file format and
on such storage medium as may be required by the village.
   (B)   Private sewage disposal systems. Where no public sanitary sewerage
system is available (See §
155.022(A)(1)), individual sanitary disposal systems shall be installed to
service individual dwelling units according to conditions set forth in §
155.022. These sanitary disposal systems shall be installed in accordance with
the latest revised edition of the Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing
Act and private sewage disposal code promulgated by the Illinois Department of
Public Health and the applicable ordinance of the village. Sufficient area
shall be provided to accommodate two seepage fields.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 94-53, passed 8-9-94; Am. Ord. 05-05,
passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 15-03, passed 1-27-15; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.100 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Public water supply.
      (1)   Water mains not less than six inches in diameter shall be
constructed throughout the entire subdivision. Larger diameter pipes may be
required by the village to provide for future transmission needs, in which
case, the village shall pay any incremental costs, over and above the costs to
install a six-inch main. All mains shall conform to SDR 21 requirements and
shall be installed with No. 12 insulated tracing wire, secured at every joint
with duct tape and exposed in every valve box.
      (2)   Every water supply system shall be designed in such a manner as to
provide an area fire flow meeting the requirements established by the Fire
Safety Division of the Fire Department. Water mains larger than six inches in
diameter shall be installed at the subdivider's expense if needed to provide
the area fire flow required by the Insurance Services office guild for
determination of required fire flow. A minimum of 1,000 gallons per minute with
a residual pressure of 20 pounds per square inch shall be required. Fire
hydrants with shut-off valves at each hydrant shall be installed throughout the
entire system at maximum intervals of 600 feet or less if required by the Fire
Protection District. All fire hydrants shall be three nozzle hydrants with
threads as specified by the Chatham Fire Department and shall have flow
characteristics similar to those of a five and a quarter inch hydrant valve.
      (3)   All fire hydrants installed on roads with 50-foot rights-of-way
shall be located as shown in Appendix
A-7. All fire hydrants installed on roads with 60-foot rights-of-way shall be
standard "tees".
   (B)   Private water supply. When a public water supply is not feasible and
the subdivision is outside the corporate limits of Chatham, a private well may
be used. Wells shall be constructed according to the Illinois Water Well Pump
Installation Code. The lot owners will be required to connect to the Village of
Chatham water system at such time as a public water main has been extended to
within 200' of any portion of the owner's property.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.101 ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION.
   The underground electric distribution system shall be installed on utility
easements along front lot lines. Transformers shall normally be placed on every
other lot line with secondary conductors and distribution pedestals installed
on the opposite side of the street. In some instances transformers may be
installed on both sides of the street. All primary and secondary cables shall
be in conduit.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.102 STREET LIGHTING.
   Street lights shall be installed along public streets in the village by the
subdivider.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.103 PUBLIC AREAS AND OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Due consideration shall be given to the allocation of areas suitably
located and of adequate size for playgrounds and parks for local or
neighborhood use as well as public service areas.
   (B)   When a proposed school, neighborhood park, electric substation, water
storage tank, recreation area, or public access to water frontage shown in the
Official Plan, is located in whole or part in a proposed subdivision, the
Village Board may require, as a condition of final plat approval, that such
space within the subdivision be reserved and not developed for a period not to
exceed one year from the date of such final plat approval. Within the one year
period, the appropriate public agency may acquire the reserved property in the
manner provided by law. If the reserved site is not acquired and no legal
action is filed within the one year period, the reservation shall become void
and the site previously reserved may then be used for other purposes.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
MINOR SUBDIVISION
§ 155.110 PURPOSE.
   (A)   A minor subdivision is the creation of a total of up to four lots
(counting the original tract from which the lots are created) which front along
a public road.
   (B)   The minor subdivision is designed to allow the sale of said lots
without the delay and expense of the conventional subdivision process.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.111 LOCATION MAP.
   (A)   Location map submission requirements. The location map shall consist
of data added to an existing base map of a suitable scale covering an area of
at least one mile radius from the tract proposed for development. The location
map shall show the following information:
      (1)   Title of proposed subdivision.
      (2)   North point, scale and date.
      (3)   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider,
engineer and registered land surveyor with the name and address of the contact
person to whom any notice is to be sent.
      (4)   Outline of the entire area owned or controlled by the subdivider
with approximate boundary dimensions and total acreage.
      (5)   Existing streets and roads expected to serve the area to be
subdivided.
      (6)   Existing utility lines expected to serve the area to be subdivided.
      (7)   Existing and proposed zoning.
      (8)   Method of sewage disposal.
      (9)   Method of water supply.
      (10) Electric service provider.
      (11) Fire protection district.
      (12) School district.
   (B)   Location map review process.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit 12 hard copy prints and one electronic
copy of the location map to the Zoning Administrator. Subdivision documents
must be submitted seven calendar days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting to be considered by the Commission at that meeting.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain one print and distribute the
remainder as follows:
         (a)   Two prints to the Planning Commission;
         (b)   One print to the Water Department and Electric Department;
         (c)   One print to the village's consulting engineer;
         (d)   One print to the Village Clerk;
         (e)   One print to the Chatham Fire Protection District;
         (f)   One print to the Springfield Metro Sanitary District;
         (g)   One print to the Sangamon County Engineer, if applicable;
         (h)   One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
         (i)   One print to the Sangamon County Soil and Water Conservation
District; and
         (j)   One print to the appropriate school district.
      (3)   The entities listed in division (B)(2) shall transmit their
comments on suitability of the site in writing to the Planning Commission
within one week of receipt.
      (4)   The Planning Commission shall review the suitability of the site
based on comments received and the suitability criteria outlined in §
155.022. The Planning Commission shall either approve or disapprove the
location map based on the suitability of the site at its next regularly
scheduled meeting after the plan was filed. If the location map is disapproved,
the owners shall be informed in writing of the noncompliance found. The
Commission's decision may be appealed to the Village Board as described in §
155.161.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35,
passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.112 FINAL PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Final plat submission requirements.
      (1)   The final plat shall be consistent with the current zoning district
classification of the property.
      (2)   The following shall be submitted on a plan drawn to a scale of no
more than 100' to the inch or in accompanying documents:
         (a)   North point, scale and date of preparation and any revisions.
         (b)   Names and addresses of the owner, engineer and registered land
surveyor.
         (c)   Total acreage.
         (d)   Lot numbers.
         (e)   Existing utilities and drainage courses within and adjacent to
the site.
         (f)   Location of all present property lines, section lines, streets,
building and watercourses within the area and within 100 feet of the area.
         (g)   Location of proposed lots, setback lines and utility easements.
         (h)   Contours referring to the United States Geological Survey datum
with intervals of two feet or less unless a greater interval is required
because of terrain. This requirement may be waived by the Planning Commission
in its sole discretion. Any such waiver shall be noted on the final plat and
signed by the Chairman of the Planning Commission.
         (i)   If applicable, a note on the final plat stating: "Approval of
this final plat by the Village of Chatham does not constitute a guarantee that
well water is of adequate quantity or quality for residential needs or that a
suitable sewage disposal system can be constructed on each lot." Any guarantees
are the subdivider's responsibility.
         (j)   A statement indicating whether or not any part of the plat is
located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
         (k)   A notation stating any setback required through covenants if the
setbacks are different from those of the appropriate zoning district.
   (B)   Accompanying documents. The following documents shall accompany the
final plat:
      (1)   A signed statement of a registered professional engineer and the
owner of the land, or his duly authorized attorney, as required by state
statutes concerning drainage.
      (2)   Notarized acknowledgment of the plat by the owner or a duly
authorized attorney. This item may be a separate document or on the plat
itself.
      (3)   The certificate of a registered Illinois land surveyor attesting to
the accuracy of the survey and the location of all monuments shown. The
certificate may be filed as a supplement to the final plat.
      (4)   Exhibit showing the location of wells and seepage field areas (must
be large enough to accommodate two seepage fields) on each lot.
      (5)   Any covenants or restrictions relating to the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.113 REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall file ten hard copy prints and one electronic copy
of the final plat for minor subdivision in the office of the Zoning
Administrator with a filing fee of $200 to be deposited to the appropriate
village account. The subdivision documents must be submitted seven calendar
days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting to be
considered by the Commission at that meeting.
   (B)   (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain one print on file and
shall distribute the prints as follows:
         (a)   Two prints to the Planning Commission;
         (b)   One print to the Water Department and Electric Department;
         (c)   One print to the Village's consulting engineer;
         (d)   One print to the Sangamon County Engineer;
         (e)   One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
         (f)   One print to the Village Clerk;
         (g)   One print to the Chatham Fire Protection District; and
         (h)   One print to the Springfield Metro Sanitary District.
      (2)   The reviewing entities shall transmit any comments or requirements
to the Planning Commission within seven calendar days of receipt.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval no
later than its second regularly scheduled meeting after the plan was filed with
Village Clerk. Failure to act by the end of said second regularly scheduled
meeting shall constitute a recommendation of disapproval.
      (1)   Disapproval. If the Planning Commission finds that the minor
subdivision plat does not meet the requirements of this chapter, it shall
specify its disapproval in writing and state the noncompliance found.
      (2)   Approval. If the Planning Commission finds that the minor
subdivision plat meets the requirements of this chapter, the subdivider shall
submit the original and three prints to the Planning Commission. The following
shall be printed or stamped on the original plat and prints and signed by the
Chairman of the Planning Commission:
   "The Plat of this subdivision is recommended to the Village Board for
approval by the Chatham Planning Commission subject to the certifications set
forth in §
155.114.
                     By:______________________________
                        Chairman
                     Dated:________________________________________
                        Chatham Planning Commission
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall transmit the endorsed original plat and
two prints to the Zoning Administrator for immediate reference to the Village
Board. One print of the endorsed minor subdivision plat shall remain on file in
the Planning Commission office.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 10-01,
passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.114 SUBMISSION OF MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT TO THE VILLAGE BOARD.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the endorsed original minor subdivision plat and two
prints, the Zoning Administrator shall retain one print on file and shall
deliver one print to the village's consulting engineer.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall deliver the original minor subdivision
plat to the Village Board at its next regular session after receiving the
documents from the Planning Commission.
   (C)   The minor subdivision plat shall remain pending on the agenda of the
Village Board and shall not be approved by the Village Board until the
following have been received:
      (1)   Written certification from the village’s consulting engineer that
the plat has been reviewed and any required Subdivision Improvements have been
approved as described in §
155.057 or, in lieu of construction, a security has been provided as described
in §
155.054.
      (2)   A certificate provided by the subdivider from the Sangamon County
Clerk indicating that payment of taxes is not delinquent.
   (D)   If the requirements of this section have not been met within two years
from Planning Commission approval, the existing approvals and recommendations
shall expire and the plat must be resubmitted and reviewed as a new minor
subdivision.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.115 VILLAGE BOARD APPROVAL.
   When the requirements of §
155.113 have been met, the Village Board may by resolution approve the minor
subdivision plat and authorize the Mayor to sign the plat for and in the name
of the Village of Chatham, with the Village Clerk attesting to it. The Village
Clerk shall retain one print on file.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.116 RECORDING THE MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAT.
   (A)   When the minor subdivision plat has been approved by the Village Board
and signed by the Mayor and Village Clerk, the original tracing shall be
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County, Illinois by
the subdivider. The subdivider will deliver a copy of the recorded final plat
(containing the document number assigned by the county) to the village Public
Works/Zoning Department.
   (B)   If the minor subdivision plat is not recorded within two years after
approval by the Village Board, the plat must be resubmitted to the Planning
Commission to determine if any changes in the plat are needed to meet the
requirements of this chapter. No title to any lots shall be conveyed until the
original tracing is recorded.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10)
§ 155.117 LIMITATIONS ON MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   Only one minor subdivision shall be allowed for any parcel of record
existing July 1, 1989. If three lots have been created from a parcel of record
after said date, all additional divisions at a later time shall follow
conventional subdividing procedures.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS
§ 155.130 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Large Scale Development site plan is intended to provide a
detailed layout of buildings, utilities, other improvements and construction
details to insure that village public health and safety standards and
subdivision and zoning requirements are met.
   (B)   The permitted uses and densities and other requirements of the site's
existing zoning district shall be met. However, yard and other bulk
requirements can be varied within the site if more than one building is
proposed.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.131 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   The site plan shall include the following information at a scale of no more
than 100' to the inch:
   (A)   Title of the development.
   (B)   North point, scale and date.
   (C)   Names, addresses and phone numbers of the owner, subdivider and
engineer. A contact person should be designated.
   (D)   Boundary lines with accurate distances and angles.
   (E)   Acreage.
   (F)   On-site vehicular circulation.
   (G)   Parking.
   (H)   Sidewalks.
   (I)   Sewer distribution.
   (J)   Site grading
   (K)   Storm drainage.
   (L)   Location of structures.
   (M)   Water distribution and size of mains.
   (N)   Location of fire hydrants and valves.
   (O)   Street profiles and typical cross-sections.
   (P)   Yard setbacks.
   (Q)   Landscape plans.
   (R)   Location of outdoor lighting and signs.
   (S)   Traffic analysis if more than 200 cars are to be accommodated on site.
   (T)   Seal and signature of a registered professional engineer.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.132 STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   The plans must comply with all standards and requirements of applicable
village codes including Land Subdivision Regulations, Zoning Ordinance,
Arterial Roadway Network Plan and any building, housing and fire codes. The
following exceptions shall be observed:
   (A)   Yard requirements:
      (1)   For all residential developments:
         Front Yard:      30'
         Side Yard:      20' each
         Rear Yard:      20'
      (2)   For all commercial and industrial districts:
         Front Yard:      20'
         Side Yard:      15' each
         Rear Yard:      15'
      (3)   Yard area shall be open area and not be used for parking.
      (4)   When a commercial or industrial development abuts or adjoins a
residential district on a side or rear yard, an additional ten feet shall be
required for each yard that abuts or adjoins a residential district. The
proposed commercial or industrial development shall be screened on each side
abutting or adjoining a residential district by a wall, opaque fence or densely
planted compact hedge not less than five feet in height.
      (5)   For all developments the front yard shall be that area fronting a
public street and which contains the main entrance to the main building or
development. Only one front yard shall be required for each development.
   (B)   Pavement width. Streets and drives within the development shall be of
sufficient width to accommodate unimpeded movement of fire vehicles. Pavement
width shall vary depending upon parking along the street and direction of
vehicle movement.
   (C)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall provide pedestrian movement within the
development and to existing public streets or sidewalks. Sidewalks shall also
be constructed along streets adjoining the development. Sidewalks shall be a
minimum of 4' wide, 4" thick and be constructed of Portland cement concrete,
and shall meet the current provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA).
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.133 REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The developer shall file 13 hard copy prints and one electronic copy
of the site plan of the proposed development in the office of the Zoning
Administrator with a filing fee of $200 to be deposited in the appropriate
village account. The site plan documents must be submitted seven calendar days
prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting to be considered by
the Commission at that meeting.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall retain four prints on file and
distribute the prints as follows:
      (1)   Two prints to the Planning Commission;
      (2)   One print to the Water Department and Electric Department;
      (3)   One print to the Village's consulting engineer;
      (4)   One print to the Sangamon County Engineer;
      (5)   One print to the appropriate Township Highway Commissioner, if
applicable;
      (6)   One print to the Village Clerk;
      (7)   One print to the Chatham Fire Protection District; and
      (8)   One print to the Springfield Metro Sanitary District.
   (C)   The reviewing entities shall review the plans for conformance with
Village Codes and transmit any comments or requirements in writing to the
Planning Commission within seven calendar days of receipt.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 05-05, passed 2-22-05; Am. Ord. 10-01,
passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
§ 155.134 COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   Recommendation of approval.
      (1)   If the Planning Commission finds that the site plan meets the
requirements of this chapter; that the site plan meets the requirements of
other village ordinances pertaining to zoning, building, and fire safety; and
utilities will be adequate, the Planning Commission shall indicate a
recommendation for approval on three copies of the plan in substantially the
following language:
      "This large scale development is recommended for approval by the Chatham
Planning Commission."
                                    By:_______________________
                                    Date:_______________________
      (2)   The prints so endorsed shall be forwarded by the Zoning
Administrator to the Village Board for further disposition, along with minutes
of the meeting at which the plans were approved.
   (B)   Recommendation of disapproval.
      (1)   If the Planning Commission does not make the findings in division
(A) above, it shall inform the developer of its findings in writing and state
the non-compliance found, and shall endorse three copies of the site plan with
its recommendation of disapproval, and shall forward the plans to the Village
Board for further disposition, along with minutes of the meeting at which the
plans were disapproved.
      (2)   If the developer desires to amend the disapproved large scale plans
prior to consideration by the Village Board, the developer shall submit 13
prints of the amended plan to the Zoning Administrator, which shall be reviewed
according to the filing deadline and review schedule established by the
Planning Commission. No filing fee shall be necessary. The Zoning Administrator
shall transmit copies of the amended plan as described in §
155.133 and review will proceed as indicated in said section.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.135 REVIEW BY THE VILLAGE BOARD.
   The large scale development plans shall be reviewed by the Village Board as
soon as practicable after review by the Planning Commission. The developer may
appear and be heard at the Village Board meeting at which the large scale
development plan is considered. The Village Board shall approve or disapprove
the plan by ordinance or resolution; and the President shall endorse the large
scale development plan in the same manner as prescribed herein for subdivision
preliminary plans. Approved plans shall expire, if not completed in the same
manner as set forth herein for final subdivision plats.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.136 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   The developer shall submit four hard copy prints and one electronic copy of
construction plans for private drives, streets, sidewalks, grading, drainage
and utilities to the village's consulting engineer for review in the same
manner and for the same review and inspection fees as prescribed herein for
subdivision plats.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10)
§ 155.137 CONSTRUCTION AND SECURITIES.
   No building permits shall be issued for any structure or mobile homes unless
the large scale development plan has been approved by the Village Board and
construction work either have been installed according to the approved
construction plans or a security provided in the same manner as set forth in
this chapter for final plats of subdivision. Security for completion of private
drives, streets, grading, and drainage shall not be required for purely
residential developments containing less than eight living units. However,
utilities and other facilities serving a public function must be built or
security provided.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
TRACT SURVEY
§ 155.150 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Tract survey approval shall be required as set forth in §
155.005.
   (B)   Tract survey approval is designed to insure that all divisions of land
comply with the State Plats Act, this chapter and the appropriate zoning
ordinances.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.151 SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.
   When a tract survey is required by this chapter, the following shall be
submitted:
   (A)   Land survey showing right-of-way conveyance in fee simple for roadway
purposes in conformance with the arterial roadway network plan.
   (B)   Certification by a professional Illinois Land Surveyor, together with
the surveyor’s seal, attesting to the accuracy of the survey.
   (C)   Notarized owner's written acknowledgement of the right-of-way
conveyance in fee simple.
   (D)   North arrow, scale and date.
   (E)   Name, address and phone number of the land surveyor and owner.
   (F)   Certification by an Illinois Professional Land Surveyor, together with
the surveyor's seal, attesting to the accuracy of the survey.
   (G)   Statement indicating whether or not any part of the land surveyed is
located in a Special Flood Hazard Area.
   (H)   Location of 100 year floodplain, if applicable.
   (I)   Location of all building and their distances from front, rear, and
side property lines.
   (J)   Parcel identification number.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 16-48, passed 9-27-16; Am. Ord. 17-45,
passed 9-12-17)
§ 155.152 REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Five hard copies and one electronic copy of the tract survey shall be
submitted to the Plats Officer accompanied by the appropriate fee.
   (B)   The Plats Officer shall review the survey to insure that it conforms
to the pertinent requirements of this chapter and applicable zoning
regulations. The owner shall be notified of tract survey approval or
disapproval within three working days.
      (1)   Disapproval. If the Plats Officer finds that the tract survey does
not meet the requirements of this code, the disapproval and noncompliance found
shall be specified in writing.
      (2)   Approval. If the Plats Officer finds that the tract survey does
meet the requirements of this code, the following shall be printed or stamped
on the original and prints and signed by the Plats Officer:
County of Sangamon         )
               ) SS.
State of Illinois         )
   I, Sangamon County Plats Officer, do hereby approve this tract survey in
accordance with the provisions of the Land Subdivision Regulations of the
Village of Chatham, Illinois, this ___ day of ______________, 20___.
                                                     
                  Sangamon County Plats Officer
   (C)   The Plats Officer shall keep one copy and transmit four copies of the
approved tract survey to the owner for recording.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 98-69A, passed 12-22-98; Am. Ord. 10-01,
passed 1-12-10; Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16; Am. Ord. 17-45, passed 9-12-17)
§ 155.153 RECORDING THE TRACT SURVEY.
   After the tract survey has been approved, the original shall be recorded in
the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County, Illinois by the
subdivider who shall subsequently deliver a copy of the recorded final plat
(containing the document number assigned by the county) to the Village Public
Works/Zoning Department. If the tract survey is not recorded within 180 days of
Plats Officer approval, the approval shall be null and void.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94; Am. Ord. 10-01, passed 1-12-10)
PROCEDURE AT PUBLIC HEARINGS; VARIATIONS;
REVIEW OF ADVERSE DECISIONS; PENALTY
§ 155.160 PROCEDURE AT PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The rules for conducting the public hearing provided for in this Ordinance
shall be published by filing the same in the office of the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.161 VARIANCE OF SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A subdivider may request a variance of the requirements of this
chapter. Application for a variance shall be made in writing and submitted with
the location and sketch maps unless the need is not then evident. Variance
applications shall clearly state the provisions to be varied and the reasons
why the variance is needed. In all cases, variance requests shall be made no
later than the time the preliminary plan is reviewed by the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   If, as a result of changes imposed by the Planning Commission at its
preliminary plan review meeting, the subdivider desires a variance, it may be
requested orally at that meeting.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval or disapproval of the
requested variance by the Village Board. Along with its recommendation the
Planning Commission shall transmit findings to the Village Board as to whether
the requested variance complies with the following requirements:
      (1)   The intent of this chapter is maintained;
      (2)   Extraordinary circumstances of topography, land ownership, adjacent
development or other circumstances not provided for in the chapter exist;
      (3)   The extraordinary circumstances will result in a hardship, not
merely an inconvenience;
      (4)   The circumstances upon which the request for variance is based are
not common to most other tracts of land;
      (5)   The circumstances upon which the request for variance is based are
not the result of the subdivider's affirmative act or failure to act; and
      (6)   The purpose of a variation is not based exclusively on the desire
to eliminate development costs at the expense of the public improvement
standards as outlined in this chapter.
   (D)   When the Village Board considers the preliminary plan it shall
consider the requested variance. The Village Board may, if it finds that the
requirements of division (C) are met, approve the plan with the requested
variation; or it may require conditions to the variation if it believes the
conditions are in the public interest; or it may in its discretion deny the
variation and insist on the literal application of this chapter.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.162 REVIEW OF ADVERSE COMMISSION DECISION.
   If a minor subdivision location map, is disapproved by the Planning
Commission, the subdivider may file a petition within 30 days of the Planning
Commission's decision with the Village Clerk asking for review of the
Commission's decision by the Village Board. The petition shall point out those
parts of the Commission's decision to which the subdivider objects. A public
hearing shall be conducted by the Village Board after a one week's notice has
been mailed by the Village Clerk to the subdivider. During the hearing, the
Village Board shall review the sufficiency or the propriety of the plan in
light of the Planning Commission's decision. Upon conclusion of the hearing,
the Village Board may affirm or modify the decision of the Planning Commission
or approve the location map or site plan.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   Any subdivider who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in a
sum not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as
such.
(Ord. 94-01, passed 1-25-94)
APPENDIX
   
A-1   Village of Chatham Subdivision Jurisdiction
   
A-2    Facilities Plan (on file with Springfield Metro Sanitary District)
   
A-3   Arterial Roadway Network Plan
   
A-4    Bill of Sale for Public Improvements
   
A-5    Typical Residential Street Section
   
A-6   Paved Ditch Detail
   
A-7   Parallel Tee/Hydrant
   
A-8   Typical Cul-De-Sac R.O.W. and Lot Layout
   
A-9   Typical Corner Elbow R.O.W. and Lot
   
A-10   Typical Sanitary Manhole Location in Easement
   A-11   Typical Trench Detail
   A-12   Residential Valley Gutter
A-1 VILLAGE OF CHATHAM SUBDIVISION JURISDICTION.
   (Confirm current jurisdictional limits with the Village)
   [Click_here_to_view_A-1_in_PDF]
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-2 FACILITIES PLAN (on file with Springfield Metro Sanitary District).
   Contact the Springfield Metro Sanitary District (217/ 528-0491) for a
current Sanitary Sewer - Facilities Plan Map
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-3 ARTERIAL ROADWAY NETWORK PLAN - WEST.
   [Click_here_to_view_A-3_West_in_PDF]
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-3 ARTERIAL ROADWAY NETWORK PLAN - EAST.
   [Click_here_to_view_A-3_East_in_PDF]
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-4 BILL OF SALE FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   BILL OF SALE FOR PERSONAL PROPERTY
   FOR ______ SUBDIVISION, ___ PLAT
   This Bill of Sale is made by __________________ (“Developer”) in favor of
the Village of Chatham, Illinois, an Illinois municipal corporation.
   WHEREAS, Developer was the owner and developer of certain property platted
as Plat _____ of ________ Subdivision, Village of Chatham, Illinois;
   WHEREAS, Developer has completed the construction of certain utility systems
and other personal property to be owned by the Village of Chatham within the
Plat;
   WHEREAS, such systems and property have been found by the Village’s
consulting engineer to be in conformance with the approved construction plans;
   NOW, THEREFORE, Developer hereby sells, transfers and delivers to the
Village of Chatham, Illinois the following goods, chattels, and other items of
personal property attached to or constructed within said subdivision:
   1.   Each and every part and item of a system of storm sewers, within public
rights of way of said plat of subdivision for the purpose of collection,
transport and flow of storm waters. This transfer does not include any
retention or detention works or drainage swales, ditches and depressions or
storm sewers not within a public right of way, which will remain the
maintenance responsibility of the individual lot owners or the homeowners
association, as the case may be.
   2.   Each and every part and item of a system for the collection,
transportation and treatment of sanitary sewage by the sewer system of the
Village of Chatham within said plat, excepting those pipes which transport the
sewage of a single building into a sewer main and commonly known as a house or
building service, and excepting those pipes which are the property of the
Springfield Metro Sanitary District.
   3.   Each and every part and item of a system for distribution of water
provided by the waterworks system of the Village of Chatham within said plats,
except the pipes which transport water from the meter pit to a building, and
commonly known as a house or building service.
   4.   Each and every part and item of a system for the distribution of
electricity provided by the electrical system of the Village of Chatham within
said plats of subdivision, except the electrical equipment and wires on the
user side of the electric transformer or pedestal and commonly known as a house
or building service.
   Developer hereby warrants that subject to the prior dedication of rights to
the Village of Chatham in connection with recordation of the Plat, it is the
lawful owner of the aforedescribed property; and such items are free from all
encumbrances; and that Developer has the right to sell and convey title to the
same.
   Developer assigns to the Village of Chatham all outstanding warranties and
guaranties by any contractor or subcontractor with respect to any public works
conveyed pursuant to this instrument.
   This Bill of Sale is effective upon its acceptance by ordinance or
resolution of the Village of Chatham, Illinois, and recordation of same with
the Recorder of Deeds of Sangamon County, Illinois.
                                                                         
Developer
By:                                                                   
Signature
                                                                        
Print Name and Title
SUBSCRIBED AND ACKNOWLEDGED
before me this       day of                    , 20      
                                                                       
Notary Public
A-5 TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL STREET SECTION.
   [Click_here_to_view_A-5_in_PDF]
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-6 PAVED DITCH DETAIL.
   [Click_here_to_view_A-6_in_PDF]
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-7 PARALLEL TEE/HYDRANT.
   [Click_here_to_view_A-7_in_PDF]
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-8 TYPICAL CUL-DE-SAC R.O.W. AND LOT LAYOUT.
   [Click_here_to_viewA-8__in_PDF]
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-9 TYPICAL CORNER ELBOW R.O.W. AND LOT.
   [Click_here_to_viewA-9__in_PDF]
(Am. Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-10 TYPICAL SANITARY MANHOLE LOCATION IN EASEMENT.
   [Click_here_to_viewA-10__in_PDF]
A-11 TYPICAL TRENCH DETAIL.
   [Click_here_to_viewA-11__in_PDF]
(Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
A-12 RESIDENTIAL VALLEY GUTTER.
   [Click_here_to_viewA-12__in_PDF]
(Ord. 16-35, passed 6-28-16)
CHAPTER 156: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
General Provisions
   
156.01   Purpose
   
156.02   Definitions
   
156.03   Compliance
Swimming Pool Standards and Specifications
   
156.10   Location
   
156.11   Permit; fee
   
156.12   Drawings
   
156.13   Ladders or steps
   
156.14   Fence
   
156.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum safety standards to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare in the construction,
installation, maintenance, or filling of private residential swimming pools and
in the filling of public swimming pools. Public swimming pools are also subject
to the provisions of The Swimming Pool and Bathing Beach Act, 210 ILCS 125/1 et
seq., as heretofore or hereafter amended.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - )
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL.  A receptacle for water, or an artificial
pool of water having a depth at any point of more than 24 inches, intended for
the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and
including all appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed, and maintained in
or above the ground outside of a building used for a dwelling unit. Provided
further, such private residential swimming pool shall be maintained by an
individual primarily for the use of his household and guests and not for the
purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit.
   PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL.   Any artificial basin of water which has been
modified, improved, constructed, or installed for the purpose of public
swimming, and includes pools for community use, pools at apartments having five
or more living units, clubs, camps, schools, institutions, park and recreation
areas, motels, hotels, mobile home parks, and other commercial establishments.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - )
§ 156.03 COMPLIANCE.
   No person shall construct, install, maintain, or fill any private
residential swimming pool in the village or fill any public swimming pool in
the village without complying with all the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - ) Penalty, see §
156.99.
SWIMMING POOL STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS
§ 156.10 LOCATION.
   Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in R-1, R-2, and R-
3 Residential Districts only.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - )
§ 156.11 PERMIT; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall proceed with the construction, installation,
enlargement, or alteration of any private residential swimming pool and
appurtenances within the village unless a permit shall first have been obtained
from the Village Administrator.
   (B)   The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a swimming
pool shall be as determined by the Board of Trustees from time to time.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - )
§ 156.12 DRAWINGS.
   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement, or
alteration of any private residential swimming pool and appurtenances for which
a permit is required shall first be presented to the Village Administrator for
examination and approval as to proper location, construction, and use.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - )
§ 156.13 LADDERS OR STEPS.
   All private residential pools above the ground level shall have means of
egress in the form of one or more ladders or sets of steps, which shall be
removed or secured when the pool is not in use to prevent access to the pool.
Any closure device shall be equipped with a self-latching device or lock.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - ) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.14 FENCE.
   All swimming pools heretofore or hereafter constructed, installed, enlarged,
or altered shall be completely enclosed by a fence of sound construction
erected along the periphery of the pool walks or around the pool, and secure
from trespass. All fence openings or points of entry into pool area enclosure
shall be equipped with gates. The fences and gates shall be 48 inches or more
in height above the ground grade level. All gates shall be equipped with self-
closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of the gate and made
inaccessible to small children.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - ) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall result in suspension of
water service for the purpose of filling or refilling any private residential
swimming pool or public swimming pool. Whoever violates any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $ 5 nor more than $ 500 for each offense;
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs.
(Ord. 76-5, passed - - )
CHAPTER 157: UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
157.01   Definition
   
157.02   Declared nuisance
   
157.03   Maintenance; occupancy
   
157.04   Statement of dangerous condition; notice
   
157.05   Removal of buildings within fire limits
   
157.06   Notice to unknown owners
   
157.07   Investigations
   
157.08   Demolition or repair; injunction
§ 157.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDING.
      (1)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its construction or condition, or
which may cause or aid in the spread of disease of cause injury to the health
of the occupants of it or of neighboring structures.
      (2)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which,
because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause
is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
      (3)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which, by
reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or any other cause
is liable to cause injury or damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of
any part of the structure.
      (4)   Any building, shed, fence, or other man-made structure which,
because of lack of doors or windows is available to and frequented by
malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of the
structure.
(Ord. 73-9, passed 10-4-73)
§ 157.02 DECLARED NUISANCE.
   Any dangerous building, as defined by §
157.01, in the village is declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 73-9, passed 10-4-73)
§ 157.03 MAINTENANCE; OCCUPANCY.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the village; and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a
dangerous condition, or to occupy the building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
(Ord. 73-9, passed 10-4-79) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 157.04 STATEMENT OF DANGEROUS CONDITION; NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever the Village Administrator or any other officer or employee of
the village shall be of the opinion that any building or structure in the
village is a dangerous building, that person shall file a written statement to
this effect with the Village Clerk. The Village Clerk shall thereupon cause
written notice to be served upon the owner thereof, and upon the occupant
thereof, if any, by registered mail or by personal service. This notice shall
state that the building has been declared to be in a dangerous condition, that
the dangerous condition must be removed or remedied by repairing or altering
the building or by demolishing it and that the condition must be remedied at
once. The notice may be in the following form:
      “To               (owner-occupant of the premises) of the premises known
and described as                  , you are hereby notified that (describe
building) on the premises above described has been condemned as a nuisance and
a dangerous building after inspection by              . The causes for this
decision are (here insert the facts as to the dangerous condition). You must
remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the Village will
proceed to do so.”
   (B)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith within
ten days from the time when this notice is served upon the person by personal
service or by registered mail, the Village Administrator may proceed to remedy
the condition or demolish the dangerous building.
(Ord. 73-9, passed 10-4-73)
§ 157.05 REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS WITHIN FIRE LIMITS.
   (A)   Any building or structure within the fire limits of the village which
has been or may be damaged by fire, decay, or other cause to the extent of 50%
of its value shall be torn down and removed.
   (B)   Upon written notice by the Village Administrator or any other village
employee filed with the Village Clerk of the conditions described in division
(A), the Clerk shall notify the President of the receipt of the notice. The
President shall then appoint three persons to determine whether or not the
building or structure has been damaged to the extent of 50% of its value. A
copy of the notice filed by the village officer, together with a notice of the
appointment of this board of three persons to determine the damage, shall be
served upon the owner of the premises by personal service or by registered mail
to the owner's last known address. The notice may be in substantially the
following form:
      “To                            , you are hereby notified that
               has determined the building owned by you at             ,
located within the fire limits of the village has been damaged by fire, decay
or otherwise to the extent of fifty percent of its value and that a board of
three members has been appointed to verify this finding, which board will hold
its first meeting in the Village
      Hall on the       day of           at the hour of          o'clock, at
which time it will determine whether this finding is correct. If this finding
is verified by the board, you must tear down and remove the said building.”
   (C)   If the board of three members determines that the building in question
has been damaged to the extent of 50% of its value, it shall be the duty of the
owner to tear down or remove the building within 20 days after the finding of
the board, and it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the building to be
occupied after this finding.
(Ord. 73-9, passed 10-4-73)
§ 157.06 NOTICE TO UNKNOWN OWNERS.
   If the owner of the premises concerned is unknown, or if his address is
unknown, service of any notice provided for in this chapter may be made by
posting a copy thereof on the premises and publishing one time a copy thereof
in a newspaper published within the village.
(Ord. 73-9, passed 10-4-73)
§ 157.07 INVESTIGATIONS.
   In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this chapter, the
Village Administrator or any other village official whose duty it is to
investigate fires, may make the investigations authorized by 425 ILCS 25/
9 through 14. If the officer shall find that any building or structure is so
occupied or situated as to endanger persons or property, or by reason of faulty
construction, age, lack of repair, or for any other cause is especially liable
to fire, or is liable to cause injury by collapsing or otherwise, the officer
shall order the dangerous condition removed or remedied, and shall so notify
the owner or occupant of the premises. Service of the notice may be in person
or by registered mail, and any person so notified may appeal from the decision
of the officer in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 73-9, passed 10-4-73)
§ 157.08 DEMOLITION OR REPAIR; INJUNCTION.
   In addition to the actions authorized by other sections of this chapter
including §
157.07, the village officials may proceed under the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-
31-1, which authorizes the demolition, or repair of unsafe and dangerous
buildings by applying to the Circuit Court for an order for the owners to do
so, and which authorizes a lien when the village is compelled to take action.
The village officials may also proceed under the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-31-
2, which authorizes an injunction to require compliance with building, fire,
health, and safety standards.
(Ord. 73-9, passed 10-4-73)
CHAPTER 158: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
158.001   Title
   
158.002   Intent and purpose
   
158.003   Rules for construction
   
158.004   Definitions
District Regulations; General Provisions
   
158.010   Allowable use of land or buildings
   
158.011   Control over use
   
158.012   Control over bulk
   
158.013   Accessory buildings, structures and uses
   
158.014   Yards, general
   
158.015   Permitted obstructions in required yards
   
158.016   Building erection and construction requirements
   
158.017   Procedure for zoning of territory to be annexed or annexed territory
   
158.018   Incorporation of the zoning map
   
158.019   Miscellaneous
   
158.020   Exceptions
Zoning Districts
   
158.030   Establishment of districts
   
158.031   Incorporation of maps
   
158.032   Boundaries of districts
   
158.033   Schedule of use regulations by districts
   
158.034   Schedule of height and bulk regulations by districts
Planned Unit Developments
   
158.040   Definitions
   
158.041   Purpose
   
158.042   Permitted uses
   
158.043   Minimum size
   
158.044   Variance
   
158.045   Maximum density
   
158.046   Procedure
   
158.047   Pre-application conference
   
158.048   Conceptual PUD submission
   
158.049   Review of conceptual PUD submission
   
158.050   Technical requirements for location map
Planned Unit Developments (Cont'd)
   
158.051   Preliminary PUD plan procedure
   
158.052   Tentative approval
   
158.053   Review of preliminary plan by Village Board
   
158.054   Zoning procedures
   
158.055   Site plan; final plat review
   
158.056   Construction plans
   
158.057   Required information
   
158.058   Standards for approval of construction plans
   
158.059   Minimum development standards
Supplemental Regulations
   
158.070   Mobile home park regulations
   
158.071   Special regulations applicable to all zones
   
158.072   Off-street parking regulations
   
158.073   Off-street loading regulations
   
158.074   Regulations pertaining to both accessory off-street parking and
loading facilities
   
158.075   Swimming pool regulations
   
158.076   Fences
   
158.077   Signs
   
158.078   Performance standards in industrial zones
Non-Conforming Lots, Non-Conforming Uses of Land,
Non-Conforming Structures, Non-Conforming Uses of Structures and
Premises and Non-Conforming Characteristics of Use
   
158.090   Intent
   
158.091   Non-conformance lots of record
   
158.092   Non-conforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only)
   
158.093   Non-conforming structures
   
158.094   Non-conforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in
combination
   
158.095   Repairs and maintenance
   
158.096   Uses under special use provisions not non-conforming uses
Administration
   
158.110   Zoning certificates
   
158.111   Duties of the Zoning Administrator
   
158.112   Planning Commission
   
158.113   Planning Commission procedure and rules
   
158.114   Procedures for zoning amendments
   
158.115   Procedures for initial zoning pursuant to annexation agreement
   
158.116   Special uses
   
158.117   Zoning Board of Appeals
   
158.118   Procedures of the Zoning Board of Appeals
   
158.119   Procedures for limited rezoning amendments
   
158.120   Appeals procedures
   
158.121   Variations
   
158.122   Fees for variances, appeals and amendments
   
158.123   Violation, penalty and enforcement
   
158.124   Nuisances
   Appendix
   
A. Bylaws of the Planning Commission
   
B. Petition for zoning amendment
   
C. Petition for special use
   
D. Petition for zoning variance
   
E. Petition for limited rezoning amendment
   
F. Fence requirements for business - residential separation
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as: VILLAGE OF CHATHAM
ZONING ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.002 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare.
      (2)   Secure adequate light, clean air and safety from fire and other
dangers.
      (3)   Conserve the value of land and buildings throughout the village by
preventing incompatible uses.
      (4)   Promote the goals of the Chatham Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   This chapter shall accomplish these purposes by:
      (1)   Organizing the village into districts regulating and restricting
therein the location and use of buildings, structures and land.
      (2)   Regulating the height and bulk of buildings and other structures.
      (3)   Regulating the building or setback lines along streets, alleys and
property line.
      (4)   Regulating the intensity of the use of lot areas and determining
the area of open spaces surrounding buildings.
      (5)   Providing for certain special permitted uses and variances.
      (6)   Regulating accessory off-street parking and loading facilities.
      (7)   Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies as provided herein.
      (8)   Providing procedures for variances from the requirements of this
chapter under certain circumstances.
      (9)   Providing for the amendment of such regulations and boundaries of
the respective districts.
      (10)   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
chapter or of any amendment thereto.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.003 RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION.
   The language of this chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with the
following rules of construction:
   (A)   Where the context admits, the singular number includes the plural and
the plural, the singular.
   (B)   The word SHALL is mandatory, while the word MAY is permissive.
   (C)   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot. If a
fraction is one-half or less, the integral foot next below shall be taken.
   (D)   Whenever a word, a phrase or a term defined hereinafter appears in the
text of this chapter, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the
definition thereof.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.004 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, phrases, and terms, whenever they occur in this
chapter, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
   ACCESSORY USE, ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.
      (1)   ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE. A subordinate building or use which is
located on the same lot on which the main building or use is situated and which
is reasonably necessary and incidental to the conduct of the primary use of
such building or main use, when permitted by district regulations.
      (2)   ACCESSORY USE. Includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A children's playhouse, garden house, and private greenhouse;
         (b)   A garage, shed or building for domestic storage;
         (c)   Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock on the same lot
with any retail service or business use, unless such storage is excluded by the
district regulations.
         (d)   Storage of goods used in or produced by manufacturing
activities, on the same lot or parcel of ground with such activities, unless
storage is excluded by the district regulations.
         (e)   Off-street motor vehicle parking areas, and loading and
unloading facilities;
         (f)   Signs, as permitted and regulated by the Village Sign Ordinance.
         (g)   A private residential swimming pool.
   AGRICULTURE. The growing, harvesting and storing of crops, including but not
limited to legume, hay, grain, fruit and truck or vegetable crops,
floriculture, horticulture, mushroom growing, nurseries, orchards, forestry and
greenhouses; the keeping, raising and feeding of poultry (including but not
limited to chickens, ducks, geese, pheasants, peacocks, quail and turkeys, and
whether kept for eggs, as pets or otherwise) livestock (including but not
limited to, swine, sheep, cattle, ponies, goats, horses, asses and mules, and
including such animals kept as pets): bees, fur farms, and fish and wildlife
farms; farm buildings used for growing, harvesting and preparing crop products
for market, for agricultural products, farm buildings for storing and
protecting farm machinery and equipment from the elements, for housing
livestock or poultry products for market; farm dwellings occupied by farm
owners, operators, tenants or farm workers.
   ALLEY. A public way with a width not exceeding 20 feet in right-of-way used
primarily as a service access to the rear or side of a property which abuts on
a street.
   ANIMAL HOSPITAL (VETERINARY CLINIC). Any building or portion thereof
designed or used for the veterinary care, observation, or treatment of animals.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms arranged, designed, used or intended to
be used as a single housekeeping unit, located in a multiple family building.
   ASSISTED CARE FACILITY. A residential facility, usually for older or
partially disabled persons, housing six or fewer residents, with two or fewer
live-in staff, providing shared food preparation service and dining areas and
other common facilities. An ASSISTED CARE FACILITY does not provide health
care. If an assisted care facility is located in an R-2 zone, no more than four
motor vehicles shall be parked on site by the residents and staff at the
facility.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR. Engine rebuilding, major reconditioning or replacement of
worn or damaged motor vehicles and components or trailers; collision service,
including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; and overall painting
of vehicles.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place where fuel, lubricating oil or grease,
for operation of automobiles, are offered for sale directly to the public on
the premises, and including minor accessories and services for automobiles
including washing of automobiles incidental to the sale of fuel, lubricating
oil or grease and not including automobile repairs. When the dispensing, sale
or offering for sale of motor fuels or lubricants is incidental to the conduct
of a public garage, the premises shall be classified as a public garage.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground.
   BED AND BREAKFAST. A building, or portion thereof, containing lodging rooms,
which accommodate three or more persons who are not members of the keeper's
family, and where lodging rooms, or meals, or both, are provided for
compensation.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The space remaining on a zoning lot after the minimum open
space requirements of this title have been complied with.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls built
for the support, shelter or enclosure of any kind, but not including any
vehicle, trailer, nor any moveable device, such as furniture, machinery or
equipment.
   BUILDING AREA. The area bounded by the exterior dimensions of the outer
walls at the ground line.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. A building surrounded by open space on the same lot.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measure from the sidewalk level or
its equivalent established grade opposite the middle of the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof; to the
deck line of a mansard roof; and to the mean height level between eaves and
ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof; provided that where buildings are set
back from the street line, the height of the building may be measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A non-accessory building in which the principal use of
the lot on which it is located, is conducted.
   BULK. The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures and the location of same with respect to one another, and including
the following:
      (1)   Size and height of buildings;
      (2)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets or to other buildings;
      (3)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio);
      (4)   All open spaces allocated to buildings;
      (5)   Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
   BUSINESS. Any occupation, employment, profession or enterprise wherein
merchandise is exhibited or sold, or which occupies time, attention, labor and
materials or where services are offered for compensation.
   CAR WASH. A building equipped for washing automobiles and other motor
vehicles for a consideration, whether the vehicles are washed by hand or by
machinery.
   CARPORT. A roofed accessory building or structure providing space for the
parking of motor vehicles and lattice, or other material. When attached to a
principal building, a carport shall be considered a part of the principal
building and subject to all applicable bulk regulations for the district in
which it is located.
   CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE. A non-profit association, or persons who are bona-
fide members paying dues, which owns, hires, or leases a building or portion
thereof, the use of such premises being restricted to members and their guests.
   COMMUNITY CENTER. A building or other facility used for programs generally
open to the public and designed to serve significant segments of the community.
   CONGREGATE HOUSING. A residential facility, usually for older or partially
disabled persons, containing four or more dwelling units or rooming units
providing shared food preparation service and dining areas and other common
facilities. A congregate facility does not provide health care.
   CORNER SIDE LOT LINE. Side lot line abutting a street.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as in section 2-09 of the Child Care
Act of 1969, ILCS Ch. 225, Act 10, § 2-09, meaning a child care facility which
regularly provides day care for less than 24 hours per day for more than eight
children in a family home or more than three children in a facility other than
a family home, subject to the qualifications and exclusions in that Act.
   DAY CARE HOME. A family home which receives more than three up to a maximum
of eight children for less than 24 hours per day.
   DENSITY. The number of living units per acre allowable under the schedule of
district regulations.
   DISTRICT. A geographical area in which the use regulations are uniform.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for
residential purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a dwelling intended to be occupied as
separate living quarters, and containing independent cooking and sleeping
facilities.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached residential building containing one
dwelling unit.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX). A detached residential building containing
two dwelling units.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY (APARTMENT). A building or portion thereof
containing three or more dwelling units.
   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, or a
group of not more than five persons not so related, maintaining a common
household in a dwelling unit.
   FAMILY CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed or approved by the State of
Illinois having not more than two staff or supervisory personnel, which
provides shelter, counseling and other rehabilitative services in a family-like
environment to six or fewer residents who are not legally related to the
facility operators or supervisors, and who by reason of mental or physical
disability, chemical or alcohol dependency, family or school adjustment
problems, require a minimal level of supervision, but do not require medical or
nursing care or general supervision. A family care facility may include uses
such as foster homes, halfway houses, community residential alternative
facilities, or home individual programs.
   FENCE. A barrier intended to prevent escape or intrusion, to mark a boundary
or to create a sense of privacy or security.
   FENCE, PRIVACY OR SOLID. A fence, including solid entrance and exit gates,
which effectively conceals from view from adjoining property and streets,
materials that are stored and activities conducted behind such fence.
   FLOOD-CREST ELEVATION. The maximum instantaneous elevation of the water
surface during the period of a 100-year flood as established by the U.S.
Federal Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration.
   FLOOD-PLAIN AREA. That continuous area, adjacent to a stream or stream bed
or other natural drainage channels or areas, whose elevation is equal to or
lower than the 100-year flood-crest elevation as established by survey or as
indicated in the study, including any land of higher elevation having as area
of less than ten acres which is completely surrounded by land equal to or lower
than the flood-crest elevation.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. For the purpose of determining floor-area ratio, the
floor area of a building or buildings shall be the sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors of such buildings or buildings-measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls
separating two buildings. In particular, GROSS FLOOR AREA shall include:
      (1)   Basement space, if at least one-half of the basement story height
is above the established curb level.
      (2)   Elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor.
      (3)   Floor space used for mechanical equipment where the structural
headroom exceeds seven and one-half feet; except equipment, open or enclosed,
located on the roof, i.e., bulkheads, water tanks, and cooling towers.
      (4)   Attic floor space where the structural headroom exceeds seven and
one-half feet.
      (5)   Interior balconies and mezzanines.
      (6)   Enclosed porches, but not terraces and breezeways.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO. The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross
floor area of a building or buildings by the total area of the lot or parcel of
land on which such building or buildings are located.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building or an accessory portion of the
principal building which is intended for and used to store the private
passenger vehicles of the family or families resident upon the premises, and in
which no business, service or industry connected directly or indirectly with
automotive vehicles is carried on.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building where automotive vehicles are painted,
repaired, rebuilt, reconstructed, and/or stored for compensation.
   GROUP CARE FACILITY. A facility licensed or approved by the State of
Illinois, having not more than three staff or supervisory personnel, which
provides shelter, counseling, and other rehabilitative services in a family-
like environment to more than six but less than 15 residents who are not
legally related to the facility operators or supervisors, and who by reason of
mental or physical disability, chemical or alcohol dependency, family or school
adjustment problems require a minimal level of supervision, but do not require
medical or nursing care or general supervision.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession customarily carried on in a
dwelling unit by a person or persons residing in that dwelling unit, and which
is clearly incidental or secondary to the residential use of the dwelling unit
and does not involve the conduct of a retail business, and which conforms to
the following additional conditions:
      (1)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area, non-illuminated,
and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.
      (2)   No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building.
      (3)   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than in a single family residential neighborhood and any need for
parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the
street and other than in required front yard.
      (4)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
reasonably offensive to neighbors, if the occupation is conducted in a single-
family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than
single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment
or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any
radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises.
   HOME OCCUPATION includes day care for three or fewer children cared for
solely by a person residing in the dwelling units.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for
compensation and is open to transient guests.
   HOUSING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof containing three or
more dwelling units.
   HOUSING UNIT. One or more rooms which constitute a separate, independent
housekeeping establishment containing independent kitchen, sleeping and
sanitary facilities.
   INTERIOR SIDE LOT LINE. Side lot line that does not abut a street.
   JUNK YARD. An open area or fenced-in enclosure where used or secondhand
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or
handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags,
rubber tires and bottles. A junk yard includes an auto- wrecking yard, but does
not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL. Any lot or premises on which two or more dogs, at least
four months of age, are kept, boarded for compensation, or kept or bred for
sale.
   LIMITED REZONING AMENDMENTS. The reclassification of a property from one
zoning classification to another, provided all of the following standards are
met:
      (1)   The zoning request is not being submitted in conjunction with a
subdivision action; and
      (2)   Final platting of the property has been approved by the Village
Board in the subdivision process; and
      (3)   The zoning classification from which reclassification is sought is
not P-1.
   LOADING, OFF-STREET. A space, accessible from a street, alley or way, in a
building or on a lot for the use of trucks while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
   LOT. For purposes of this chapter, a lot is a parcel of land of at least
sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and
area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required.
Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, or on an approved
private street, and may consist of:
      (1)   A single lot of record.
      (2)   A portion of a lot of record.
      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of
record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of record.
      (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no
case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created
which does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the vertical planes
through front, side and rear lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets; or a lot at the point of deflection in alignment of a
single street, the interior angle of which is 135 degrees or less.
   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
   LOT LINE. A property boundary line of any lot held in single or separate
ownership; except that where any portion of the lot extends into the abutting
street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to be the street or alley right-
of-way line.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or
dedicated street. The owner of a corner lot may select either street lot line
as the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, REAR. That boundary of a lot which is most distant from and is, or
is approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less
than ten feet in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the rear lot
line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet in length within the lot; parallel
to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or rear lot line.
   LOT, MOBILE HOME. The area assigned to a mobile home in a mobile home park.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office
of the Sangamon County Recorder of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes
and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
   LOT, REVERSED. A lot which the frontage is at right angles or approximately
right angles (interior angle less than 135 degrees) to the general pattern in
the area.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage
on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to
as double frontage lots.
   LOT, WIDTH. Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between
straight lines connecting front and rear lots lines at each side of the lot,
measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided, however, that
width between side lot lines at their foremost points (where they intersect
with the street line) shall not be less than 80% of the required lot width
except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sac where the 80%
requirement shall not apply.
   MOBILE HOME. a structure designed for permanent habitation and so
constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or
subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling for one or more persons.
The term MOBILE HOME shall include manufactured homes constructed after June
30, 1976, in accordance with the Federal "National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974".
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A contiguous parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of mobile homes. Developments or portions of
development intended for the sale of individual lots or parcels for the
placement of mobile homes on permanent foundations shall not be included within
the definition of mobile home park.
   MODULAR HOME. A factory-built home which is subject to regulation by the
Illinois Department of Public Health. By law a modular home must have affixed
to it a yellow seal in the shape of the State of Illinois on the electrical
panel box, or a similar seal of the State of Indiana. A modular home on a
permanent perimeter foundation extending below the frost depth qualifies as a
single family structure in any zone in which single family structures are
allowed.
   MOTEL. A building containing lodging rooms having adjoining individual
bathrooms; where each lodging room has a doorway opening directly to the
outdoors; and where more than 50% of the lodging rooms are for rent to
transient tourists for a continuous period of less than 30 days.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or premises in which freight is received
or dispatched by motor vehicle.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designated or intended
primarily for the transportation of persons or goods along public streets,
alleys or other public ways.
   NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name and/or address of a building or the
name of an occupant thereof.
   NONCONFORMING. Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use or
lawfully established at the time of the passage of the ordinance or amendments
thereto, which does not conform after the passage of the ordinance or
amendments thereto.
   NURSING HOME. A private home for the care of children or the aged or infirm,
or a place of rest for those suffering bodily disorders. Such a home may
contain equipment for surgical care or for treatment of a disease or injury,
but does not include maternity care or mental illnesses. Includes intermediate
care facilities licensed by the State of Illinois.
   OPEN SALES LOT. Any land used or occupied for but not limited to the purpose
of buying and selling secondhand passenger cars and/or trucks, motor scooters,
motorcycles, boats, trailers, aircraft, and monuments, and for the storing of
same prior to sale.
   PATIO. A recreation area adjoining a residential structure which is either
paved or constructed of flagstones or the like, which is not raised above the
ground level, and which is not covered with a roof or other structure.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Chatham Planning Commission.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. See §§
158.040 through
158.059.
   PORCH. A covered or roofed entrance to a building, or covered or roofed
patio deck.
   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. Any publicly-owned open area, including, but not limited
to, the following: parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, beaches, waterways,
parkways and streets.
   PUBLIC SERVICE AREA. An area including such uses as fire and police
stations, telephone exchanges, radio and television transmitting and relay
stations and towers, filter plants and pumping stations and similar uses.
   RECYCLING CENTER. A facility for the collection of recyclable materials
defined as such by village ordinances pertaining to recycling.
   RECREATION SPACE. The total area in square feet which is countable as open
space but is not paved in streets, walks or driveways and is suitably improved
for public or private (recreation pursuits) of all residents. Recreation space
should provide for active and passive recreation activities. That part of a
recreation area having a dimension of less than 20 feet shall not be included
as countable recreation space. In addition, countable recreation space must be
at least 20 feet away from any residential wall containing a window on the
ground floor.
   REFUSE. All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
   RESIDENCE. The act or condition of residing or dwelling in a place.
   RETAIL. The sale of relatively small quantities of commodities and services
directly to customers.
   SANITARY LAND FILL. A method of disposing of refuse by spreading and
covering with earth.
   SELF STORAGE MINI-WAREHOUSE. A facility that leases separate, indoor-only
storage areas for individuals or businesses, in which the storage areas are
designed to allow private access by tenants for storing and removing personal
property. Accessory uses may include security and leasing offices. Use of the
storage areas for sales, service, repair and manufacturing operations is not
considered accessory to the self storage mini-warehouse use.
   SETBACK, FRONT-YARD. The minimum horizontal distance permitted between the
front line or side line of the building and the lot line nearest the street
line, disregarding steps and unroofed porches.
   SHED. A storage structure not intended for dwelling purposes or for storage
of automobiles.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above. A basement shall be counted as a story for
the purposes of this chapter when more than one-half of such basement height is
above the adjacent ground level.
   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
   STREET LINE. The dividing line between a lot and the right of way of a
contiguous street.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders; or any substantial change in the roof or
exterior wall.
   STRUCTURE. Anything erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on
the ground, or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.
A sign, billboard, or other advertising medium detached or projecting shall be
construed to be a structure.
   SWIMMING POOL. A receptacle for water, or an artificial pool of water having
a depth at any point of more than two feet, intended for the purpose of
immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings, and including all
appurtenant equipment, constructed, installed and maintained in or above the
ground inside or outside of a building. There are three types of swimming
pools, for purposes of this chapter.
      (1)   A PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL is a swimming pool maintained
by an individual primarily for the sole use of his or her household and guests
and not for the purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated
for profit. Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in single
family and duplex residential zones only as an accessory use.
      (2)   A PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL is a swimming pool maintained by individuals
for the use of more than one household, or owned or maintained by a club or
other not-for-profit organization, corporation or homeowners association for
the use of its members, or owned or maintained by any person or entity for
profit, or maintained by a school, park district, municipality or other public
not- for-profit organizations.
      (3)   JUVENILE POOL refers to a receptacle for water or an artificial
pool of water having a depth of less than two feet, intended for the purpose of
immersion or partial immersion therein of human beings.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereof, is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate use which is clearly and customarily
incidental to the principal use of a building or premises and which is located
on the same lot as the principal building or use except for such accessory
parking facilities as are specifically authorized to be located elsewhere.
   USE, NON-CONFORMING. Any lawfully established use of a building or premises
which on the effective date of this chapter does not comply with all of the
applicable use (no bulk) regulation of the zoning district in which such
building or premises shall be located. For the purpose of this chapter, any use
lawfully established on the effective virtue of lacking off-street parking or
loading facilities as required hereinafter for new uses, shall not be deemed a
non-conforming use.
   USE, PRINCIPAL. The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Chatham, Illinois.
   VILLAGE'S CONSULTING ENGINEER. A registered professional engineer retained
by the village to perform engineering services.
   VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE. A triangular space at either:
      (1)   The corner lot which is bounded by the street right-of-way lines;
or
      (2)   The intersection of the street line and the left side of the line
of a private driveway at an egress point facing the public right-of-way which
consists of the street lines or street and driveway lines as the case may be,
and a setback line connecting points determined by measurements from
intersection of the street and driveway lines.
   YARD. An open space on a lot which is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground level to the sky. A yard extends along a line and at right angles to
such lot line to a depth or width specified in the yard regulations for the
zoning district in which such lot is located.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending along the full width of the front lot line
between side lot lines.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner side
yard lines. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear
yards, but only front and side yards.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard
to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to
the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved
with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend
from the rear lines of the front yards required. In the case of corner lots,
yards remaining after full- and half-depth front yards have been established
shall be considered side yards.
   ZERO LOT LINE DUPLEX. A duplex structure that is situated on more than one
separately platted lot, where the following conditions have been met by the
owner or owners thereof:
      (1)   The duplex structure is bisected by the lot line, and each dwelling
unit is located exclusively on one lot, except for a party wall which is
bisected by the lot line;
      (2)   A party wall agreement or other appropriate covenant, perpetual in
duration and running with the land, has been recorded with the Recorder of
Deeds of Sangamon County with respect to both lots, and which provides for the
perpetual maintenance of the party wall and reconstruction of the duplex
structure in event of fire or casualty, and a copy of such party wall agreement
or other appropriate covenant has been provided to and approved by the Plat
Officer;
      (3)   If a larger lot has been divided to form the two lots, a tract
survey has been prepared, approved and recorded in accordance with the
subdivision regulations of the village, with the recording information for the
party wall agreement and other covenants noted on the tract survey; and
      (4)   The duplex structure, and any subdivision of an existing lot into
two lots, is not otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance or by any existing
subdivision covenant.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. Whenever in this chapter the term Zoning Administrator
is used, it shall mean the Zoning Administrative Officer and such deputies or
assistants as have been or shall be duly authorized by the village.
   ZONING BOARD. The Chatham Zoning Board of Appeals.
   ZONING LOT. A plot of ground, made up of one or more parcels, which is or
may be occupied by a building or buildings, including the open spaces required
by this chapter.
   ZONING MAPS. The maps incorporated into this chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96; Am. Ord. 02-42, passed 10-8-02; Am. Ord. 11-50,
passed 11-8-11; Am. Ord. 12-06, passed 2-28-12)
DISTRICT REGULATIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.010 ALLOWABLE USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS.
   The following uses of land or buildings listed below are allowed in the
districts indicated hereinafter under the conditions specified in this chapter.
   (A)   Uses lawfully established on the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   Permitted uses as established in §§
158.030 through
158.034.
   (C)   Special uses as established in §§
158.030 through
158.034.
   (D)   Accessory uses, subject to §
158.013 hereof.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.011 CONTROL OVER USE.
   In all districts, after the effective date of this chapter, and subject to
the provisions as set out in §§
158.090 through
158.096 on non-conforming uses:
   (A)   Any tract of land may be used.
   (B)   Any lawfully existing or new building or other structure may be used,
relocated, enlarged, converted, extended, reconstructed or altered.
   (C)   The use of any lawfully established existing building or other
structure, or tract of land may be continued, changed, extended or enlarged.
   (D)   Special uses allowed by these regulations for the district in which
such building or other structure, or tract of land is located, may be used as
specified in the district regulations and shall conform to other regulations
set forth for that district, and to other applicable regulations of this
chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.012 CONTROL OVER BULK.
   In all districts, after the effective date of this chapter and subject to
the provisions of §
158.090 through
158.096 on non-conforming uses, any new building or other structure shall
conform to all the bulk, height and area requirements set forth in the
regulations for the district in which such building or other structure is
located, and to all other applicable regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.013 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A)   Compatibility. Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be
compatible with the principal uses and shall not be established prior to the
establishment of the principal use.
   (B)   Location. No accessory buildings or structure, unless it conforms with
the requirements of accessory buildings for conditional uses, shall be erected
or altered at, nor moved to, a location within ten feet of the nearest wall of
the principal building, nor within the required area of a front or side yard.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an accessory building may be located within ten
and three feet of the nearest wall of the principal building if the wall(s)
within three and ten feet are one-hour fire rated walls. For purposes of this
section, a wall shall be presumed to be a one-hour fire rated wall if it is
constructed with two layers of "Type X 5/8" drywall or gypsum board.
   An accessory building, structure of use in a rear yard shall be not less
than three feet from any property line, except that on a corner lot, a reversed
corner lot, or a through lot, such accessory building, structure or use shall
be set back from the property line adjoining a street the distance required
herein for the principal building. No accessory building shall be located on an
underground utility easement or on a drainage easement or so as to interfere
with the easement.
   (C)   Encroachment. No accessory building, structure, or use shall encroach
upon that side yard of a corner lot which is adjacent to the street, upon that
side of a reversed corner lot which is adjacent to the street, upon that part
of a rear yard, or of a through lot, which is within 35 feet from the street
line abutting the rear lot line, or upon a front yard, except as permitted
herein for specific uses.
   (D)   Height of accessory buildings. No building or structure, accessory to
dwelling uses, shall have more than one story nor exceed 17 feet in height
unless otherwise permitted.
   (E)   A private residential pool is an accessory use. See §
158.073 of this chapter for further pool regulations.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96; Am. Ord. 17-12, passed 3-14-17)
§ 158.014 YARDS, GENERAL.
   (A)   Location. All yards and other open spaces allocated to a building (or
group of buildings comprising one principal use) shall be located on the same
lot as such building. The maintenance of yards and other open space and minimum
lot area legally required for a building shall be a continuing obligation of
the owner of such building or of the property on which it is located, as long
as the building is in existence. Furthermore, no legally required yards, other
open space, or minimum lot area allocated to any building shall, by virtue of
change of ownership or for any other reason, be used to satisfy yard, other
open space, or minimum lot area requirements for any other building.
   (B)   Lot division. No improved lot shall hereafter be divided into two or
more lots and no portion of an improved lot shall be sold, unless all improved
lots resulting from each such division or sale shall conform with all the
applicable bulk regulations of the zoning district in which the property is
located.
   (C)   Reduction. No yards, now or hereafter provided for a building existing
on the effective date of this chapter, shall subsequently be reduced below, or
further reduced if already less than, the minimum yard requirements of this
chapter for equivalent new construction.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.015 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS.
   No obstructions shall be permitted in any required yard except as follows:
   (A)   In any yards: marquees and awnings adjoining the principal building
overhanging roof eaves; chimney, if they do not exceed ten percent of the depth
of the yard; and ornamental light standards, domestic television and radio
antenna, flag poles, arbors, trellises, trees, shrubs, coin operated telephone,
permitted signs and outdoor fuel dispensing equipment. On corner lots,
obstructions not higher than 30 inches above curb level, if located in that
portion of a required front yard or side yard situated within 20 feet of the
lot corner formed by the intersection of any two street lines.
   (B)   In side yards: open accessory off-street parking spaces, except in a
side yard abutting a street.
   (C)   In rear yards: enclosed, attached or detached off-street parking
spaces; open off-street parking spaces; accessory sheds; tool rooms; and any
farm accessory building; or any similar structures customarily accessory to the
principal use; and balconies, breezeways and open porches.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.016 BUILDING ERECTION AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permits. No application for a building permit zoning certificate shall
be approved by the Zoning Administrator, and no permit or license shall be
issued by any other village department which would authorize the use or change
in use of any land or building contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or
the erection, moving, alteration, enlargement or occupancy of any building
designed or intended to be used for a purpose or in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Building construction; compliance with district limitations. No
building shall be erected, reconstructed, relocated or structurally altered so
as to have a greater height or bulk, or smaller open space about it than
permissible under the limitations set forth in this chapter for the district in
which such building is located.
   (C)   Building construction; open space requirements. No space allocated to
a building or dwelling group for the purpose of complying with the side, rear
or front yard, or court or other open space, or lot area requirements shall
thereafter, by reason of change in ownership, be used to satisfy the yard, open
space of lot area requirements of any other building or dwelling group.
   (D)   Building construction; usable open space. No usable open space or off-
street parking space or loading space existing or provided for any building
shall be reduced below the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter for
such usable open space, parking space, or loading space, nor further reduced if
already less than such minimum requirements.
   (E)   Lot area and dimension. Any single lot or parcel of land which was of
record on July 1, 1982, that does not meet the requirements for yards or usable
open space, may be utilized for a permitted use; provided, that front and rear
yards are not less than 75% of the required minimum and that side yards shall
not be not less than three feet.
   (F)   Building location. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter,
every building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot, or parcel of land,
which abuts upon a public, fully dedicated street or permanent easement of
access to a public street.
   (G)   Buildings under construction. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of any
building upon which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the
adoption of the ordinance and upon which building construction is diligently
carried on; provided, that such building shall be completed within one year
from the date of passage and publication of the ordinance.
   (H)   Accessory buildings. Conformance to regulations applicable to main
buildings. Where an accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to, and must confirm to, all regulations
pertaining to the main building.
   (I)   Accessory building placement. An accessory building may not be located
nearer to any interior lot line than that permitted for the main building, when
any part of the accessory building is on line with the main building if
extended. However, subject to restrictions on buildings with easement when an
accessory building is located in the rear yards it may then be located within
three feet of an interior lot line, but not nearer than five feet of the rear
lot line.
   (J)   Accessory building, construction prior to that of main building. An
accessory building shall not be erected more than 60 days prior to the
establishment or construction of the main building to which it is accessory.
   (K)   Accessory building, prohibited locations. No accessory building shall
be located on a reversed corner lot beyond the front yard required on the
adjacent lot to the rear, nor be located nearer than three feet to the side lot
line of the adjacent lot.
   (L)   Excavation, zoning certificate. The excavations from or deposits on
the earth of rock, stone, gravel, sand, earth, minerals, or building or
construction materials shall not be construed to be permitted use in any
district established by this chapter unless and until a land use zoning
certificate has first been secured therefore, except for the following defined
extractions and deposits:
      (1)   Excavations for the foundation or basement of any building or for a
swimming pool for which a land use permit or a building permit has been issued,
or deposits on the earth of any building or construction materials to be used
in a structure for which such zoning permit and building permit has been
issued.
      (2)   Grading of any parcel of land for a permitted use where no bank is
left standing and exposed of more than ten feet in vertical height, or when
less than 1,000 cubic yards of earth is removed from the premises.
      (3)   Grading in a subdivision which has been approved by the village in
accordance with the village subdivision regulations and any amendments thereto.
      (4)   Excavation by any public agency or public utility for the
installation, operation, inspection, repair or replacement of any of its
facilities.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.017 PROCEDURE FOR ZONING OF TERRITORY TO BE ANNEXED OR ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   All land which may hereafter become a part of the village as a result of
annexation shall be classified and placed in zoning districts in the following
manner:
   (A)   Automatic zoning. Unless otherwise provided pursuant to an annexation
agreement, any area which is annexed to the village shall automatically be
classified P-1, Pre-Urban District. Only those uses actually in effect on the
date of annexation, or uses permitted in both the R-1 zone and the P-1 zone,
may continue until such time as the lot is rezoned from P-1 to some other
classification.
   (B)   Procedures in event of an annexation agreement. When land is annexed
pursuant to an annexation agreement, which contains provisions relating to
zoning, all hearings which would be required with respect to such zoning
provisions if the land were already in the village shall be conducted prior to
the village's execution of the annexation agreement.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.018 INCORPORATION OF THE ZONING MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the districts established by this chapter are
set forth in the "Zoning District Map", dated November, 1994, as amended from
time to time by subsequent ordinances amending or adding to same, which is
hereby incorporated as part of this chapter. The zoning map, including all
amendments thereto, shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully set
forth and described herein. Said map shall be filed with the office of the
Village Clerk and shall be made available to public reference at all times
during which those offices are open.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.019 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   Unclassified or unspecified uses. In case of uncertainty where the
Zoning Administrator is unable to determine literally whether a use is
permitted as a principal or accessory use, he shall consult the Zoning Board of
Appeals for an interpretation.
   (B)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses such as real estate field offices or
shelters for materials and equipment being used in the construction of a
permanent structure may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator through the
issuance of a certificate for a period not to exceed six months. This temporary
certificate may be renewed semi-annually but in no case shall the effective
space of the certificate exceed two years.
   (C)   Flood hazard area. No building or structure other than those accepted
by this chapter shall be erected within the flood plain boundary illustrated on
the Zoning District Map. The flood plan area shown on the map is derived from
the Flood Hazard Boundary Map for Chatham and vicinity prepared by the U.S.
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.020 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Exceptions to use regulations. The following uses are exempted in all
districts by this chapter and permitted by right: public rights-of-way by
easement; telephone booths; poles, towers, wires, cables, conduits, vaults,
laterals, pipes, mains, valves, or any other similar distributing equipment for
telephone or other communication and electric power, gas, water and sewer
lines.
   (B)   Exceptions to height regulations. The height limitations of this
chapter shall not apply to the following structures: cooling towers, church
spires, belfries, cupolas, elevator bulkheads and domes not intended for human
occupancy; monuments, water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smoke
stacks, derricks, conveyors, flag poles, radio towers, masts, aerials and
necessary mechanical appurtenances.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 158.030 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this chapter, the
following districts are hereby established:
   (A)   Pre-urbanized District (P-1). This district provides for low density
uses presenting a rural appearance.
   (B)   Residence districts.
      (1)   R-1 Residential, Single Family, Low Density. This district is
intended to provide a suitable open character for single-family detached
dwellings at the lowest densities, and community facilities and public open
spaces which serve the residents of these districts or are benefitted by an
open residential environment.
      (2)   R1A Residential, Single Family, Low Density. This district is
intended to provide a suitable open character for single-family detached
dwellings at low densities, and community facilities and public open spaces
which serve the residents of these districts or are benefitted by an open
residential environment.
      (3)   R-2 Residential, Single Family and Two-Family, Low Density. This
district is intended to provide a suitable open character for single and two-
family detached dwellings at medium densities, and community facilities and
public open spaces which serve the residence of these districts or are
benefitted by an open residential environment at medium densities.
      (4)   R-3 Residential District, Multiple Family, Medium Density. This
district provides a suitable open character for multiple family dwellings at
medium densities and community facilities and public open spaces which serve
the residents of these districts or are benefitted by an open residential
environment at medium densities.
      (5)   R-3A Residential District, Multiple Family, Medium Density Four-
Plex. This district provides a suitable open character for multiple family
dwellings at medium densities and community facilities and public open spaces
which serve the residents of these districts or are benefitted by an open
residential environment at medium densities, but is limited to four-plex
buildings only.
      (6)   RM-4 Residential-Mobile Home. This district allows exclusively
mobile home parks.
      (7)   RO-5 Residential-Office, Duplex and Multiple Family, High Density.
(Obsolete) This zoning district classification, allowed by the 1982 Zoning
Ordinance, provided for a mixture of single duplex and multiple family
residences and offices. It is considered to be a potential transitional
district to serve as a buffer between business and residential areas and
business and industrial areas. The Village Board hereby declares this zoning
classification to be obsolete and no longer appropriate for the village. No
further rezonings to this classification will be allowed. Properties zoned RO-
5 as of the date of this chapter shall continue to be subject to the use
regulations for the RO-5 zone contained in the 1982 Ordinance. They shall be
subject to the height and bulk regulations contained in the Schedule of Height
and Bulk Regulations by Districts, §
158.034 hereto.
   (C)   Business districts.
      (1)   B-1 Community Business District. This district provides for
community wide retail shopping and personal services. It is intended to be
located to serve a wide area and be easily accessible to a large number of
people.
      (2)   B-2 General Business District. This district provides for the
business and services needed by the population of the community.
   (D)   Industrial districts.
      (1)   I-1 Restricted Performance Manufacturing. This district provides
for a range of light manufacturing uses.
      (2)   I-2    General Performance Manufacturing. This district provides
for heavier manufacturing uses than I-1, or uses creating appreciable truck
and/or train usage.
   (E)   Planned Unit Developments, see §§
158.040 through
158.059.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96; Am. Ord. 04-36, passed 6-22-04)
§ 158.031 INCORPORATION OF MAPS.
   The location and boundaries of districts established by this chapter are
shown upon the zoning map, dated November, 1994, as amended from time to time
by subsequent ordinance amending or adding to same, which is hereby
incorporated as a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.032 BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.
   When uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   District boundary lines are either the center lines of railroads,
highways, streets, alleys, or easements; and lot lines and tract lines, or such
lines extended, unless otherwise indicated.
   (B)   Wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and
paralleling a railroad, highway or street, the depth of such strips shall be in
accordance with dimensions shown on the maps measured at right angles from the
center line of a railroad, street or highway, and the length of frontage shall
be in accordance with dimensions shown on the map from the center lines of
railroad, highway or street rights-of-way unless otherwise indicated.
   (C)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership, the
regulations for either portion of the lot may, at the owner's discretion,
extend to the entire lot, but not more than 25 feet beyond the boundary line of
the district.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.033 SCHEDULE OF USE REGULATIONS BY DISTRICTS.
   The following schedule sets forth the permitted uses and special uses for
the various zoning districts.
   (A)   Pre-urbanized District, P-1.
      (1)   Permitted uses:
         Agriculture
         Animal Hospital
         Home Occupations
         Residences, Single Family
      (2)   Special uses:
         Campgrounds
         Cemeteries and Mausoleums
         Churches
         Fruit and Vegetable Stands
         Golf Courses
         Greenhouses
         Heliports and Airports
         Historic Sites
         Kennels
         Nurseries
         Nursery School
         Parks, Public
         Planned Unit Developments
         Police and Fire Stations
         Private Outdoor Recreation (including stables)
         Public Outdoor Recreation
         Public Swimming Pool
         Satellite Receiving Station or Uplinks, Commercial
         Schools, Elementary and High
         Solar Farms
         Wind Farms
         Wildlife Game Preserve
   (B)   Residential, single family, low density, R-1.
      (1)   Permitted uses:
         Home Occupations
         Public Open Spaces
         Single-Family Dwelling Units
      (2)   Special uses: The following institutional uses, provided that
principal buildings shall be located not less than 20 feet from adjoining lot
lines in a residential district.
         Cemeteries
         Churches
         Day Care Home
         Golf Course
         Police and Fire Stations
         Private Outdoor Recreation Centers
         Public Libraries
         Public Open space, including customary public parks
         Public Outdoor Recreation Centers
         Public Swimming Pool
          Schools, Public or Private, to be used for elementary, junior and
senior high, with adjacent space for playgrounds, athletic fields, including
scoreboards and/or advertisement signage to be a maximum of 40 feet in height
and 800 square feet in size, dormitories and other accessory uses required for
operation
      Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious institutions,
including dormitories and other accessory uses required for operation
   (C)   Residential, single family, low density, R-1A.
      (1)   Permitted uses same as R-1 District.
      (2)   Special uses same as R-1 District.
   (D)   Residential, single family and two-family, low density, R-2.
      (1)   Permitted uses:
         Same as R-1 District
         Duplexes
         Zero Lot Line Duplexes
      (2)   Special uses:
         Same as R-1 District
         Assisted Care Facility
   (E)   Residence District, multiple family, medium density, R-3.
      (1)   Permitted uses:
         Duplexes
         Zero Lot Line Duplexes
         Day Care Homes
         Multiple Family, Attached Dwelling Units
         Congregate Housing
         Assisted Care Facility
      (2)   Special uses:
         Same as R-1 District
         Nursing homes
         Family Care Facility
         Group Care Facility
         Shelter Care Facility
   (F)   R-3A Residential District, Multiple Family, Medium Density Four-Plex.
(1)   Permitted Uses: only apartment buildings with four dwelling units.
(2)   Special Uses: None.
   (G)   Residence-Mobile Home District, RM-4.
   (H)   Residence-Office District. (Obsolete -- See Appendix A)
   (I)   Community Business District, B-1.
      (1)   Permitted uses:
         Antique, Coin, Stamp and Other Collectibles Shop
         Art Galleries
         Art Supplies
         Banks and Financial Institutions
         Barber Shops
         Beauty Parlors
         Bed and Breakfast
         Book Stores
         Restaurants without drive-through facilities
         Camera and Photographic Supply
         Candy Shops
         Churches
         Clubs - private
         Convenience Stores, no gasoline sales
         Day Care Center
         Delicatessens
         Dress Making
         Drug Store without liquor sales
         Dry Cleaning
         Funeral Homes
         Gift Shops
         Golf Course
         Ice Cream Shops
         Jewelry Stores
         Laundromat
         Libraries
         Locksmith Shops
         Millinery Shops
         Museums
         Offices
         Parking, Off-street
         Public Swimming Pool
         Shoe Repair
         Stationery store
         Tailor Shops
         Video Sales and Rentals
      (2)   Special uses:
         Animal Hospitals without outside runs or boarding
         Community Centers
         Fire Stations
         Health Service Facility
         Owner-occupied Dwelling Units above first floor
         Satellite Receiving Station or uplinks, commercial
   (J)   General Business District, B-2.
      (1)   Permitted uses:
         Advertising sign shops
         Animal Hospitals
         Auction houses and rooms, excluding livestock
         Auto Parts
         Automobile service stations
         Automotive repairs and auto body repair and painting
         Bakers
         Banquet Halls
         Boat Sales
         Bicycle stores, sales, rentals and repairs
         Blueprinting establishments
         Bowling alleys
         Building material sales without outdoor storage
         Business machine sale and services
         Business schools
         Car Wash
         Carpet and rug stores
         Casket and casket supplies
         Catering establishments
         Clothing and costume rental establishments
         Commercial printing
         Community centers
         Construction offices
         Crematorium
         Currency exchanges
         Dance halls
         Diet centers
         Dental laboratories
         Department stores
         Drug sales with liquor sales
         Electric shops
         Electrical appliance stores
         Electronic sales and service
         Exterminating
         Feed stores
         Frozen food shops and lockers
         Fuel sales, retail only
         Furniture stores
         Furrier shops
         Garages
         Garden supply stores
         Golf course
         Greenhouses
         Grocery stores
         Gymnasium
         Hat and repairs
         Hardware stores
         Hobby shops
         Hotels
         Household appliance stores
         Ice sales, retail only
         Interior decoration shops
         Laundries
         Leather goods
         Liquor stores
         Mail order houses
         Meeting halls
         Medical appliances
         Medical laboratories
         Motels
         Motor vehicle equipment sales
         Motor vehicle sales
         Musical instrument, sales and repairs
         Newspaper offices
         Office supply stores
         Orthopedic appliance stores
         Paint
         Parking, commercial
         Pet shops
         Pawn shops
         Photographic, studio, sales and service
         Picture framing
         Plumbing shop
         Private Club or Lodge
         Pool Halls
         Post office
         Public Swimming Pool
         Radio broadcasting
         Recording studios
         Recreation building
         Research laboratories
         Restaurants, with drive-through facilities
         Restaurants and bars with live entertainment and dancing
         School supply stores
         Schools, dance, music
         Sewing machine sales and service
         Shoe stores
         Skating rinks, indoor
         Small engine repair
         Sporting goods
         Taxidermists
         Telephone offices
         Testing laboratories
         Television broadcasting studios
         Theaters
         Toy stores
         Trade schools
         Trailer sales
         Transportation ticket offices
         Travel bureaus
         Variety stores
         Video arcades
         Vending machines, sales and service
         Wholesale establishments - storage limited to samples
         All retail uses compatible with the foregoing list
      (2)   Special uses:
         Antenna towers
         Electrical distribution centers
         Fire stations
         Hospitals
         Police stations
         Private outdoor recreation centers
         Public outdoor recreation centers
         Taverns
         Zoo
   (K)   Restricted Performance Manufacturing, I-1.
      (1)   Permitted uses:
         (a)   Uses permitted in the I-1 District are subject to the following
condition: Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted, except for
watchmen’s quarters.
         (b)   The following uses are permitted in the I-1 District:
            1.   Any establishment, engaged in production, processing,
cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods, or
products.
            2.   Self storage mini-warehouse.
      (2)   The following additional uses:
         Adult uses, pursuant to a permit granted in accordance with
Chapter 161 of this Code of Ordinances
         Arenas, open or enclosed
         Auditoriums, open or enclosed
         Auto laundries
         Automobile service stations
         Building material sales with outside storage
         Bus terminals and garages
         Cartage and express facilities
         Construction equipment storage
         Contractors’ office, shops and yards
         Dental service facilities
         Dry cleaning plant
         Dwelling units for watchmen and their families, when located on the
premises where employed
         Electric, wholesale
         Electric, gas, telephone and water service substations
         Extermination
         Feed sales and service
         Fertilizer sales and services
         Fire stations
         Food locker
         Fuel sales
         Furniture, repair and upholstery
         Garages for storage, repair and servicing of motor vehicles
         Gas regulator stations
         Grain elevators
         Greenhouses - wholesale
         Highway maintenance shops and yards
         Hotels sleeping, lodging, eating and related facilities
         Ice sales
         Laundries
         Machinery sales
         Mail order houses
         Medical service facilities
         Motor freight terminals
         Offices and lodges of labor organizations
         Packing and crating
         Police stations
         Publishing establishments
         Railroad passenger stations
         Recreational center building (public and private)
         Restaurants - including the sale of liquor in conjunction therewith
         Satellite Receiving Station or uplink, commercial
         Stadiums, open or enclosed
         Taverns
         Telephone exchanges
         Telephone transmission equipment buildings
         Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed the duration of such construction
         Temporary real estate tract offices, for the purposes of conducting
the sale of lots of the tract upon which such tract office is located, for a
period not to exceed two years
         Truck wash
         Waterworks
         Warehouses
         Weighing stations
         Wholesale establishments
         Accessory uses, incidental to and on the same lot and zoning district
as the principal use
      (3)   Special uses:
         Airports, private and commercial
         Auxiliary facilities
         Flying schools
         Grain elevators
         Hangars
         Heliports and other flight strips
   (L)   General Performance Manufacturing; I-2.
      (1)   Permitted uses:
         All permitted uses in I-1
         Air-freight terminals
         Fertilizer manufacturing
         Railroad-classification yards
         Railroad-freight terminals
         Railroad-switching yards
         Railroad-repair shops
         Roundhouses
      (2)   Special uses:
         Same as I-1
         Bulk Fuel Sales
         Junk Yards
         Sanitary landfill
         Radio and TV transmitting or relay stations and antennas
         Utility-transmission towers
         Extraction of minerals
   (M)   Planned Unit Development. See §§
158.040 through
158.059.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96; Am. Ord. 97-71, passed 11-11-97; Am. Ord. 01-50,
passed 9-25-01; Am. Ord. 01-51, passed 8-28-01; Am. Ord. 04-36, passed 6-22-04;
Am. Ord. 12-06, passed 2-28-12; Am. Ord. 18-13, passed 2-27-18; Am. Ord. 21-21,
passed 6-22-21)
§ 158.034 SCHEDULE OF HEIGHT AND BULK REGULATIONS BY DISTRICTS.
   Dimensions requirements by district shall be as follows:
         Minimum Lot Minimum Lot Minimum Yard Setbacks (Ft.) Maximum Building
District Area        Width (Ft.) Front Rear Interior Corner  Height (Ft.)
         (Sq. Ft.)
           Minimum Lot              Minimum Yard Setbacks (Ft.)    Maximum
District   Area        Minimum Lot                                 Building
           (Sq. Ft.)   Width (Ft.)  Front Rear Interior     Corner Height (Ft.)

P-1        43,560      180          30    30   25           30     35
R-1        12,000      80           30    30   10           30     35
R-1A       10,000      70           30    25   8            25     35
           5,000 per   70 (35 for              8 (0 for
R-2        dwelling    Zero Lot     30    25   Zero Lot     25     35
           unit        Line Duplex)            Line Duplex)
           3,500 per   70 (35 for              5 (0 for
R-3        dwelling    Zero Lot     25    25   Zero Lot     25     50b
           unit        Line Duplex)            Line Duplex)
           5,000 per
R-3A       dwelling    100          30    25   10           25     35
           unit
R-M4       10,000      65           30    25   8            25     35
R-O5       1,500 per   60           20    20   5            20     30
(obsolete) office
B-1        None        None         20a   20   None c       None   35
B-2        None        None         20a   20f  None c       None   50b
I-1        None        None         25    None 10d          None   50b
I-2        None        None         20a   None 10d          None   80b
PUD        xxxxxxxxxxx See Note e xxxxxxxxxxx
 
   a.   Where adjacent structures have front yard setbacks different from those
required, the minimum front yard setback shall be the average setback of such
structures.
   b.   Buildings over 35 feet in height shall have an additional 5 feet of
side yard for each ten feet of height over 30 feet.
   c.   The side yard of a lot within a B-1 District abutting a lot within an R
district shall be equal to at least one-half the front yard required in the
abutting R district. The side yard of a lot within a B-2 district abutting a
lot within an R district shall be at least 30 feet.
   d.   A lot within an I District abutting a lot within an R District shall
maintain a side yard of 25 feet, and not permit parking of automobiles closer
than five feet to the R District lot.
   e.   A lot within a PUD District abutting a lot within a R District shall
maintain a setback from the boundary of the R District of one-half the lot
width required in the abutting R District.
   f.   The rear year of a lot within the B-2 district abutting a lot within an
R district shall be at least 30 feet.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96; Am. Ord. 01-51, passed 8-28-01; Am. Ord. 04-36,
passed 6-22-04; Am. Ord. 12-06, passed 2-28-12)
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
§ 158.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPER. The person, firm or corporation proposing to develop the Planned
Unit Development. If such person is different from the owner of record, the
owner of record shall join in all submissions required by this chapter.
   NET DEVELOPMENT AREA. An arithmetic value determined for the purpose of
calculating the allowable number of dwelling units. The net development area
shall be determined by subtracting from the total planned unit development area
the area set aside for:
      (1)   Right of way;
      (2)   Churches;
      (3)   Schools;
      (4)   Commercial, offices, and other non-residential uses; or
      (5)   Water bodies except where the shoreline has been incorporated in
the common open space plan; provided that in no case shall the submerged land
constitute more than 10% of the net development area.
   OPEN SPACE. Land or water that is not built upon or used for parking and is
used for creation, conservation, or aesthetic purposes. To qualify as open
space under this chapter, the land:
      (1)   Must be owned in perpetuity by a homeowner or property owners'
association;
      (2)   Cannot be required side, rear or front yards;
      (3)   Cannot be a right-of-way or easement; and
      (4)   Must have guaranteed access.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A subdivision or development having a PUD zoning
district classification that allows the development of ten or more acres of
land with variations of some of the restrictions of standard zoning and
subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.041 PURPOSE.
   Traditional land development through subdivision is in general designed to
apply to individual lots, sometimes making innovative, creative, and efficient
land development more difficult than necessary. It is the purpose of a planned
unit development to provide innovation, creativity and efficiency by:
   (A)   Producing a development which would be as good as or better than
traditional development;
   (B)   Permitting developments which will provide a desirable and stable
environment in harmony with the surrounding area and in accord with adopted
plans for the village.
   (C)   Permitting flexibility that will encourage a more creative approach in
the development of land, which will result in a more efficient, aesthetic and
desirable integration of open space with housing and other land uses.
   (D)   Protecting and preserving scenic and natural features such as streams,
trees and topographic features.
   (E)   Permitting development of more energy efficient living areas by
encouraging bicycle and pedestrian circulation facilities which will reduce
reliance on automobiles, allowing for the proper orientation of streets, lots,
and buildings to facilitate current and future solar energy application, and in
general promoting a way of life that will lessen the consumption of scare
energy resources.
   (F)   Encouraging a more stable neighborhood by permitting a mixture of
housing types.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.042 PERMITTED USES.
   The planned unit development district allows all permitted uses and
conditional permitted uses in all districts of the Chatham Zoning Ordinance
except for the RM4, I-1 and I-2 Districts. The uses may be mixed if arranged in
such a way as to ensure compatibility among users.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.043 MINIMUM SIZE.
   The planned unit development must be at least ten acres in area and of
reasonable dimensions to allow a practical arrangement of improvements, open
spaces, and land uses.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.044 VARIANCE.
   The provisions or requirements of this chapter may be varied by the Village
Board upon application to the Planning Commission at the time of the
preliminary PUD application submission. The Planning Commission shall make
whatever recommendations it deems in the best interest of the village with
respect to the requested variance and the Village Board shall either approve or
reject such recommendation as a part of its approval of the planned unit
development zoning classification.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.045 MAXIMUM DENSITY.
   (A)   The aggregate residential densities within a planned unit development
shall not exceed 35 persons per acre of the net development area. Computation
of the net development area shall include public parks and open space.
Computation of the net development area shall not include non-residential areas
or rights-of-way. Water bodies will be included in the computation of the net
development area when the shorelines are incorporated in the common open space
plan; provided that in no case shall the submerged land constitute more than
10% of the net development area.
   (B)   To calculate the persons per acre of the net development area for
compliance with this density requirement, the following schedule of persons per
unit in single, duplex, and multiple family dwellings shall be used:
 
Bedrooms per dwellings unit in duplex and multiple family Persons per unit
dwellings
0 Bedroom                                                 1.0
1 Bedroom                                                 1.5
2 Bedrooms                                                2.4
3 Bedrooms                                                3.0
4 Bedrooms                                                3.5
For single-family dwellings                               3.5
 
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.046 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The procedure for approval of PUDs consist of the following discrete
steps in the following order:
      (1)   Pre-application conference (optional);
      (2)   Conceptual PUD Submission Plan;
      (3)   Preliminary PUD Plan;
      (4)   PUD Zoning Application;
      (5)   Plat/Plan Submission; and
      (6)   Construction Plan submission.
   (B)   In order to obtain a PUD zoning classification, the procedures set
forth in this chapter must be followed step by step without variation or
exception. When a PUD classification has been granted, the approved site plans
and supporting documentation shall control use of land, regulate the spacing
and height structures, control use of signs, and outline any deviations from
the zoning and subdivision regulations of the village. Where no indication or
exception is given to the zoning or subdivision regulations of the village, the
requirements of the appropriate section of the zoning or subdivision
regulations shall apply.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.047 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE.
   To assist developers in the preparation of a planned unit development, a
pre-application conference with the Zoning Administrator may be requested by
the developer. The purpose of the meeting will be to ensure that the developer
fully understands the procedures and required submissions necessary for
obtaining a PUD zoning classification as well as to make an initial assessment
as to the suitability of the site for a PUD. The Zoning Administrator shall
point out any potential problems that might be anticipated and make suggestions
for their resolution, if resolution is possible. Within ten days following the
conference, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the developer in writing to
proceed with the Conceptual PUD submission. If the Zoning Administrator has
ascertained that there are problems with the site, he shall so inform the
developer in his letter and make clear that the problem or problems must be
addressed before approval of the PUD submission and resolved prior to
Preliminary Plan approval by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.048 CONCEPTUAL PUD SUBMISSION.
   (A)   The first stage of the PUD process is submission of a conceptual
submission consisting of the location map, along with a narrative describing
the developer's plans for the planned unit development including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   A general description of the proposed site;
      (2)   The overall concept for development, including the type of land
uses to be included, their approximate location, and the approximate percentage
of the development that the land uses will occupy;
      (3)   A preliminary sketch of automobile and pedestrian circulation
systems; and
      (4)   The availability and adequacy of utilities to serve the
development.
   (B)   The purposes of the conceptual PUD submission is:
      (1)   To enable the technical personnel of the village to formally
address the adequacy of utilities to serve the site;
      (2)   To make a preliminary assessment of the impact of the planned unit
development of the vicinity and the village as a whole;
      (3)   Insure that the proposal is in accord with the official village
plan; and
      (4)   To determine if the proposed planned unit development is in accord
with the purposes of the PUD District.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.049 REVIEW OF CONCEPTUAL PUD SUBMISSION.
   (A)   The owner/developer shall submit to the Zoning Administrator 12 copies
of the location map and other required submissions. The Planning Commission
shall, after consultation with the Villagers Consulting Engineer complete its
review within 30 days and direct any comments in writing that they might have
to the Village Board. The Planning Commission shall indicate if the developer
should or should not proceed with the Preliminary Plan before any problems the
Planning Commission has identified, if any, are resolved.
   (B)   After all the comments of the Planning Commission have been received,
the Village Board shall consider the Conceptual PUD Submission at its next
regularly scheduled meeting and by resolution approve, disapprove or approve
subject to modification, the Conceptual PUD Submission.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.050 TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LOCATION MAP.
   The location map shall consist of data added to an existing base map such as
a United States Geological Survey map, a township base map that can be obtained
from the regional planning commission office, or other base map to a suitable
scale covering an area of at least a one-mile radius from the tract proposed
for a planned unit development. If possible, the map should be no smaller than
8½ inches by 14 inches. The location map shall show the following information:
   (A)   The outline of the proposed planned unit development with approximate
boundary dimensions and total acreage;
   (B)   Existing streets and principal utility lines of adjacent property
expected to serve the PUD;
   (C)   North point, scale, and date;
   (D)   The title of the proposed PUD along with the names and addresses of
the owner/developer, engineer, and professional land surveyor;
   (E)   A legal description for the property;
   (F)   The approximate percentage of the planned unit development to be
occupied by the proposed land uses along with a sketch showing their
approximate location in relation to proposed streets and pedestrian ways;
   (G)   The approximate densities of the areas within the PUD which will be
occupied by dwelling units. This information should be presented for the
project as a whole and for the individual areas within the PUD which will be
occupied by different housing types;
   (H)   A signed statement by the owner/developer or his agent stating that
the owner/developer holds fee title to the land for the proposed PUD.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.051 PRELIMINARY PUD PLAN PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Following notification from the Zoning Administrator that the
Conceptual PUD Submission is approved, the developer shall file 12 copies of
the Preliminary Plan in the office of the Village Zoning Administrator at least
ten days before the meeting of the Planning Commission.
   (B)   The Preliminary PUD Plan shall include sufficient information and
drawings at a fixed scale along with written statements to properly document
all items called for below. The submissions shall include:
      (1)   The name of the proposed PUD.
      (2)   The name of the owner and developer of the PUD. If the owner or
developer is a trust, the beneficiaries of the trust shall be listed in an
affidavit.
      (3)   The layout of the vehicular circulation system. A traffic analysis
is required where the number of dwellings for the PUD exceeds 200. This shall
include the assignment of traffic generated by the PUD on the existing street
network and those streets included in the comprehensive plan. The area on which
traffic volume assignments shall be made includes all street sections where the
traffic volume attributable to the PUD would be equal to or greater than 10% of
the total after the surrounding area is developed at the density permitted
under its current zoning.
      (4)   The layout of the pedestrian circulation system.
      (5)   Identification of outstanding topographical problems, if any.
      (6)   The approximate location of lot lines for the exchange of
ownership, if any.
      (7)   The location, quantity, and use of open space along with a
maintenance plan in general terms.
      (8)   The control over height, spacing and setback of structures, given
by individuals areas within the proposed planned unit development. The
restrictions shall be stated in the same terms that are used in the zoning
code.
      (9)   The general drainage pattern within the proposed planned unit
development and general plans for retention.
      (10)   The proposed parking facilities stated in ratios as they are in
the zoning acct.
      (11)   The general development schedule, particularly indicating phases
if the planned unit development is to be constructed over a period of years.
      (12)   A statement granting blanket easements to the appropriate
utilities.
      (13)   A list of uses to be included in the planned unit development.
Separate lists shall be prepared for individual areas or phases within the
planned unit development.
      (14)   Illustrate the location of the land uses.
      (15)   Indicate the approximate quantity of land area to be devoted to
each land use.
      (16)   Explain how the planned unit development land uses relate to the
surrounding area.
      (17)   Give the population density in terms of persons per acre of the
net development area for the project as a whole and for the areas to be
developed individually.
      (18)   Floor area ratios for non-residential uses.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.052 TENTATIVE APPROVAL.
   (A)   At its first regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the
village's consulting engineer's comments regarding the Preliminary PUD Plan,
the Planning Commission shall review the Plan and shall make a recommendation
to the Village Board regarding the Plan. In formulating its recommendations the
Planning Commission shall make written findings as to each of the following
issues:
      (1)   Whether the PUD will meet the use and density requirements of this
chapter, including §§
158.042 through
158.046.
      (2)   Whether the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable.
      (3)   Whether the proposed planned unit development shall retain as much
of the natural features of the site as is feasible including but not limited
to:
         (a)   Existing trees.
         (b)   Natural water bodies.
         (c)   Steep slopes.
      (4)   Whether provision for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment is adequate.
      (5)   In the case of a proposed planned unit development which
contemplates construction over a period of years, whether the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interest of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed planned unit development in the total
completion of the project are adequate.
      (6)   Whether the proposed planned unit development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be
established.
      (7)   Whether the proposed planned unit development is in accord with the
general purposes of planned unit development set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   If upon meeting, the Planning Commission finds that the proposed
Preliminary Plan and documentation satisfies the requirements of this chapter,
the chairman of the Planning Commission shall certify the approval of the
commission of the plan in substantially the following language:
The Preliminary Plan as shown herein is recommended for approval.
      Dated:______________________________
      By:________________________________
   (C)   No Preliminary Plan shall be approved by the Planning Commission
unless there has been a prior review by the village's consulting engineer.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.053 REVIEW OF PRELIMINARY PLAN BY VILLAGE BOARD.
   The Planning Commission shall forward its findings and the minutes of its
meeting to the Village Board, which shall by resolution approve or disapprove
the Preliminary Plan meeting. Approval of the Plan shall be conditional on
zoning.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.054 ZONING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Once the Preliminary PUD Plan has been approved by the Village Board,
the petition for PUD zoning may be filed for consideration at a public hearing
by the Planning Commission. The petition for PUD zoning shall be filed and the
hearing shall be held in accord with the standard hearing requirements for
zoning district amendments, except that each petition shall have attached a
copy of the approved Preliminary Plan.
   (B)   Once the Planning Commission has concluded its hearing and made a
recommendation to the Village Board, the Village Board may, in accord with
standard zoning requirements, approve or deny the petition for PUD zoning,
except that if the petition is approved on condition or denied subject to
certain requested revisions, the petitioner may immediately file revised
Preliminary Plan, and subject to the required approvals as outline above, an
amended PUD zoning petition. If the Preliminary Plan and Zoning are approved,
the Village President shall sign the Preliminary Plan and documentation and
enter them into the official records of the village.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.055 SITE PLAN; FINAL PLAT REVIEW.
   (A)   If the Developer intends to sell individual lots within the Planned
Unit Development, it shall be platted in accordance with the final plat
procedures of the Village Subdivision Ordinance (
Chapter 155). The approved Preliminary PUD Plan submission shall serve as the
Preliminary Plan, for purposes of the Zoning Ordinance. However, only one final
plat shall be permitted for a PUD.
   (B)   If the developer does not intend to sell individual lots within the
Planned Unit Development, or if any individual lot will have an internal
network of roads, utilities or other facilities, the developer shall submit 12
copies of a Site Plan for the PUD or for the individual lots within the PUD to
the Zoning Administrator. Any Site Plan for the individual lots shall be
submitted simultaneously with the Final Plat.
   (C)   The Site Plan shall contain, as a minimum, the following information,
drawn to scale as in the case of a final plat:
      (1)   The name of the PUD, its owner and developer.
      (2)   Locations and heights of all buildings.
      (3)   Existing and proposed changes in topography at one foot contour
intervals.
      (4)   The pattern of surface water drainage.
      (5)   The location of lot lines and setback lines from the streets and
easements.
      (6)   The detailed maintenance plan for open space and responsibilities
for all public and private improvements.
      (7)   The locations of streets, sidewalks, pedestrian and bicycle paths,
and the type of pavement and curbs.
      (8)   The location of sewers, water mains, utilities and fire hydrants.
      (9)   The type and location of the street lighting system.
      (10)   The major landscaping plans for the development.
      (11)   A certificate lettered on the plan indicating that the owner/
developer agrees to abide by the plan for the physical development of the site
and that future owners will be required to abide by the same covenant.
      (12)   Any proposed restrictive covenants.
      (13)   All certificates as required in the case of a final plat.
   (D)   The Site Plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission and Village Board using the same procedures and criteria as in the
case of a final plat under the Subdivision Ordinances (
Chapter 155). The Site Plan shall, upon approval by the Village Board, be filed
for record by the Developer with the Sangamon County Recorder of Deeds.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.056 CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   (A)   After receiving approval of the Preliminary Plan and before approval
of the Final Plat and Site Plan, the developer shall submit two sets of
construction plans to the village's consulting engineer, one set to the
Electric Department of the village and one set to the Chatham Fire Protection
District.
   (B)   The construction plans shall be prepared for the area to be covered by
individual final plats or site plans except when specific additional
information is requested by the village's consulting engineer.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.057 REQUIRED INFORMATION.
   (A)   The construction plans shall be submitted on appropriate size sheets
(24 inches by 36 inches) and to a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet.
Construction plans shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Cover sheet containing the location of the development; symbols
that are used; index to sheets; summary of quantities; scales that are used;
appropriate place for approval of the engineer; and the signature and seal of a
registered professional engineer.
      (2)   North arrow and bench marks with their elevations noted. Bench
marks shall be referenced to mean sea level datum as determined by the United
States Geological Survey, current datum.
      (3)   Plan sheets showing the locations of all existing and proposed
streets, right-of-way lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, sidewalks, drainage
ditches, easements, rear lot drainage, direction of storm drainage flow, survey
monuments, water mains, fire hydrants, and any other appurtenance or structure
that might influence design considerations.
      (4)   Profile sheets indicating the existing ground line and proposed
grades and elevations for all proposed streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers,
drainage structures, drainage ditches and rear lot drainage. Elevations shall
be referenced to the current United States Geological Survey datum.
      (5)   Typical sections showing right-of-way lines, proposed pavement
widths, pavement thickness, base thickness, sub-base thickness, subgrade,
crown, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, and design data when required.
      (6)   Detailed sheets showing the details of manholes, inlets, catch
basins, curb and gutters, drainage structures, and any other structure or
appurtenance to be constructed, or reference made to the latest edition of the
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction or the latest edition
of Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois or
the latest edition of the Highway Standards published by the State Department
of Transportation.
      (7)   Design computations for storm sewer design, special structures, and
pavement designs when required, certified by a professional engineer.
   (B)   Basic review of the construction plans shall be completed by the
village's consulting engineer within 30 days of the submission date. When
construction plans have been resubmitted, they will be re-reviewed and returned
to the developer's engineer within 14 days, unless review time is extended by
the village's consulting engineer in a letter listing reasons for the
extension. This letter will be sent to the engineer who submitted the
construction plans. When the construction plans have been approved by the
village's consulting engineer and the village's consulting engineer has
determined that the other village departments have approved the construction
plans, the developer may install the required public improvements.
   (C)   The village's consulting engineer shall notify the developer when the
construction plans are approved and shall send a copy of such approval to the
Planning Commission. Once the construction plans have been approved, the
developer may proceed with the next step.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.058 STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION PLANS.
   Construction plans shall meet the requirements of the current Village
Subdivision Ordinance except where such requirements have been explicitly
waived in the Preliminary PUD Plan approval process.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.059 MINIMUM DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The uniqueness of each proposal for a planned unit development allows
that the requirements for the public improvements serving the development and
for the location of the building in the development are subject to modification
from the requirements of the prevailing land subdivision regulations.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may, therefore, recommend waivers or
modifications of such requirements if it finds that the requirements are not
necessary for the best interest of the residents of the development and that
such action is not inconsistent with the interest of the entire village. No
such modification shall be less than the standards indicated below. Where no
indication or exception is given in the PUD zoning district classification, the
requirements shall be as stated in the appropriate portion of the land
subdivision regulations except that for private ways the requirements for the
ways shall be only as noted below:
      (1)   Off street parking.
         (a)   A minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided
as follows:
 
Building Classification   Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces
Single-family, two-family 2 space per unit
Multiple-family buildings 2½ spaces per unit
 
            Where on-street parking is not provided, an additional amount of
off-street parking spaces shall be provided for guests and others at a minimum
of ½ space per unit.
         (b)   Off-street parking spaces shall be constructed in accordance
with the rules and regulations for the zoning code. For residential use, off-
street parking facilities shall be located not more than 300 feet from the
dwelling served.
      (2)   Setback. The minimum setback is 20 feet from the public right-of-
way.
      (3)   Setback from adjoining residential districts -- see schedule, §
158.034.
      (4)   Public streets.
         (a)   Provisions shall be made for the continuation and extension of
thoroughfare streets adjacent to or through a planned unit development in
accordance with the street and thoroughfare plan contained in the land
subdivision regulations.
         (b)   A planned unit development that adjoins or includes an existing
street shall have a dedicated additional right-of-way, if needed, to meet the
minimum street width requirements called for on the official street and
thoroughfare plan of the village. The entire additional right-of-way shall be
provided where the PUD is on both sides of the existing street. When the PUD is
located on one side of the street, one-half of the right-of-way shall be
provided. However, in no case shall the resulting right-of-way be less than 50
feet.
         (c)   When a PUD or portion thereof adjoins a major thoroughfare, as
indicated on the official street and thoroughfare plan, access shall be
reasonably restricted so that ingress or egress to the major thoroughfares
shall occur at 400 foot intervals or longer. Residential lots and business and
industries development shall be provided with a frontage on a marginal access
street or street other than the major thoroughfare. The classifications,
planning, design and construction of public streets shall be in accordance with
the land subdivision ordinance and village standards.
         (d)   Public alleys shall not be included in a planned unit
development. Adequate off- street access to the rear or side of commercial
buildings shall be provided by means of private driveways or streets.
         (e)   In subdivisions proposed to have streets with an anticipated
average daily volume of 2,500 or more, a barrier type, curb and gutter shall be
constructed along all public street pavements. Curb and gutter shall be similar
to type B-6.18 as described in the "State of Illinois, Department of
Transportation, Highway Standards" publication. Other locations where barrier
type curb and gutter are required will be determined by the engineer for the
subdivision with the approval of the village engineer.
      (5)   Sidewalks shall be provided to permit easy pedestrian movement
throughout the development. Sidewalks need not be located adjacent and parallel
to the public streets but shall be provided to meet pedestrian desires or
needs. Sidewalks located along public streets, and within or leading to
dedicated open spaces from public streets, shall be considered as public
sidewalks, provided they are located on dedicated right-of-way or easements and
constructed in accordance with the subdivision ordinance.
      (6)   Public sanitary sewers shall be provided to serve all platted
building lots and be located on public street right-of-way or dedicated utility
easement a in accordance with the subdivision ordinance.
      (7)   Public storm sewers and open drainage waterways shall be provided
to receive surface water drainage from public streets and each platted lot.
Surface drainage from any platted lot must not be diverted across another
platted lot except by way of a public storm sewer or well-defined waterway on
an easement. Drainage facilities within a platted lot serving that lot only
shall be privately owned and maintained facilities. Public drainage facilities
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the subdivision ordinance.
      (8)   There shall be no restrictions on the sizes of blocks or the
arrangement of lots except that each platted lot must front upon a public or
private street.
      (9)   Private ways, common driveways, parking areas and pedestrian
walkways may be used as access to buildings and facilities, provided that
protective covenants are recorded which perpetuate access easements for the use
of these facilities by the owners of the buildings or facilities being served.
Private ways for vehicular movement and common driveways shall be of Portland
cement concrete or shall be surfaced with bituminous concrete on a crushed
stone base course. Pavement thickness and width shall be designed to handle the
amount and type of traffic expected but in no case shall be less than the
following minimums.
         (a)   Thickness. Two inches of class I surface course on six inches of
CA-6 crushed stone, base course, six inches of Portland cement concrete, or one
inch of class I surface course on 5½ inches of BAM base course having a
marshall stability of 800.
         (b)   Minimum pavement width, 20 feet.
         (c)   Dead-end turnaround, 40-foot radius.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 158.070 MOBILE HOME PARK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted. Mobile homes are permitted in the RM-4 District. Mobile
homes are not permissible in any other district.
   (B)   Minimum size. The minimum size of a mobile home park shall be five
acres.
   (C)   Conformance with the village code and state regulations. A mobile home
park shall conform to all village ordinances and to state law, including but
not limited to the Illinois Mobile Home Park Act and Illinois Department of
Public Health regulations.
   (D)   Screening. Unless adequately screened by existing vegetative cover, a
mobile home park shall be screened on all sides by a planting of fast-growing
material, capable of reaching a height of 15 feet or more, such as hybrid
poplar, and a permanent evergreen planting such as White Pine or Norway Spruce,
the individual trees to be such a number and so arranged that within ten years
they will have formed a screen equivalent in opacity to a solid fence or wall.
Such permanent planting shall be grown or maintained to a height of not less
than 15 feet.
   (E)   Drives, parking areas and walkways. All drives, parking areas and
walkways shall be hard- surfaced.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.071 SPECIAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONES.
   (A)   Screening.
      (1)   Where outdoor storage of materials, goods and products exists
within business or industrial districts, such storage shall be effectively
screened by a solid fence, compact hedge or similar opaque landscaped element
located on the property of the party storing the material, goods, and products.
Such screening shall not extend within 15 feet of any street or driveway. The
screening shall be placed along property lines or, in the case of screening
along a street, 15 feet from the street right-of-way line with landscaping
between the screening and pavement. A louvered fence shall be considered solid
if it blocks direct vision.
      (2)   Screening is required on all lots in a B district which adjoin R
districts. Such screening shall consist of a solid fence at least eight feet
above curb level, constructed to specifications attached to this chapter as
Appendix F. Berms and vegetation are not allowed to fulfill the requirements of
this subsection. Whenever a structure is to be built on a vacant lot in a B
district which adjoins an R district, the required fence shall be constructed
prior to the commencement of construction of the structure. Whenever a
structure or use in a B district adjoining an R district becomes an unlawful
nonconforming structure or use, requiring alterations to be made to bring the
structure or use in conformity with this chapter, such alterations shall
include bringing the screening into conformity with this section.
   (B)   Landscaping. In all but the B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts,
all developed uses shall provide a landscaped yard along the streets.
   (C)   Animal hospitals. Animal hospitals with outside runs shall be located
no closer than 100 feet to any residential district, restaurant, hotel or motel
in any district and shall show that reasonable measures and controls shall be
taken to prevent offensive noise and odor. No incineration of refuse shall be
permitted on the premises.
   (D)   Country clubs - golf courses.
      (1)   No building shall be located within 100 feet of any property line.
      (2)   Facilities such as restaurants and bars may be permitted when
conducted and entered from within the building.
      (3)   Swimming pools, tennis courts, and the like shall be located not
less than 25 feet from any property line and adjoining property in any
residence or business district shall be effectively protected by a wall, hedge
and/or screen planting.
   (E)   Outdoor lighting. Whenever outdoor light is to be used to illuminate a
property, the lighting fixture shall be so placed that the light rays are
generally directed away from adjacent properties.
   (F)   Agricultural processing plants. Agricultural processing plants in any
district which process agricultural products produced on the premises or within
a contiguous area shall be so located as to provide convenient trucking access
with a minimum of interference to normal traffic and shall provide parking and
loading spaces. Proponent shall show that adequate measures shall be taken to
control odor, dust, noise, and waste disposal so as not to constitute a
nuisance and shall show that the proposed source of water will not deprive
others of normal supply.
   (G)   Amusement parks. Golf driving ranges and amusement parks shall be
located on major or secondary thoroughfares or nonresidential streets.
Floodlights used to illuminate the premises shall be so directed and shielded
as not to be an annoyance to any developed residential property. Golf driving
platforms shall be not less than 200 feet from any adjacent residence district
or existing dwelling.
   (H)   Cemeteries. Cemetery, crematories, and mausoleums shall provide
entrance on a major street or road with ingress or egress so designed as to
minimize traffic congestion, shall provide required off-street parking space
and shall provide a minimum size six-foot high wall or minimum three-foot thick
six-foot high evergreen hedge or provide a minimum 20 feet of permanently
maintained planting strip on all property lines abutting any R District or
residential street.
   (I)   Airports. Airports or heliports or landing strips for aircraft shall
be located no closer than 600 feet from any dwelling and shall be located so
that air or land traffic shall not constitute a nuisance to neighboring uses.
Proponents shall show that the field comes within standards of the Federal
Aviation Agency for the particular class of field.
   (J)   Community buildings, social halls, lodges, fraternal organizations and
clubs.
      (1)   All buildings must be a minimum of ten feet from the side lot lines
and 20 feet from the rear lot line. There shall be no external evidence of any
gainful activity, however, other than from within the building.
      (2)   Any such use must be located on or have access to a major or
secondary thoroughfare and cause no heavy traffic on local residential streets.
   (K)   Private stables. Private stables and paddocks shall be located in the
P-1 zone only on the rear half of the lot and not closer than 20 feet to any
property line, nor closer than 40 feet from any dwelling on the same or
adjoining property. The minimum lot area upon which a horse may be kept is one
acre and one additional horse may be kept for each 20,000 feet by which the
parcel of land exceeds one acre.
   (L)   Nursing homes. Approval must be obtained from proper agencies
concerning health and safety conditions and such home must be licensed by such
agencies.
   (M)   Retail sales for guests only. Community buildings, private clubs,
lodges, social or recreational establishments and churches may engage in retail
sales for guests provided that:
      (1)   There shall be no external evidence of any gainful activity,
however incidental, nor any access to any space used for gainful activity other
than from within the building.
      (2)   There shall be no harm to adjacent existing or potential
residential development due to excessive traffic generation or noise or other
circumstances.
   (N)   Amusement centers. Amusement centers, bowling alleys and similar
places of amusement shall provide parking with ingress and egress designed so
as to minimize traffic congestion, shall not be less than 20 feet from any
property line, shall comply with screening provisions elsewhere in this
chapter, and shall show that adequate controls or measures will be taken to
prevent offensive notices and vibration.
   (O)   Temporary tract offices. Temporary subdivision offices in any district
shall be located on the property to which it is appurtenance shall be limited
to a six month period at the expiration of which time the applicant may request
a further extension of time. Otherwise the subdivision office shall be removed
at the expense of the owner. The office shall meet all yard requirements of the
district in which it is located.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96; Am. Ord. 01-51, passed 8-28-01)
§ 158.072 OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. These regulations are applicable to all zones and are written
to help increase safety, less congestion, and reduce storage of vehicles in the
streets.
   (B)   Location of parking spaces. Required parking spaces shall be located
in a zoning district having the same zoning prefix, i.e.: residential parking
in R Districts, except that industrial parking spaces may also be located in a
B District. No parking shall be located in a required front yard. Where
applicable, safety curbing or barrier shall be provided to define the limits of
the parking area and prevent encroachment into a required front yard.
   (C)   Central Business District. In the Central Business District (defined
as all streets contiguous to the Village Square except Illinois Route 4, and
Mulberry Street between Illinois Route 4 and the railroad tracks), each lot
owner shall provide off-street parking for its employees in accordance with
these regulations; however, each lot owner shall be otherwise required to
provide off-street parking in accordance with these regulations only to the
extent that required spaces exceed ten in number.
   (D)   Number of spaces. The following are the minimum required off-street
parking spaces for the particular use:
      (1)   Amusement parks -- One per each 500 square feet of lot area for
public use.
      (2)   Apartment, hotels -- One per dwelling unit.
      (3)   Aquariums -- One per 800 square feet of floor area.
      (4)   Art galleries -- One per 800 square feet of floor area.
      (5)   Auditoriums -- One per 5 seats.
      (6)   Automobile service stations -- One per each two employees plus one
per owner or manager.
      (7)   Boarding and lodging houses -- One plus one for each two persons
for whom living accommodations are provided.
      (8)   Bowling alleys -- Five per each alley plus three per each ten
persons accommodated by affiliated uses.
      (9)   Business offices and banks -- One per 250 square feet of space used
per office and one per 200 square feet of space for customers.
      (10)   Business schools -- One per each two employees, plus one per each
100 square feet of instruction space.
      (11)   Churches -- One per five seats.
      (12)   Community centers -- 30 per cent of persons accommodated.
      (13)   Cultural and civic institutions -- One per two employees plus one
per each 800 square feet of public area.
      (14)   Dance halls -- 30 per cent of persons accommodated.
      (15)   Dancing schools -- One per each two employees, plus one per each
100 square feet of instruction space.
      (16)   Dental offices or clinics -- One per each examining or treatment
room, plus one per doctor, plus one per each three other employees.
      (17)   Dwelling units -- One per dwelling unit.
      (18)   Eating and drinking establishments -- One per each 100 square feet
of floor area for public use.
      (19)   Elementary schools -- Two per classroom.
      (20)   Fraternity and sorority houses -- One plus one for each two
persons for whom living accommodations are provided.
      (21)   Funeral parlors -- One per funeral vehicle maintained on premises,
plus ten per chapel or parlor.
      (22)   Gymnasiums -- One per five seats.
      (23)   Governmental offices -- One per each 3 employees, plus one per 200
square feet of floor area for customers, client or patron use.
      (24)   High Schools -- Three per classroom.
      (25)   Hospitals -- One per each three beds, plus one per staff doctor,
plus one per each four employees.
      (26)   Hotels -- One, plus one for each two persons for whom living
accommodations are provided.
      (27)   Junior High School -- Two per classroom.
      (28)   Libraries -- One per 800 square feet of floor area.
      (29)   Medical offices or clinics -- One per each examining or treatment
room, plus one per doctor, plus one per each three other employees.
      (30)   Mobile home parks -- One per mobile home.
      (31)   Motels -- One per dwelling unit.
      (32)   Museums -- One per 800 square feet of floor area.
      (33)   Music schools -- One per each 100 square feet of instruction
space, plus one per two employees.
      (34)   Non-business clubs -- One per each three members.
      (35)   Nursing homes -- One per each four beds, plus one per each staff
doctor, plus one per each other two employees.
      (36)   Private clubs and lodges -- One plus one for each two persons for
whom living accommodations are provided.
      (37)   Professional offices -- Two per each five employees, plus one per
200 square feet of floor area for customer, client or patron use.
      (38)   Retail sales -- Two for five employees and one for 200 square feet
devoted to public.
      (39)   Savings and loan associations -- One per each 3 employees, plus
one per 200 square feet of floor area for customer, client or patron use.
      (40)   Stadiums and grandstands -- One per five seats.
      (41)   Swimming pool (public) -- Three per each ten persons accommodated.
      (42)   Theaters, indoor -- One per each five seats up to 400, plus one
per each three seats over 400.
      (43)   Tourist homes and cabins -- One per dwelling unit.
      (44)   Trade schools -- One per each two employees, plus one per each 100
square feet of instruction space.
      (45)   Transient trailer camps -- One per dwelling unit.
      (46)   Truck terminals -- One per two employees.
      (47)   Undertaking establishment -- One per funeral vehicle maintained on
premises, plus ten per chapel or parlor.
      (48)   Wholesale, manufacturing and industrial plants -- One per four
employees.
      (49)   Wholesale offices -- Two per each five employees, plus one per 200
square feet of floor area for customer, client or patron use.
      (50)   Zoos -- One for each two employees, plus five per acre of
exhibition space.
   (E)   Calculation of number of spaces.
      (1)   In any determination of total parking requirements, any fraction
less than one-half may be dropped and any fraction of one-half or more shall be
counted as one parking space.
      (2)   When a building or structure is erected, the required spaces shall
be recorded. If there is an increase or decrease in number of dwelling units,
gross floor area, seating capacity, number of employees, or other unit of
measurement specified in this text for determining the required parking or
loading facilities, and when such increase or decrease results in a requirement
for more or less total parking or loading spaces through application of the
requirements, the parking and loading spaces shall be increased or may be
decreased accordingly.
      (3)   If any parking is provided for employees, visitors or both, the
minimum number of accessible parking spaces to be provided for handicapped
persons shall be as set forth in the Illinois Accessibility Code, Ill. Admin.
Code, § 400.110 et seq., as amended from time to time. As of the date of
passage of this chapter, the applicable standards are:
TOTAL OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF
SPACES REQUIRED          ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES
TOTAL OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED MINIMUM NUMBER OF
SPACES REQUIRED          ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES
1 to 20                  1
21 to 50                 2
51 to 75                 3
76 to 100                4
101 to 150               5
151 to 200               6
201 to 300               7
301 to 400               8
401 to 500               9
501 to 1000              2% of total number
over 1000                20 plus 1 for each 100
 
   (F)   Size of spaces. An accessory off-street parking space must be at least
18 feet long and at least 8½ feet wide, having a minimum loading area of 153
square feet, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps, column, or work areas.
Handicapped parking spaces must be a minimum of 16 feet wide in addition to the
foregoing requirements.
   (G)   Parking layout drawing. An application for a zoning certificate for a
new or enlarged building, structure or use, shall include therewith a plot plan
drawn to scale, and fully dimensioned showing any parking or loading facilities
to be provided in compliance with the requirements of these regulations.
   (H)   Multiple uses. If groups of buildings contain uses which vary in their
parking requirements, the number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the
individual requirements for each use. However, where peak parking requirements
occur at distinctly different times of the day or at different times of the
week as determined by the Zoning Administrator, joint parking facilities may be
shared by two or more uses.
   (I)   Use of parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities accessory to
residential use and developed in any residential district in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter shall be used solely for the parking of non-
commercial vehicles owned by occupants of the dwelling structures to which such
facilities are accessory or by guests of the occupants. Under no circumstances
shall required parking facilities accessory to residential structures in
residential zones be used for the storage of commercial vehicles, or for the
parking of automobiles belonging to the employees, tenants, visitors, or
customers of business or manufacturing establishments. In residential
districts, motor homes, trailers and campers may be parked only in enclosed
garages and buildings or in rear yards. Parking in other yards may be permitted
for a period of not to exceed two weeks by written permit from the Zoning
Administrator.
   (J)   Surfacing. All open off-street parking areas containing more than four
parking spaces shall be improved with an adequate stormwater drainage system,
and paved with a crushed stone base, or equal, not less than six inches thick,
and a wearing surface of asphaltic concrete or comparable hard-surfaced, all-
weather dustless material not less than two inches thick. All open accessory
off- street parking areas containing not more than four parking spaces shall be
surfaced and maintained in such manner as to make them dust-free.
   (K)   Lighting. Illumination of an accessory off-street parking area shall
be arranges so as not to reflect rays of light into adjacent districts and
streets.
   (L)   Parking space - screening and landscaping.  
      (1)   Off-street parking facilities accessory to residential use and
developed in any residential district in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter shall be used solely for the parking of non-commercial vehicles
owned by occupants or by guests of the occupants of the dwelling structures to
which such facilities are accessory. Under no circumstances shall required
parking facilities accessory to residential structures in residential zones be
used for the storage of commercial vehicles, or for the parking of automobiles
or other vehicles belonging to the employees, tenants, visitors, or customers
of business or manufacturing establishments.
      (2)   In residential districts, motor homes, trailers, campers and boats
may be parked in side yards, rear yards and enclosed garages and buildings
subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   Motor homes, trailers, campers and boats shall not be parked
closer than three feet to any property line of the lot;
         (b)   Parked motor homes, trailers, campers and boats shall not
encroach on or block the view of the roadway right-of-way from any adjoining
property;
         (c)   In no case may motor homes, trailers, campers and boats be
parked on village-owned property or on roadway rights-of-way.
         (d)    Motor homes, trailers, and campers parked in residential
districts shall be operable and shall have a current Illinois vehicle license.
Boats shall be operable and have a current boat license.
         (e)   Motor homes, trailers, campers and boats parked in residential
districts shall not be used for the storage of goods, materials or equipment
other than those items that are part of the unit or essential for its immediate
use.
         (f)   Motor homes, trailers, campers and boats parked in residential
districts shall be kept locked or otherwise secured when not in use.
      (3)   Parking in other yards may be permitted for a period of not to
exceed two weeks by written permit from the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96; Am. Ord. 08-25, passed 5-27-08; Am. Ord. 09-10,
passed 4-28-09)
§ 158.073 OFF-STREET LOADING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   General provisions. No building or other structure shall be erected
and no extensions, major repairs, or substantial alterations shall be made to
an existing building or other structure in any zone unless there already exists
on the zoning lot, or unless provision is made for the location of the lot
concurrently with such erection or change, off-street loading space on the
basis of the following minimum requirements.
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings, boarding or lodging houses, dormitories,
fraternity and sorority houses, and apartment hotels. One off-street loading
space shall be provided for each building having 10,000 to 150,000 square feet
of floor area, plus one additional loading space for each additional 150,000
square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
   (C)   Hotels, motels, private clubs, and lodges, containing no retail shops,
convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or professional
offices. One off-street loading space shall be provided for each building
having 10,000 to 150,000 square feet of floor area; plus one additional loading
space for each additional 150,000 square feet of floor area or fraction
thereof.
   (D)   Hotels, motels, private clubs and lodges, containing retail shoes,
convention halls, auditoriums, exhibition halls, or business or professional
offices. One off-street loading space shall be provided for each building
having 10,000 to 150,000 square feet, plus one additional loading space for
each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
   (E)   Community facilities uses such as auditoriums, colleges, hospitals,
museums, nursing homes, sanitariums, schools, and similar institutions. One
off-street loading space shall be provided for each building having 10,000 to
150,000 square feet of floor area, plus one additional loading space for each
additional 150,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
   (F)   Public service and public utility facilities. Airports, railroad
passenger and freight stations, public transit and bus terminals and post
offices. One off-street loading space shall be provided for each building
having 10,000 to 50,000 square feet plus one additional loading space for each
additional 50,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
   (G)   Banks and business involves no retail sales, professional and
governmental offices, and medical clinics. One off-street loading space shall
be provided for each building having 10,000 to 150,000 square feet, plus one
additional loading space for each additional 150,000 square feet of floor area
or fraction thereof.
   (H)   Retail or service establishments and eating and drinking
establishments.  
      (1)   Retail or service establishments and eating and drinking
establishments. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the following table:
 
Square Feet of Floor Area Minimum # of Spaces
5,000 to 9,999            1
10,000 to 24,999          2
25,000 to 39,999          3
40,000 to 100,000      4
 
      (2)   For each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area, or fraction
thereof in such a building, one additional loading space shall be provided.
   (I)   Amusement facilities.
      (1)   Bowling alleys, dance halls, gymnasiums, skating rinks, recreation
centers, and similar facilities. One off-street loading space shall be provided
for each building having 10,000 to 150,000 square feet of floor area, plus one
additional space for each additional 150,000 square feet of floor area or
fraction thereof.
      (2)   Theaters. One off-street loading space shall be provided for each
building having 8,000 to 50,000 square feet of floor area, plus one additional
space for each additional 50,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof.
   (J)   School, business, dance, music or trade. One off-street loading space
shall be provided for each building having 10,000 to 150,000 square feet of
floor area, plus one additional space for each additional 150,000 square feet
of floor area or fraction thereof.
   (K)   Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors. One off-street loading
space shall be provided for each building having up to 25,000 square feet of
floor area, plus one additional space for each additional 25,000 square feet or
fraction thereof.
   (L)   Wholesale, manufacturing and industrial plants. In wholesale,
manufacturing and industrial plants, including warehouses and storage building
and yards, contractor equipment and lumber yards, business service
establishments such as blueprinting and engraving, soft drink bottling
establishments, breweries, fabricating plants, research laboratories, and all
other establishments devoted to production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, or repairing of materials, goods or products. One off-street loading
space shall be provided for each building having 5,000 to 39,999 square feet of
floor area; two off-street loading spaces shall be provided for each building
having 40,000 to 100,000 square feet of floor area, plus one additional space
for each additional 100,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. Each
such loading space for buildings over 10,000 square feet shall be not less than
50 feet in length.
   (M)   Other uses. Uses not specifically listed in this division. Of f-street
loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with requirements heretofore set
forth for the most similar uses.
   (N)   Size of loading spaces. A required off-street loading space shall be
not less than ten feet in width, 14 feet in height, and 25 feet in length,
exclusive of access aisles and maneuvering space, unless otherwise specified.
   (O)   Location of off-street loading spaces. All required off-street loading
spaces shall be located on the same zoning lot as the use to be served. No
loading spaces for vehicles of more than two-ton capacity shall be closer than
50 feet to any property in a residence district unless completely enclosed by
building walls, or a uniformly painted solid fence or wall, or any combination
thereof, not less than six feet in height. No permitted or required off-street
loading space located in a required rear yard shall be open to the sky.
   (P)   Regulation for access of off-street loading facilities. Each required
off-street loading space shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular
access to a street or alley in a manner which will least interfere with traffic
movements and subject to approval by the city traffic engineer.
   (Q)   Regulations for surfacing of off-street loading facilities. All open
off-street loading spaces shall be improved with a durable hard surface
pavement. The pavement shall be equal to or superior to a pavement consisting
of a base course of macadam not less than six inches thick, with a bituminous
surface of not less than two inches thick.
   (R)   Regulations for repair and service facilities within off-street
loading spaces. No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair or service
shall be permitted within any required off-street loading space.
   (S)   Regulations on space allowed for off-street loading spaces. Space
allowed to any off-street loading space shall not, while so allocated, be used
to satisfy the space requirements for any off-street parking facilities or
portions thereof.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.074 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO BOTH ACCESSORY OFF-STREET PARKING AND
LOADING FACILITIES.
   The schedule of requirements for accessory off-street parking spaces and
off-street loading spaces applicable to newly erected or substantially altered
structures shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the real estate on
which any such structure is located so long as the structure is in existence
and its use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities continues
and it shall be unlawful for an owner of any building affected by this chapter
to discontinue, change, or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance or
change of the required vehicle parking or loading space which meets the
requirements of and is in compliance with this chapter, or for any person,
firm, or corporation to use such building without obtaining the use of
sufficient land for vehicle parking or loading space to meet the requirements
of this division.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.075 SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permit requirements.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction,
installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool unless permits
shall have been obtained from the village.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction,
installation, enlargement or alteration of any public swimming pool within the
village unless any required permits shall first have been also been obtained
from the State of Illinois.
      (3)   Juvenile pools shall require no permit.
   (B)   Drawings and plans and permits. Each application for a swimming pool
permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee specified in §§
158.110 through
158.124 and by a set of plans or drawings which shall be drawn to scale. All
distances and dimensions shall be accurately figured and drawings shall be
explicit and complete showing the lot lines, distance from the residence(s),
location of the fence and pool walk. The pool, walk and fence construction,
electrical system, and all relevant appurtenances pertaining to the pool,
sufficient to show whether the swimming pool will comply with this chapter.
   (C)   Location restrictions. No portion of a private residential pool shall
be located less than four feet from a side or rear lot line. Private
residential swimming pools and appurtenant equipment shall not be permitted in
any front yard. No portion of a public swimming pool or its appurtenant
equipment shall be located less than 15 feet from a side or rear lot line.
   (D)   Swimming pool fences. 
      (1)   A swimming pool, except juvenile pools, shall be completely
enclosed by a fence erected along the periphery of the swimming pool and any
immediately adjacent walk, deck or terrace area appurtenant to the swimming
pool. The fence shall be at least 36 inches in height and shall be designed and
constructed to render the swimming pool inaccessible to children under six
years of age. All fence openings shall be equipped with gate., and all gate
shall be equipped with self-closing devices and shall have latches.
      (2)   Swimming pools shall be exempt from the requirements of subdivision
(1) if they are above ground level in whole or in part, and have a walkway or
deck area greater than 30 inches in height with integral guards or rails and a
means of egress which can be removed and locked while the swimming pool is not
in use. Persons with such exempt pools ensure that ladders and other means of
ingress or egress are kept removed or locked when the swimming pools are not in
use.
   (E)   Safety precautions. Swimming pools and juvenile pools shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition.
   (F)   Inspection requirements. The Zoning Administrator may, upon completion
of construction of a pool or upon receipt of information that a pool is
nonconforming, and with prior notice to the owner, inspect a swimming pool to
determine whether it is in compliance with provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   Nonconforming structures. Swimming pools erected prior to the
effective date of this chapter which do not meet the fence requirements of this
chapter shall be made to conform to such requirements within 90 days of the
effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.076 FENCES.
   (A)   No fence may be erected which will hinder access to any easement or
right of way for a public or village-owned utility, including but not limited
to gas, water, sewer, telephone, electric and cable television.
   (B)   No fence may be erected unless a fence permit is obtained from the
Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.077 SIGNS.
   Signs in all zoning districts shall be governed by the village Sign
Ordinance, when such ordinance is passed and approved. Until such time, signs
shall be governed by the provisions of the 1982 Zoning Ordinance relating to
signs.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.078 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS IN INDUSTRIAL ZONES.
   All uses in industrial zones shall conform to current Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency laws and regulations pertaining to water, air and noise
pollution.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
NON-CONFORMING LOTS, NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND,
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES, NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES AND
NON-CONFORMING CHARACTERISTICS OF USE
§ 158.090 INTENT.
   (A)   Within the districts established by this chapter and amendments that
may later be adopted there exist: lots; structures; uses of land and
structures; and characteristics of use which were lawful before this chapter
was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted
under the terms of this chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this
chapter to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed,
damaged in excess of 50% of the value of the structure, or changed to a
conforming use, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent
of this chapter that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expended or
extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited
elsewhere in the same district.
   (B)   Non-conforming uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. A non-conforming use of a
structure, a non-conforming use of land, or a non- conforming use of structure
and a land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of
this chapter by the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be
prohibited generally in the district involved.
   (C)   To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building
on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position
and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal
of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding,
such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual
construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.091 NON-CONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted, a
single family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
chapter, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
chapter. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and
requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the lot
shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the
Board of Appeals.
   (B)   If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this chapter, and no
portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes
compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this chapter,
nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or
area below the requirements stated in this chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.092 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND (OR LAND WITH MINOR STRUCTURES ONLY).
   Where at the time of passage of this chapter lawful use of land exists which
would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this chapter, and where
such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding
$3,000, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
provided:
   (A)   No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (B)   No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter.
   (C)   If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform
to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such
land is located.
   (D)   No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
chapter shall be erected in connection with such non-conforming use of land.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.093 NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendments of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height yards, its
location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   (A)   No such non-conforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way
which increases its non-conformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be
altered to decrease its non-conformity.
   (B)   Should such existing non-conforming business or industrial non-
conforming structure or non-conforming portion of structure be destroyed by any
means to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement cost at time of
destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. (Residential structures or the residential portion
of a business or industrial structures are excepted from the 50% portion of a
business or industrial structures are excepted from the 50% provision).
   (C)   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.094 NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN
COMBINATION.
   If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of
$3,000 or more, or of structure and premises in combinations, exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be
allowed in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;
   (B)   Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to
occupy any land outside such building;
   (C)   If no structure alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be changed to
another non-conforming use provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals, either by
general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the
proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than
the existing non- conforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the
provisions of this chapter;
   (D)   When a non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in
combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive months or for 12
months during any three-year period (except when government action impedes
access to the premises), the structure, or structures and premises in
combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the district in which it is located; and
   (E)   Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and premises in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-
conforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection
is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost at
the time of destruction.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.095 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   On any non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
non-conforming use, repairs may be made. In any period of 12 consecutive
months, repairs or replacement of non- bearing walls, fixture, wiring or
plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten per cent of the current replacement
costs of the non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of the
structure as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it
became non-conforming shall not be increased.
   (B)   If a non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs
and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe
or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be
restored, repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.096 USES UNDER SPECIAL USE PROVISIONS NOT NON-CONFORMING USES.
   Any use which is permitted as a special use in a district under the terms of
this chapter (other than a change through Zoning Board of Appeals action from a
non-conforming use to another use not generally permitted in the district)
shall not be deemed a non-conforming use in such district, but shall without
further action be considered a conforming use.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 158.110 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   No permit pertaining to the use of land or building shall be issued unless
the Zoning Administrator has certified, after examination, that it complies
with all provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.111 DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Appointment. The Zoning Administrator of the village or other
officials that have been or shall be duly appointed by the Village President,
with the approval of the Village Board, shall enforce this chapter.
   (B)   Duties. In enforcing and administering this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator shall:
      (1)   Issue all certificates and make and maintain records thereof.
      (2)   Conduct or cause to be conducted inspections of buildings,
structures, and uses of land to determine compliance with the terms of this
chapter.
      (3)   Maintain permanent and current records of the ordinance, including
but not limited to, all maps, amendments and special uses, variations, appeals,
and applications therefor.
      (4)   Receive, file and forward to the Zoning Board of Appeals and
Planning Commission, and Village Board all applications for appeals,
variations, special uses, amendments and other matters on which such Boards and
Commission are required to act under this chapter.
      (5)   Provide such clerical and technical assistance as may be required
by the Zoning Board of Appeals and Planning Commission in the exercise of their
duties.
      (6)   Be mindful of the requirements of this chapter while administering
other ordinances pertaining to buildings, subdivisions and the like.
      (7)   Assist applicants with drafting of newspaper notices required by
this chapter.
      (8)   Turn over to the office manager all application and other fees
received by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.112 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall consist of nine members who shall be
qualified as officers of the village, except that they need not be residents of
the village if they reside within contiguous territory not more than 1½ miles
from the corporate limits of the village, and who shall select a chairman and
vice chairman.
   (B)   Jurisdiction and duties. The Planning Commission is hereby vested with
the following powers and duties in the administration of this chapter:
      (1)   To meet at least once per month.
      (2)   To post or publish notices of public hearing, and to hold such
hearings as requested by the applicable statutes of the state, pertaining to
proposed amendments to the regulations imposed and the districts created by
this chapter, pertaining to initial zoning of property upon annexation or in
accordance with annexation agreements, and to proposed special uses, as
established in this chapter. Except, however, that the Planning Commission
shall not have jurisdiction over limited rezoning amendments as defined in this
chapter.
      (3)   To make written reports and recommendations to the Village Board on
any such proposed amendments, zoning upon annexation, or proposed special uses.
      (4)   To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, studies of the
provisions of this chapter and to make reports of its recommendations to the
Village Board.
      (5)   To hear and decide all matters which it is required to act upon
under this chapter.
      (6)   To conduct hearings on adult use permits in accordance with
Chapter 161 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   The jurisdiction of the Planning Commission is not limited to zoning;
for example, the Planning Commission has other duties under the Village
Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96; Am. Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 158.113 PLANNING COMMISSION PROCEDURES AND RULES.
   (A)   All meetings requested of the Planning Commission shall be held at the
call of the Chairman, and at such other times as the Commission may determine.
All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this chapter shall,
at the option of the chairman, be given under oath. The Chairman, or in the
Chairman's absence, the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.
The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating
that fact, and shall also keep records of other official actions. Every rule,
regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order, requirement,
decision or determination of the Planning Commission shall immediately be filed
in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
   (B)   The concurring vote of a majority of a quorum of the Planning
Commission, is necessary to decide in favor of the applicant any matter under
this chapter, or to recommend any amendment or special use to the Village
Board.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall have rules of procedure which shall be
approved from time to time by the Village Board. The Rules of Procedures
effective on the effective date of this chapter are attached hereto as Appendix
A.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.114 PROCEDURES FOR ZONING AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Authority. The regulations imposed and the districts created under the
authority of this chapter may be amended from time to time by ordinance. An
amendment shall be granted or denied by the Village Board only after proper
notice and a public hearing before the Planning Commission and a report of its
findings and recommendations has been submitted to the Village Board.
   (B)   Initiation. Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board, or by a
resident or owner of property in the village.
   (C)   Processing. A petition for an amendment shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator in a form attached to this chapter as Appendix B. Such petition
shall be forwarded from the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission
with a request to hold a public hearing. Notice shall be given of the petition,
the relief requested therein, the name of petitioner and the time and place of
the hearing (a) by posting at the applicant's land not less than ten days prior
to the hearing, and (b) by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or
more newspapers in general circulation within the village not more than 30 nor
less than 15 days prior to the hearing, and (c) by giving a written notice by
first class mail at least 15 days before the hearing to the owners of the
properties located adjacent to the location for which the amendment is
requested. Failure to comply with steps (a) and (c) will not void an amendment.
   (D)   Conduct of Planning Commission hearing and report. 
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in
accordance with §
158.113 above. At the hearing, the Planning Commission shall take testimony as
necessary and shall consider the following issues:
         (a)   Consistency with the adopted Village Comprehensive Plan.
         (b)   Consistency with existing commitments and/or planned public
improvements.
         (c)   Benefit to the neighborhood.
         (d)   Occurrence of any land use changes that affect the original
zoning of the subject area.
         (e)   Any major changes in the condition of buildings and structures
that affect the original zoning of the subject area.
         (f)   Need for additional zoning amendments resulting by change
requested.
         (g)   Adequate carrying capacity of existing servicing of utilities
and streets.
         (h)   Effect proposed change will have on vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
         (i)   Impact proposed change will have on living conditions in the
vicinity by changing environmental factors such as sunlight, air and water
quality or noise.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall prepare and transmit to the Village
Board a written recommendation regarding the proposed amendment, along with a
copy of its minutes.
   (E)   Action by the Village Board. The Village Board, after receiving the
report of the Planning Commission and without further public hearing, except
for any new matter not presented to the Planning Commission and which the
Village Board deems relevant, may grant by ordinance any proposed amendment or
may refer it back to the recommending body for further consideration. A failure
to pass an ordinance shall be deemed a denial of the petition. Any written
protest against any proposed amendment of the regulations or districts may be
signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 per cent of the frontage proposed
to be altered, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage immediately adjoining or
across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of the frontage directly
opposite the frontage proposed to be altered. If such written protest in such
manner is filed with the Clerk of the Village and the applicant and his
attorney five days prior to public hearing, the amendment shall not be passed
except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of the Village Board then holding
office.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.115 PROCEDURES FOR INITIAL ZONING PURSUANT TO ANNEXATION AGREEMENT.
   Whenever a proposed annexation agreement containing provisions for zoning is
filed with the village, the proposed agreement shall serve as a petition for
amendment in accordance with §
158.114(C). The provisions of §
158.114(D) and (E) shall apply to any zoning requested in a proposed annexation
agreement. In the event a proposed annexation agreement requests variations of
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall consider
the variations requested along with the other zoning issues. The notices
required by §
158.114(C) shall include a notice of the requested variation.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.116 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Purpose. The development and execution of the Zoning Ordinance is
based upon the division of the village into districts, within any one of which
the use of land, buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings or
structures, as related to the land, are essentially uniform. It is recognized,
however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique character,
cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those use. upon neighboring lands
and upon public need for the particular use of the particular location. Such
special uses fall into two categories:
      (1)   Uses operated by a public agency or publicly-regulated utilities,
or uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
      (2)   Uses entirely private in character, but of such a nature that the
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities.
   (B)   Initiation. A written petition for a special use may be made by any
person, firm, or corporation who is the owner of real estate for which such
special use is sought, requesting or intending to request application for a
special use.
   (C)   Processing.  
      (1)   A petition for a special use in the form attached to this chapter
as Exhibit C shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. Such petition shall
be forwarded by the Zoning Administrator to the Planning Commission with a
request to hold a public hearing. Notice shall be given of the petition, the
relief requested therein, the name of the petitioner and the time and place of
the hearing (a) by posting on the applicant's land not less than ten days prior
to the hearing, and (b) by publishing a notice thereof at least once in one or
more newspapers in general circulation within the village not more than 30 days
nor less than 15 days prior to the hearing, and (c) by mailing a written notice
before the hearing to the owners of the properties located adjacent to the
location for which the special use is requested. Failure to comply with (a) and
(c) shall not void the special use.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall make a finding on the request and
shall submit a recommendation to the Village Board for decision.
   (D)   Findings. Before any special use shall be recommended to the Village
Board, the Planning Commission shall make written findings certifying that the
special use:
      (1)   Is proposed to be operated, designed, and located so that the
public health, safety and welfare will be protected; and
      (2)   Will not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in
the vicinity in which it is located.
   (E)   Decisions. The Village Board, after receiving the finding and
recommendation and minutes of the Planning Commission and without further
public hearing, may grant or deny by majority vote the proposed special use or
may refer it back to the Planning Commission for further consideration.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.117 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Creation. A Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby created for the village.
The Board of Appeals, shall consist of seven members who shall serve for a term
of five years, provided that the members first appointed after the enactment of
this chapter shall serve terms as follows: One shall serve a term of one year;
one for two years; one for three years; one for four years; one for five years;
one for six years; and one for seven years; the successor to each member so
appointed to serve a term of five years. One of the members so appointed shall
be named as Chairman at the time of his appointment. The terms of the members
shall commence on the date of their appointment. The amount of compensation, if
any, shall be fixed by the President and Board of Trustees. The members shall
be subject to removal by the President and Village Board of Trustees for good
cause after public hearing. Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have
the powers and duties assigned to the Zoning Board of Appeals by statute and
ordinance.
   (B)   Membership. All appointments to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
made by the Village President subject to approval of the Village Board. One of
the members so appointed shall be named as Chairman by the Village President
with approval of the Village Board at the time of his appointment. Vacancies
shall be filled as soon as possible for the unexpired term of any members whose
place has become vacant. In the event that the office of Chairman is vacated
for any reason, the Village President with approval of the Village Board shall
immediately appoint, at his option, either one of the remaining members of the
Board, or any member who is appointed to fill such vacancy on the Board as the
new Chairman.
   (C)   Jurisdiction and authority. The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby
vested with the powers as granted by the statutes of the state and this chapter
as follows:
      (1)   To hear and recommend appeals from any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator pertaining to
conformance with requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   To hear and recommend variations from the terms provided in this
chapter in the manner and subject to the standards set forth in this section.
      (3)   To hear and decide all other matters upon which it is required to
pass under this chapter.
      (4)   To hear and make recommendations as to limited rezoning amendments
as defined in this chapter.
      (5)   To hear all requests for unclassified or unspecified uses as
defined in this chapter (see §
158.019 of this chapter).
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.118 PROCEDURES OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   All meetings requested of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at
the call of their Chairman, and at such other times as the Board may determine.
All testimony by witnesses at any hearing provided for in this chapter shall,
at the option of the Chairman, be given under oath. The Chairman, or in the
Chairman's absence, the Acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating that fact, and shall also keep records of other official actions.
Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public
record.
   (B)   The concurring vote of four members of the Zoning Board of Appeals is
necessary to reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, or to decide in
favor of the applicant any matter under this chapter or to any effect any
variation in this chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.119 PROCEDURES FOR LIMITED REZONING AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Authority. A limited rezoning amendment shall be granted or denied by
the Village Board only after proper notice and a public hearing before the
Zoning Board of Appeals and a report of its findings and recommendations has
been submitted to the Village Board.
   (B)   Initiation. Amendments may be proposed by the Village Board, or by a
resident or owner of property in the village.
   (C)   Processing. A petition for a limited rezoning amendment shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator on a form attached to this chapter as Appendix E.
Such petition shall be forwarded from the Zoning Administrator to the Zoning
Board of Appeals with a request to hold a public hearing. Notice shall be given
of the petition, the relief requested therein, the name of petitioner and the
time and place of the hearing (a) by posting at the applicant's land not less
than ten days prior to the hearing, and (b) by publishing a notice thereof at
least once in one or more newspapers in general circulation within the village
not more than 30 nor less than 15 days prior to the hearing, and (c) by giving
a written notice by first class mail at least 15 days before the hearing to the
owners of the properties located adjacent to the location for which the
amendment is requested. Failure to comply with steps (a) and (c) will not void
an amendment.
   (D)   Conduct of Zoning Board of Appeals hearing and report.
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing in
accordance with §
158.113 above. At the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall take testimony
as necessary and shall consider the following issues:
         (a)   Consistency with the adopted Village Comprehensive Plan.
         (b)   Consistency with existing commitments and/or planned public
improvements.
         (c)   Benefit to the neighborhood.
         (d)   Occurrence of any land use changes that affect the original
zoning of the subject area.
         (e)   Any major changes in the condition of buildings and structures
that affect the original zoning of the subject area.
         (f)   Need for additional zoning amendments resulting by change
requested.
         (g)   Adequate carrying capacity of existing servicing of utilities
and streets.
         (h)   Affect proposed change will have on vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
         (i)   Impact proposed change will have on living conditions in the
vicinity by changing environment factors such as sunlight, air and water
quality or noise.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall prepare and transmit to the
Village Board a written recommendation regarding the proposed amendment, along
with a copy of its minutes.
   (E)   Action by the Village Board. The Village Board, after receiving the
report of the Zoning Board of Appeals and without further public hearing,
except for any new matter not presented to the Zoning Board of Appeals and
which the Village Board deems relevant, may grant by ordinance any proposed
limited rezoning amendment or may refer it back to the recommending body for
further consideration. A failure to pass an ordinance shall be deemed a denial
of the petition. Any written protest against any proposed limited rezoning
amendment of the regulations or districts may be signed and acknowledged by the
owners of 20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20%
of the frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the
owners of 20% of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be
altered. If such written protest in such manner is filed with the Clerk of the
Village and the applicant and his attorney five days prior to public hearing,
the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable vote of two-thirds of
the Village Board then holding office.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.120 APPEALS PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Initiation. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals by
any person, firm, or corporation or by any office, department board, bureau, or
commission, aggrieved by an administrative order, requirement, decision, or
determination under this chapter by the Zoning Administrator or other
authorized official of the village.
   (B)   Processing. An appeal shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator,
who shall forward such petition with all exhibits and papers constituting the
record upon which the action was taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals for
processing in accordance with the applicable statutes of the state. The Board
of Appeals shall within 30 days fix a time for the hearing of the appeal and
give due notice thereof to the parties and decide the appeal. Upon the hearing,
any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
   (C)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this event,
the proceedings shall not be stayed, or otherwise than by a restraining order
which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a circuit court on
application and on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on
due cause shown.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.121 VARIATIONS.
   (A)   Initiation. A written petition for a variance in the form attached to
this chapter as Appendix D may be made by any person, firm or corporation which
is the owner of real estate for which such variation is sought.
   (B)   Processing. A petition for a variance shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. Such petition shall be forwarded to the Zoning Board of Appeals
with a request to hold a public hearing. Notice shall be given of the petition,
the relief requested therein, the name of the petitioner, and the time and
place of the hearing (a) by posting at the applicant's land not less than ten
days prior to the hearing, and (b) by publishing a notice thereof at least once
in one or more newspapers in general circulation within the Village of Chatham
not more than 30 nor less than 15 days prior to the hearing, and (c) by giving
a written notice by mail the hearing to the owners of the properties located
adjacent to the location for which the variation is requested. Failure to
comply with (a) and (c) will not void the proposed variance.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not recommend variance of the
provisions of this chapter as authorized in this section unless it shall have
made findings based upon the evidence presented to it that all of the following
conditions apply:
         (a)   That the property in question cannot yield a reasonable return
if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations
governing the district in which it is located;
         (b)   That the plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
         (c)   That the variance, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
      (2)   The Zoning Board of Appeals, in making the foregoing determination
may take into consideration the extent to which the following facts, favorable
to the applicant, have been established by the evidence:
         (a)   That the particular physical surroundings, shape or
topographical conditions of the specific property involved would bring a
particular hardship upon the owner as distinguished from a mere inconvenience
if the strict letter of regulation were to be carried out;
         (b)   That the conditions upon which the petition for variance is
based would not be applicable generally to other property within the same
zoning classification;
         (c)   That the purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         (d)   That the alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by
any person presently having an interest in the property;
         (e)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; or
         (f)   That the proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the danger of
fire, or otherwise endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
      (3)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may require such conditions and
restrictions upon the premises benefitted by a variance as may be necessary to
comply with the standards set forth in this section to reduce or minimize the
injurious effect of such variance upon other property in the neighborhood, and
to implement the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
   (E)   Authorized variations. Variations from the regulations of this chapter
may be recommended by the Zoning Board of Appeals only in accordance with the
standards set forth in this section and only in the following instances:
      (1)   To permit a height greater than allowed.
      (2)   To permit a yard less than the yard required by the applicable
regulation.
      (3)   To permit the use of a lot located in a Residence District having
insufficient area and width for a single-family dwelling, provided such lot is
of record on the effective date of this chapter.
      (4)   To permit the use of any lot not covered above, for a use otherwise
prohibited solely because of insufficient area of the lot.
      (5)   To permit the same off-street parking spaces to qualify as required
spaces for two or more uses, provided that the maximum use of such facility by
each user does not take place during the same hours of the same days of the
week.
      (6)   To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading
requirements.
      (7)   To authorize a use of land where an amendment to the village zoning
district classification causes practical difficulties or hardships.
      (8)   To vary requirements for fences and swimming pools.
   (F)   Decisions.
      (1)   The Zoning Board of Appeals at the conclusion of the public hearing
promptly thereafter shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations
on each petition to the Village Board.
      (2)   The Village Board, after receiving the report of the Zoning Board
of Appeals and without further public hearing, except for any new matter not
presented to the Zoning Board of Appeals and which the Village Board deems
relevant, may grant or deny by majority vote and proposed variation or may
refer it back to the recommending body for further consideration.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.122 FEES FOR VARIANCES, APPEALS AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Any application for a variance or appeal filed by or on behalf of the
owner or owners of the property affected shall be accompanied by a fee of $200.
   (B)   Any application for an amendment or special use filed by or on behalf
of the owner or owners of the property affected shall be accompanied by a fee
of $200.
   (C)   Any application for any action, filed by an officer, board or
commission of the village not on behalf of any specific private interest, shall
not be accompanied by any fee.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.123 VIOLATION, PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   Any person, firm, or corporation, who violates, omits, neglects, or refuses
to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500
for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate offense. The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated
and authorized to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
§ 158.124 NUISANCES.
   Every structure and lot which is in violation of this chapter is hereby
declared a nuisance. The village may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction
for equitable relief to restrain, enjoin or abate any such nuisance.
(Ord. 96-54, passed 3-26-96)
APPENDIX A: BYLAWS OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
Article
   
I.   Name
   
II.   Purpose of bylaws
   
III.   Membership on the Planning Commission
   
IV.   Meetings
   
V.   Committees
   
VI.   Amendment of bylaws
   
VII.   Powers and duties
ARTICLE I. NAME.
   The name of this organization shall be known as the Village of Chatham
Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "Planning Commission."
(Adopted 2-23-93; Am. Ord. 96-54, 3-26-96)
ARTICLE II. PURPOSE OF BYLAWS.
   It is the purpose of these bylaws to govern and facilitate the operations
and policies of the Planning Commission in accordance with the provisions of
the laws and regulations of the Village of Chatham.
(Adopted 2-23-93; Am. Ord. 96-54, 3-26-96)
ARTICLE III. MEMBERSHIP ON THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   1.   The membership of the Planning Commission shall consist of nine
members.
   2.   Any resident of voting age of the Village of Chatham or resident of
unincorporated Sangamon County with 1½ miles of Chatham shall be eligible to
participate as a member of the Planning Commission. The President may accept
recommendations for member to the Planning Commission from any citizen within
the Village of Chatham.
   3.   Members to the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the President
with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees. Such appointments
shall be made by a resolution passed by the Village Board of Trustees at either
a regular or special Village Board meeting. Membership terms shall be set out
in the resolution in accordance with paragraphs 4 and 5 below.
   4.   Members to the Planning Commission shall serve for a term of 6 years.
Such terms shall be in accordance with the scheduled outlined under paragraph 7
of these Bylaws. Membership renewal shall be subject to reappointment by the
President with the advice ad consent of the Village Board of Trustees.
   5.   The Chairperson of the Planning Commission shall be selected by and
from the Planning Commission membership. The Chairperson shall serve for a term
of 2 years.
   6.   No member of the Planning Commission shall serve more than 2
consecutive terms as the Chairperson.
   7.   Beginning on the effective date of these Bylaws, members of the
Planning Commission shall be appointed such that the term of 3 members shall
expire at the end of the second year, 3 at the end of the fourth year, and 3 at
the end of the sixth year. The initial appointment of the Planning Commission
members shall be drawn by lot by the Planning and Programming Subcommittee of
the Village Board of Trustees. The Village Board shall pass a resolution
specifying the names and terms of the Planning Commission members at its first
regular meeting after the effective date of these Bylaws.
   8.   Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the
expiration of the term for which his/her predecessor was appointed shall be
appointed for the remainder of such term. Vacancies shall be filled pursuant to
the provisions outlined in this Article.
   9.   Members of the Planning Commission may be removed by the President,
with the consent of the Village Board of Trustees, as in the case of other
Village officers. Any member who is absent for two consecutive meetings without
informing the Chairperson without a good and sufficient reason shall be deemed
to have requested removal by the Village President. Notification of such
absence shall be given to the Chairperson or Secretary of the Planning
Commission.
   10.   The Chairperson of the Planning Commission may appoint one of the
members as Vice- Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall act in the
Chairperson's place and stead when the Chairperson is out of the Village, ill,
or otherwise unable to perform the functions of Chairperson. When acting on
behalf of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall have all of the powers of
the Chairperson, including but not limited to chairing meetings of the Planning
Commission and signing plats and other documents on behalf of the Planning
Commission.
(Adopted 2-23-93; Am. Ord. 96-54, 3-26-96)
ARTICLE IV. MEETINGS.
Regular Meeting. The regular meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held
on the third Thursday of each month at 7:30 p.m. in the municipal hall of the
Village of Chatham.
Special Meetings. Special meetings can be called by the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission, or by any member of the Planning Commission, or at the
request of the Village Board, and shall be called upon the written request of
the person calling the meeting. The purpose of the meeting shall be stated in
the call, except in cases of emergency, at least three calendar days' notice
shall be given. All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be in accordance
with the Open Meetings Act.
Agenda.
   A.   At least 5 working days prior to all regular meetings of the Planning
Commission, a proposed agenda of business to be conducted at the meeting shall
be prepared by the Secretary of the Planning Commission after consultation with
the Chairperson. An agenda shall be prepared for all special meetings as far in
advance of the special meeting as possible. Planning Commission members may
place items on the agenda by notifying the Chairperson at least 2 working days
prior to a regular meeting. Items may be placed on the agenda for a special
meeting in the same manner as for regular meetings, except that the Chairperson
may waive the time deadlines set forth in this Section as appropriate under the
circumstances.
   B.   At least 5 working days prior to a regular meeting the Secretary of the
Planning Commission shall mail a copy of the agenda to every member of the
Planning Commission, to each person on the mailing list and to any other person
the Chairperson deems appropriate under the circumstances.
   C.   One copy of the plans/documents that have been filed with the Chatham
Village Clerk shall be forwarded by the Clerk to the Secretary of the Planning
Commission. At such time the documents are to be considered by the Planning
Commission at its scheduled monthly meeting, the Secretary shall have available
a copy of the documents for review by Planning Commission members prior to the
meeting. Such documents are described in Exhibit A, which is attached hereto
and made a part of these Bylaws. The provisions of this subsection shall not
prohibit the Planning Commission from acting upon an item that was not
contained in the published agenda.
Quorum. A majority of the total members of the Planning Commission shall
constitute a quorum for any meeting.
Rules of Procedure. The official rules of procedure of the Planning Commission
for meetings shall be Roberts Rules of Order unless otherwise provided by these
Bylaws. Each member is entitled to one vote. No action of the Planning
Commission is binding unless a majority of members present at the meeting casts
their vote in the affirmative.
Public Participation in Planning Commission Meetings. Upon request made prior
to or at a Planning Commission meeting, any person who desires to present a
statement on a matter that is on the agenda for the meeting must be afforded an
opportunity to present an oral statement or submit written comments, or both,
to the Planning Commission at the meeting. The Chairperson may, depending on
the circumstances, limit the time and manner of this statement. All Planning
Commission actions and decisions shall be made in open meetings and
appropriately recorded.
Minutes of Meeting. Written minutes of all Planning Commission meetings shall
be kept. The minutes shall record the final votes to any Planning Commission
decision. The Secretary of the Planning Commission shall furnish copies of the
minutes to each Planning Commission member, the Village Board and shall make
the minutes available to the public as soon as practicable after the meeting.
(Adopted 2-23-93; Am. Ord. 96-54, 3-26-96)
ARTICLE V. COMMITTEES.
   The Planning Commission may establish committees of its members or advisory
committees of persons other than Planing Commission members for the purpose of
advising the Planning Commission on any and all matters of interest to the
Planning Commission. The committee members shall elect a Chairperson. The
committee shall meet at the call of the committee Chairperson. The committee
Chairperson shall provide reasonable public notice of committee meetings. All
meetings of a committee shall be open to the public. Standing Committees for
the Planning Commission are as follows: Zoning Committee, Comprehensive
Planning Committee and the Subdivision Committee.
(Adopted 2-23-93; Am. Ord. 96-54, 3-26-96)
ARTICLE VI. AMENDMENT OF BYLAWS.
   These Bylaws can be amended at any regular meeting of the Village Board of
Trustees, provided that the amendment has been submitted in writing at the
previous regular meeting and has been reviewed by the Planning Commission.
(Adopted 2-23-93; Am. Ord. 96-54, 3-26-96)
ARTICLE VII. POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties set forth in
Division 12 of Article 11 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et
seq.), and in Village of Chatham Ordinances relating to planning, zoning and
subdivisions in accordance with the duties enumerated in these documents (i.e.,
Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision Ordinance).
(Adopted 2-23-93; Am. Ord. 96-54, 3-26-96)
APPENDIX B: PETITION FOR ZONING AMENDMENT
   VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, ILLINOIS
   PETITION FOR ZONING AMENDMENT
TO:   Planning Commission and
      Village Board
      Village Hall
      Chatham, IL 62629                  Date:                         
   [DO NOT WRITE IN THIS SPACE - FOR OFFICE USE ONLY]
Date Set for Hearing                                    Fee $               
Notice published                                     Date Paid                
Newspaper                                   
Notice Mailed to Adjacent Landowners                                         
Notice Posted on Subject Property                                            
Planning Commission
   Recommendation                  Village Board Action         Date       
Approve         Date                  Denied
Deny   Chairman Initials                Approved (Ordinance No.       -       )
Approve with Modification
INSTRUCTIONS TO APPLICANTS: All information required by this Application must
be completed and submitted herewith. Applicants are encouraged to visit the
Village office for any assistance needed in filling out this form.
Normally there are only two primary reasons for change in zoning. There are:
(a) the original zoning was in error: (b) the conditions of the neighborhood
have changed to such an extent or degree as to warrant rezoning. The burden of
providing substantiating evidence rests with the applicant. See Section 7.05 of
the 1994 Zoning Ordinance for further details.
NAME OF APPLICANT:
                                                                                                     
ADDRESS OF APPLICANT:
                                                                                                 
PHONE NUMBER:                          (H)
                                        (W)
Interest of Applicant In the Subject Property (if not owner):
                                                                                                                                                             
1.   This application must be filed with an accurate legal description and a
plat map of the property drawn to scale not less than one (1) inch equals Two
Hundred (200) feet.
   LEGAL DESCRIPTION
                                                                              
                     Lot, Block, Subdivision, Metes and Bounds--may be on
attachment
2.   Street Address of Property
                                                                      
3.   Area of land re-zoning requested for:                           square
feet.
4.   (a)   Present Zoning District Classification of subject and adjacent
properties (show zone district boundaries on plat):
                                         
   (b)   Requested New Zoning District Classification of subject Property:
                  
5.   Present use of Property:
                                                                         
   Proposed use of Property:
                                                                        
6.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of all owners of record:
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                    
7.   An amendment is requested to amend the Zone District Classification of
certain described properties shown on the Zone District Map. A statement of the
applicant's described reasons and factual information supporting the requested
rezoning is attached.
DATE:                                       SIGNATURE:
                                          
OWNER'S CONSENT
[This part need be signed only if the applicant is different from the owner or
if there is more than one owner of record]
   I consent to this requested zoning change
                                                                          
                                                                          
1997 S-1                                                                    
APPENDIX C: PETITION FOR SPECIAL USE
   VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, ILLINOIS
   PETITION FOR SPECIAL USE
TO:   Chatham Planning Commission and
      Village Board
      Village Hall
      Chatham, IL 62629                  Date:                         
   [DO NOT WRITE IN THIS SPACE - FOR OFFICE USE ONLY]
Date Set for Hearing                                    Fee $               
Notice published                                     Date Paid                
Newspaper                                   
Notice Mailed to Adjacent Landowners                                         
Notice Posted on Subject Property                                            
Planning Commission      Date              
   Recommendation                  Village Board Action         Date       
Approve                         Denied
Deny   Chairman Initials                Approved (Ordinance No.       -       )
Approve with Modification
INSTRUCTIONS TO APPLICANTS: All information required by this Application must
be completed and submitted herewith. Applicants are encouraged to visit the
Village office for any assistance needed in filling out this form. See Section
7.07 of the 1994 Zoning Ordinance, and district regulations in the Zoning
Ordinance for further details.
NAME OF APPLICANT:
                                                                                                     
ADDRESS OF APPLICANT:
                                                                                                 
PHONE NUMBER:                          (H)
                                        (W)
Interest of Applicant In the Subject Property (if not owner):
                                                                                                                                                             
1.   This application must be filed with an accurate legal description and a
plat map of the property drawn to scale not less than one (1) inch equals Two
Hundred (200) feet.
   LEGAL DESCRIPTION
                                                                              
                     Lot, Block, Subdivision, Metes and Bounds--may be on
attachment
2.   Street Address of Property
                                                                      
3.   Area of land re-zoning requested for:                           square
feet.
4.   (a)   Present Zoning District Classification of subject and adjacent
properties (show zone district boundaries on plat):
                                         
   (b)   Requested New Zoning District Classification of Adjacent Property:
                  
5.   Present use of Property:
                                                                         
   Proposed use of Property:
                                                                        
6.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of all owners of record:
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                        
7.   A special use permit is requested for the subject property. A statement of
the applicant's described reasons and factual information supporting the
requested special use is attached.
DATE:                                       SIGNATURE:
                                          
OWNER'S CONSENT
[This part need be signed only if the applicant is different from the owner or
if there is more than one owner of record]
   I consent to this requested zoning change
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
APPENDIX D: PETITION FOR ZONING VARIANCE
   VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, ILLINOIS
   PETITION FOR ZONING VARIANCE
TO:   Zoning Board of Appeals and
      Village Board
      Village Hall
      Chatham, IL 62629                  Date:                         
   [DO NOT WRITE IN THIS SPACE - FOR OFFICE USE ONLY]
Date Set for Hearing                                    Fee $               
Notice published                                     Date Paid                
Newspaper                                   
Notice Mailed to Adjacent Landowners                                         
Notice Posted on Subject Property                                            
Zoning Board of Appeals
   Recommendation                  Village Board Action         Date       
Approve         Date                  Denied
Deny   Chairman Initials                Approved (Ordinance No.       -       )
Approve with Modification
INSTRUCTIONS TO APPLICANTS: All information required by this Application must
be completed and submitted herewith. Applicants are encouraged to visit the
Village office for any assistance needed in filling out this form.
An applicant for variance must show that (a) the property in question cannot
yield a reasonable return if permitted to be used only under the conditions
allowed by the regulations in the zone; (b) the plight of the owner is due to
unique circumstances; (c) the variation, if granted, will not alter the
essential character of the locality. The burden of providing substantiating
evidence is on the applicant. See Section 7.11 of the 1994 Zoning Ordinance for
further details.
NAME OF APPLICANT:
                                                                                                     
ADDRESS OF APPLICANT:
                                                                                                 
PHONE NUMBER:                          (H)
                                        (W)
Interest of Applicant In the Subject Property (if not owner):
                                                               
1.   This application must be filed with an accurate legal description and one
copy of a plat map of the property showing the location of all existing and
proposed structures and setbacks, and structures on all adjacent properties
drawn to scale not less than one (1) inch equals Two Hundred (200) feet.
   LEGAL DESCRIPTION
                                                                              
                     Lot, Block, Subdivision, Metes and Bounds--may be on
attachment
2.   Street Address of Property
                                                                      
3.   Area of land variance requested for                     square feet.
4.   (a)   Present Zoning District Classification of subject and adjacent
properties (show zone district boundaries on plat):
                                         
   (b)   Nature of requested variance:
                                                                                                                                                                                          
5.   Present use of Property:
                                                                         
6.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of all owners of record:
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                        
7.   A variance is requested to vary the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
with respect to the property described herein. A statement of the applicant's
described reasons and factual information supporting the requested variance is
attached.
DATE:                                       SIGNATURE:
                                          
OWNER'S CONSENT
[This part need be signed only if the applicant is different from the owner or
if there is more than one owner of record]
   I consent to this requested zoning change
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
APPENDIX E: PETITION FOR LIMITED REZONING AMENDMENT
   VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, ILLINOIS
   PETITION FOR LIMITED REZONING AMENDMENT
TO:   Zoning Board of Appeals and
      Village Board
      Village Hall
      Chatham, IL 62629                  Date:                         
   [DO NOT WRITE IN THIS SPACE - FOR OFFICE USE ONLY]
Date Set for Hearing                                    Fee $               
Notice published                                     Date Paid                
Newspaper                                   
Notice Mailed to Adjacent Landowners                                         
Notice Posted on Subject Property                                            
Zoning Board of Appeals
   Recommendation                  Village Board Action         Date       
Approve         Date                  Denied
Deny   Chairman Initials                Approved (Ordinance No.       -       )
Approve with Modification
INSTRUCTION TO APPLICANTS: All information required by this Application must be
completed and submitted herewith. Applicants are encouraged to visit the
Village office for any assistance needed in filling out this form.
Normally there are only two primary reasons for change in zoning. There are:
(a) the original zoning was in error; (b) the conditions of the neighborhood
have changed to such an extent or degree as to warrant re-zoning. The burden of
providing substantiating evidence rests with the applicant. See Section 7.09(a)
of the 1994 Zoning Ordinance for further details.
NAME OF APPLICANT:
                                                                                                     
ADDRESS OF APPLICANT:
                                                                                                 
PHONE NUMBER:                          (H)
                                        (W)
Interest of Applicant In the Subject Property (if not owner):
                                                                                                                                      
1.   This application must be filed with an accurate legal description and a
plat map of the property drawn to scale not less than one (1) inch equals Two
Hundred (200) feet.
   LEGAL DESCRIPTION
                                                                              
                     Lot, Block, Subdivision, Metes and Bounds--may be on
attachment
2.   Street Address of Property
                                                                      
3.   Area of land re-zoning requested for:                           square
feet.
4.   (a)   Present Zoning District Classification of subject and adjacent
properties (show zone district boundaries on plat):
                                         
   (b)   Requested New Zoning District Classification of subject Property:
                  
5.   Present use of Property:
                                                                         
   Proposed use of Property:
                                                                        
6.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of all owners of record:
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                        
7.   An amendment is requested to amend the Zone District Classification of
certain described properties shown on the Zone District Map. A statement of the
applicant's described reasons and factual information supporting the requested
rezoning is attached.
DATE:                                       SIGNATURE:
                                          
OWNER'S CONSENT
[This part need be signed only if the applicant is different from the owner or
if there is more than one owner of record]
   I consent to this requested zoning change
                                                                          
                                                                          
                                                                          
(Am. Ord. 17-32, passed 6-13-17)
APPENDIX F: FENCE REQUIREMENTS FOR BUSINESS - RESIDENTIAL SEPARATION
   (See §
158.071(A)(2) of Code of Ordinances)
1.   Eight feet minimum height.
2.   Line Post - minimum four inch by four inch.
3.   Line Post Separation - maximum eight feet.
4.   Rails - minimum four runs, first run maximum six inches from ground,
second run maximum six inches from top, last two runs evenly spaced between
first and second run.
5.   Fence Slats - minimum four inch width, minimum  3/4 inch thick, no
separation between slats.
6.   Fence must be erected and complete before a building permit will be issued
for the commercial construction.
7.   The village may require an engineering review of the fence construction
and location if natural or human-made obstacles, such as drainage or utilities
interfere with the erection of the fence. This review will be done by the
Village Engineer.
(Ord. 01-51, passed 8-28-01)
CHAPTER 159: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
159.01   Purpose
   
159.02   Relationship to zoning ordinance
   
159.03   Definitions
   
159.04   Applicability
   
159.05   General requirements
Uses
   
159.15   Permitted uses
   
159.16   Administratively approved uses
   
159.17   Special use permits
   
159.18   Buildings or other equipment storage
   
159.19   Removal of abandoned antennas and towers
   
159.20   Non-conforming uses
   
159.21   Special procedures for special use determinations
   
159.22   Severability
Small Cell Antenna/Tower Right-of-Way Siting
   
159.35   Definitions
   
159.36   Standards and regulations
   
159.37   Number limitation and co-location
   
159.38   Separation and clearance requirements
   
159.39   Village-owned infrastructure
   
159.40   New towers
   
159.41   Attachment limitations
   
159.42   Signage
   
159.43   Screening
   
159.44   Permission to use utility pole or alternative antenna structure
   
159.45   Licenses and permits
   
159.46   Variance requirements
   
159.47   Abandonment and removal
   
159.48   Permits and application fees and procedures
   
159.49   Conflict of laws
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 159.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this
chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts
of towers and antennas;
   (B)   Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas;
   (C)   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
   (D)   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a
primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
   (E)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
   (F)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful
design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques;
   (G)   Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and efficiently;
   (H)   Consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and
   (I)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. In furtherance of
these goals, the village shall give due consideration to its comprehensive
plan, zoning map, existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
§ 159.02 RELATIONSHIP TO ZONING ORDINANCE.
   This chapter is closely related to and shall be interpreted together with
the Zoning Chapter,
Chapter 158. All terms contained in this chapter shall have the same meanings
as when used in
Chapter 158, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. However, in the
event of any conflict between this chapter and
Chapter 158, this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
§ 159.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE. Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples,
light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage
or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
   BACKHAUL NETWORK. The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to
one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance
providers, or the public switched telephone network.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   HEIGHT. When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured
from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or
other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
   PRE-EXISTING TOWERS AND PRE-EXISTING ANTENNAS. Any tower or antenna for
which a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to
the effective date of Ordinance 99-14, including permitted towers or antennas
that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not
expired.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use, excluding village owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cutoff switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including self- supporting lattice towers, guyed towers
or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures and the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto.
   VILLAGE. Refers to the Village of Chatham.
   ZONING CHAPTER. Refers to
Chapter 158 of the Code of the Village of Chatham.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99; Am. Ord. 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
§ 159.04 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the village
shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in §
159.02 (B) through (D).
   (B)   Amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This chapter
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under
70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur
radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas.
   (C)   Pre-existing towers or antennas. Pre-existing towers and pre-existing
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter, other
than the requirements of §
159.05(F) and (G).
   (D)   AM array. For purposes of implementing this chapter, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system which
functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be measured from the
outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM array. Additional tower units
may be added within the perimeter of the AM array by right.
   (E)   The Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act and
Chapter 163 of Title XV shall govern the location and permitting of small
wireless facilities within the right-of-way and/or within districts zoned
either business or industrial.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99; Am. Ord. 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
§ 159.05 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses under the zoning chapter. A different
existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the
installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
   (B)   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zoning district regulations, including but not
limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such
requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
   (C)   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Zoning Administrator an inventory of its existing
towers, antennas or sites approved for towers or antennas that are either
within the jurisdiction of the village or within one mile of the border
thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design
of each tower. The Zoning Administrator may share such information with other
applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under
this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the
jurisdiction of the village, provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator
is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that
such sites are available or suitable.
   (D)   Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject
to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      (2)   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
      (3)   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
   (E)   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
   (F)   State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state
or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If
such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and
antennas governed by this chapter shall bring the towers and antennas into
compliance with the revised standards and regulations within six months of the
effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance
schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to
bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
   (G)   Building codes: safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes
and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the
village concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards
and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such
tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal of the
tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
   (H)   Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
   (I)   Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify, that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communication system in the village have been obtained
and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the Zoning Administrator.
   (J)   Public notice. For purposes of this chapter, any special use request,
variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or special use
shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property
owners of properties that are located within the corresponding separation
distance listed in §
159.17(B)(5)(b), Table 2, in addition to any notice otherwise required by the
Zoning Ordinance.
   (K)   Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
   (L)   Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of §
159.17.
   (M)   Multiple antenna/tower plan. The village encourages the users of
towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple
towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall
be given priority in the review process.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
USES
§ 159.15 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted
uses and shall not require administrative approval or a special use permit.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
      (1)   Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the village, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna
or tower has been approved by the village.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
§ 159.16 ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES.
   (A)   General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator may administratively approve the uses
listed in this section.
      (2)   Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the
Zoning Administrator providing the information set forth in §
159.17(B)(1) and (3) and a non-refundable fee of $250 to reimburse the village
for the costs of reviewing the application.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for
administrative approval and determine if the proposed use complies with §§
159.05,
159.17(B)(4) and (B)(5).
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall respond to each such application
within 60 days after receiving it by either approving or denying the
application. If the Zoning Administrator fails to respond to the applicant
within the 60 days, then the application shall be deemed to be approved.
      (5)   In connection with any such administrative approval, the Zoning
Administrator may, in a case involving shared use, administratively waive any
zoning district setback requirements in §
159.17(B)(4) or separation distances between towers in §
159.17(B)(5) by up to 50%.
      (6)   In connection with any such administrative approval, the Zoning
Administrator may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively
allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole construction.
      (7)   If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant's
administrative remedy shall be limited to filing an application for a special
use permit pursuant to §
159.17.
   (B)   List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be
approved by the Zoning Administrator after conducting an administrative review.
      (1)   Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional
buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or
antenna, in any industrial zoning district.
      (2)   Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of (a) and (b) below.
         (a)   Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Zoning Administrator as an accessory
use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or multi-family
structure of eight or more dwelling units, provided:
            1.   The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the
highest point of the structure;
            2.   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations; and
            3.   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
         (b)   Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to an
existing tower may be approved by the Zoning Administrator and, to minimize
adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing towers
shall take precedence over the construction of new towers, provided such
collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with the following:
            1.   A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type as the
existing tower, unless the Zoning Administrator allows reconstruction as a
monopole.
            2.   Height.
               a.   An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height, not to exceed 30 feet over the tower's existing height, to accommodate
the collocation of an additional antenna.
               b.   The height change referred to in division (B)(2)(b)2.a.
above may only occur one time per communication tower.
               c.   The additional height referred to in division (B)(2)(b)2.a.
above shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth in §
159.17. The tower's premodification height shall be used to calculate such
distance separations.
            3.   Onsite location.
               a.   A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its
existing location.
               b.    After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation,
only one tower may remain on the site.
               c.   A relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from
the original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances
between towers pursuant to §
159.17(B)(5). The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to
cause a violation of § 159.017(B)(5).
               d.   The onsite relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as
established in §
159.17(B)(5) shall only be permitted when approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   New towers in non-residential zoning districts. Locating any new
tower in a non- residential zoning district other than industrial provided a
licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate
the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the Zoning Administrator
concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in §
159.01 and the requirements of §
159.05; the tower meets the setback requirements in §
159.17(B)(4) and separation distances in §
159.17(B)(5); and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria:
         (a)   For a single user, up to 90 feet in height;
         (b)   For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and
         (c)   For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height.
      (4)   Installing a cable microcell network through the use of multiple
low powered transmitters/receivers attached to existing wireline systems, such
as conventional cable or telephone wires, or similar technology that does not
require the use of towers.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
§ 159.17 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special
use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning Commission:
      (1)   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under §
159.15 or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to §
159.16, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a
tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
      (2)   Applications for special use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, except as
modified in this section.
      (3)   In recommending the grant of a special use permit, the Planning
Commission may suggest conditions to the extent the Planning Commission
concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.
      (4)   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a
licensed professional engineer.
      (5)   An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information
described in this section and a non-refundable fee of $250 plus a commitment to
reimburse the village its out-of-pocket costs for a review by a licensed
engineer.
   (B)   Towers.
      (1)   Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for special use permits pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance,
applicants for a special use permit for a tower shall submit the following
information:
         (a)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses
and zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), zoning
classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in §
159.17(B)(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from
property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other
structures, topography, parking and other information deemed by the Zoning
Administrator to be necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.
         (b)   Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
         (c)   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
         (d)   The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to §
159.05(C) shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall
also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
         (e)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
         (f)   Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
         (g)   A description of compliance with §
159.05(C) through (G), (J), (1), and (M), §
159.17 (B)(4), and (B)(5) and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
         (h)   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas
for future users.
         (i)   Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the municipality.
         (j)   A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or
structures to provide the services to be provided through the use of the
proposed new tower.
         (k)   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the village based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological or geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is
erected.
      (2)   Factors considered in granting special use permits for towers. In
addition to the standards for consideration of special use permit applications
pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall consider the
following factors in determining whether to recommend issuance of a special use
permit, although the Planning Commission may recommend waiver or reduction of
the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Planning
Commission concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby:
         (a)   Height of the proposed tower;
         (b)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
         (c)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
         (d)   Surrounding topography;
         (e)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
         (f)   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
         (g)   Proposed ingress and egress; and
         (h)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in §
159.17(B)(3).
      (3)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be recommended unless the applicant
demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning Commission that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna.
An applicant shall submit information requested by the Planning Commission
related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing
tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
         (a)   No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
         (b)   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
         (c)   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
         (d)   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
         (e)   The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower
or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower
development are presumed to be unreasonable.
         (f)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors
that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
         (g)   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell
network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to a
wireline system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
      (4)   Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a special use permit is required; provided, however, that the
Planning Commission may recommend reduction of the standard setback
requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby.
         (a)   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
         (b)   Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
      (5)   Separation.   The following separation requirements shall apply to
all towers and antennas for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Planning Commission may reduce the standard separation
requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby.
         (a)   Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
            1.   Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the tower
to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as specified in
Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table 1.
            2.   Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
TABLE 1:
TOWER SEPARATION REQUIREMENTS
 
Off-Site Use/Designated Area              Separation Distance
Single-Family or Duplex Residential Units 200 Feet or 300% Height of Tower
1                                         Whichever is Greatest
Vacant Single-Family or Duplex
Residentially Zoned Land Which is Either  200 Feet or 300% Height of Tower 2
Platted or has Preliminary Subdivision
Plan Approval which is not Expired.
Vacant Unplatted Residentially Zoned      100 Feet or 100% Height of Tower
Lands 3                                   Whichever is Greater
Existing Multi-Family Residential Units   100 Feet or 100% Height of Tower
Greater Than Duplex Units                 Whichever is Greatest
Non-Residentially Zoned Lands or          None; Only Setbacks Apply
Non-Residential Uses
 
      1 Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for living purposes.
      2 Separation measured from base of tower to closest building setback
line.
      3 Includes any unplatted residential use properties without a valid
preliminary subdivision plan or valid development plan approval and any mufti-
family residentially zoned land greater than duplex.
         (b)   Separation distances between towers.
            1.   Separation distances between towers shall be applicable for
and measured between the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the
base of the existing tower and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of
the proposed tower. The separation distance (listed in linear feet) shall be
shown in Table 2.
            2.   Separation distance.
TABLE 2:
EXISTING TOWERS - TYPES
 
                                    Monopole 75       Monopole less than 75
                      Lattice Guyed Feet in Height or Feet in Height
                                    Greater
Lattice               5000    5000  1500              750
Guyed                 500     500   1500              750
Monopole 75
Feet in Height or     1500    1500  1500              750
Greater
Monopole less than 75 750     750   750               750
Feet in Height
 
         (6)   Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate
anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may waive
such requirements, as it deems appropriate.
         (7)   Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit is required;
provided, however, that the Planning Commission may waive such requirements if
the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby.
            (a)   Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from property
used for residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at
least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound.
            (b)   In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived.
            (c)   Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as
towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
§ 159.18 BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE.
   (A)   Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the following:
      (1)   The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 225 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in height. In addition, for
buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in height, the related
unmanned equipment structure, if over 150 square feet of gross floor area or
eight feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located
on the roof of the structure.
      (2)   If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall
not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
      (3)   Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
   (B)   Antennas mounted on utility poles or light poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located in
accordance with the following.
      (1)   In residential districts, the equipment cabinet or structure may be
located in:
         (a)   A front or side yard provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than three feet in height or 16 square feet of gross floor area and the
cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 15 feet from all lot lines. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate
height of at least 42-48 inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches; or
         (b)   A rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater
than five feet in height or 25 square feet in gross floor area. The cabinet/
structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of
eight feet and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
      (2)    In commercial or industrial districts the equipment cabinet or
structure shall be no greater than five feet in height or 25 square feet in
gross floor area. The structure or cabinet shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 36
inches.
   (C)   Antennas located on towers. The related, unmanned equipment structure
shall not contain more than 225 square feet of gross floor area or be more than
15 feet in height and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard
requirements of the zoning district in which located.
   (D)   Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of §
159.18(A) through (C) may be modified by the Zoning Administrator in the case
of administratively approved uses or by the Planning Commission in the case of
uses permitted by special use to encourage collocation.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 159.19 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
   Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower
shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the village
notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna
or tower within the 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or antenna at
the owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then
this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
§ 159.20 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   No expansion of non-conforming use. Towers that are constructed, and
antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a non-conforming use or
structure.
   (B)   Pre-existing towers. Pre-existing towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including replacement
with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be permitted on such
pre-existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on a pre-
existing tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed non-conforming towers or antennas.
Notwithstanding §
159.19, bona fide non-conforming towers or antennas that are damaged or
destroyed may be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval
or a special use permit and without having to meet the separation requirements
specified in §
159.17(B)(4) and (B)(5). The type, height and location of the tower on site
shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility approval.
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable
building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility
is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires,
the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in §
159.10.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
§ 159.21 SPECIAL PROCEDURES FOR SPECIAL USE DETERMINATIONS.
   The procedures for special uses shall be the same as in the Zoning Chapter
with respect to a public hearing and approval of the special use by ordinance
of the corporate authorities. However, the following requirements, peculiar to
the Telecommunications Act, shall apply:
   (A)   If the applicant shows that the antenna tower and the equipment to be
installed thereon meet all requirements of the FCC, the Planning Commission
shall disallow and disregard evidence regarding the environmental effects
(including interference) of radio frequency emissions, and the Village Board
shall disregard any such evidence in making its final determination.
   (B)   All findings of the Planning Commission shall be in writing and shall
be based on substantial evidence.
   (C)   Since the Telecommunications Act requires a written record, there
shall be a certified shorthand reporter present at any public hearing, and a
written transcript shall be prepared of any public hearing.
   (D)   The Village Board shall not take final action on a special use permit
application until all fees required to be paid, including reimbursement of the
cost of an engineering review, have been paid.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
§ 159.22 SEVERABILITY.
   The various parts, sections and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared
to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the chapter shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 99-14, passed 3-23-99)
SMALL CELL ANTENNA/TOWER RIGHT-OF-WAY SITING
§ 159.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE. An existing pole or other structure within
the public right-of-way that can be used to support an antenna and is not a
utility pole or a village-owned infrastructure.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio signals used in the provision of any type of wireless communications
services.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity submitting an application to install
personal wireless telecommunication facilities or structures to support the
facilities within a public right-of-way.
   DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEM (DAS). A type of personal wireless
telecommunication facility consisting of a network of spatially separated
antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides
wireless service within a geographic area. Generally serves multiple carriers.
   LANDSCAPE SCREENING. The installation at grade of plantings, shrubbery,
bushes or other foliage intended to screen the base of a personal wireless
telecommunication facility from public view.
   MONOPOLE. A structure composed of a single spire, pole or tower designed and
used to support antennas or related equipment and that is not a utility pole,
an alternative antenna structure, or a village-owned infrastructure.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION ANTENNA. An antenna that is part of a
personal wireless telecommunications facility.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT. Equipment, exclusive of an
antenna, that is part of a personal wireless telecommunications facility.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. An antenna, equipment, and
related improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide wireless
transmission of voice, data video streams, images, or other information
including, but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication
service, paging, and Wi-Fi antenna service.
   SMALL CELL FACILITIES. A personal wireless telecommunications facility
consisting of an antenna and related equipment either installed singly or as
part of a network to provide coverage or enhance capacity in a limited defined
area. Generally single-service provider installation.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, and that is not a utility pole, an
alternative antenna structure, or a village-owned infrastructure. Except as
otherwise provided for by this subchapter, the requirements for a tower and
associated antenna facilities shall be those required in this subchapter.
   UTILITY POLE. An upright pole designed and used to support electric cables,
telephone cables, telecommunication cables, cable service cables, which are
used to provide lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function.
   VARIANCE or VARIATION. A grant of relief by the Village Manager/
Administrator or his or her designee.
   VILLAGE-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE. Infrastructure in public right-of-way within
the boundaries of the village, including, but not limited to, streetlights,
traffic signals, towers, structures, or buildings owned, operated or maintained
by the village.
   WI-FI ANTENNA. An antenna used to support Wi-Fi broadband Internet access
service based on the IEEE 802.11 standard that typically uses unlicensed
spectrum to enable communication between devices.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.36 STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS.
   Personal wireless telecommunication facilities will be permitted to be
placed in right-of- way within the jurisdiction of the village as attachments
to existing utility poles, alternative antenna structures, or village-owned
infrastructure subject to the following regulations:
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.37 NUMBER LIMITATION AND CO-LOCATION.
   The Village Manager/Administrator or his or her designee may regulate the
number of personal wireless telecommunications facilities allowed on each
utility pole or unit of village-owned infrastructure. No more than two personal
wireless telecommunications facilities will be permitted on utility poles or
alternative antenna structure of 90 feet or less. No more than three personal
wireless telecommunications facilities will be permitted on utility poles or
alternative antenna structures in excess of 90 feet and less than 120 feet.
This subchapter does not preclude or prohibit co-location of personal wireless
telecommunication facilities on towers or monopoles that meet the requirements
as set forth elsewhere in this section or as required by federal law.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.38 SEPARATION AND CLEARANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Personal wireless telecommunication facilities may be attached to a utility
pole, alternative antenna structure, monopole, or village-owned infrastructure
only where such pole, structure or infrastructure is located no closer than a
distance equal to 100% of the height of such facility to any residential
building and no closer than 300 feet from any other personal wireless
telecommunication facility. A separation or lesser clearance may be allowed by
the Village Manager/Administrator or his or her designee as an administrative
variance to this subchapter when the applicant establishes that the lesser
separation or clearance is necessary to close a significant coverage or
capacity gap in the applicant's services or to otherwise provide adequate
services to customers, and the proposed antenna or facility is the least
intrusive means to do so within the right-of-way.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.39 VILLAGE-OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE.
   Personal wireless telecommunication facilities can only be mounted to
village-owned infrastructure including, but not limited to, streetlights,
traffic signal, towers or buildings, if authorized by a license or other
agreement between the owner and the village.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.40 NEW TOWERS.
   No new monopole or other tower to support personal wireless
telecommunication facilities in excess of 60 feet is permitted to be installed
on right-of-way within the jurisdiction of the village unless the Village
Council finds, based on clear and convincing evidence provided by the
applicant, that locating the personal wireless telecommunications facilities on
the right-of-way is necessary to close a significant coverage or capacity gap
in the applicant's services or to otherwise provide adequate services to
customers, and the proposed new monopole or other tower within the right-of-way
is the least intrusive means to do so.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.41 ATTACHMENT LIMITATIONS.
   No personal wireless telecommunication antenna or facility within the right-
of-way will be attached to a utility pole, alternative antenna structure,
tower, or village-owned infrastructure unless all of the following conditions
are satisfied:
   (A)   Surface area of antenna. The personal wireless telecommunication
antenna, including antenna panels, whip antennas or dish-shaped antennas,
cannot have a surface area of more than seven cubic feet in volume.
   (B)   Size of above-ground personal wireless telecommunication facility. The
total combined volume of all above-ground equipment and appurtenances
comprising a personal wireless telecommunication facility, exclusive of the
antenna itself, cannot exceed 32 cubic feet.
   (C)   Personal wireless telecommunication equipment. The operator of a
personal wireless telecommunication facility must, whenever possible, locate
the base of the equipment or appurtenances at a height of no lower than eight
feet above grade.
   (D)   Personal wireless telecommunication services equipment mounted at
grade.  In the event that the operator of a personal wireless telecommunication
facility proposes to install a facility where equipment or appurtenances are to
be installed at grade, screening must be installed to minimize the visibility
of the facility. Screening must be installed at least three feet from the
equipment installed at-grade and eight feet from a roadway.
   (E)   Height. The top of the highest point of the antenna cannot extend more
than seven feet above the highest point of the utility pole, alternative
antenna support structure, tower or village-owned infrastructure. If necessary,
the replacement or new utility pole, alternative support structure or village-
owned infrastructure located within the public right-of-way may be no more than
ten to 70 feet higher than existing poles adjacent to the replacement or new
pole or structure, or no more than 90 feet in height overall, whichever is
less.
   (F)   Color. A personal wireless telecommunication facility, including all
related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color that blends with the
surroundings of the pole, structure tower or infrastructure on which it is
mounted and use non-reflective materials which blend with the materials and
colors of the surrounding area and structures. Any wiring must be covered with
an appropriate cover.
   (G)   Antenna panel covering. A personal wireless telecommunication antenna
may include a radome, cap or other antenna panel covering or shield, to the
extent such covering would not result in a larger or more noticeable facility
and, if proposed, such covering must be of a color that blends with the color
of the pole, structure, tower or infrastructure on which it is mounted.
   (H)   Wiring and cabling.  Wires and cables connecting the antenna to the
remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with the electrical
code currently in effect. No wiring and cabling serving the facility will be
allowed to interfere with any wiring or cabling installed by a cable television
or video service operator, electric utility or telephone utility.
   (I)   Grounding. The personal wireless telecommunication facility must be
grounded in accordance with the requirements of the electrical code currently
in effect in the village.
   (J)   Guy wires. No guy or other support wires will be used in connection
with a personal wireless telecommunication facility unless the facility is to
be attached to an existing utility pole, alternative antenna support structure,
tower or village-owned infrastructure that incorporated guy wires prior to the
date that an applicant has applied for a permit.
   (K)   Pole extensions.  Extensions to utility poles, alternative support
structures, towers and village-owned infrastructure utilized for the purpose of
connecting a personal wireless telecommunications antenna and its related
personal wireless telecommunications equipment must have a degree of strength
capable of supporting the antenna and any related appurtenances and cabling and
capable of withstanding wind forces and ice loads in accordance with the
applicable structural integrity standards as set forth in division (L) below.
An extension must be securely bound to the utility pole, alternative antenna
structure, tower or village-owned infrastructure in accordance with applicable
engineering standards for the design and attachment of such extensions.
   (L)   Structural integrity.  The personal wireless telecommunication
facility, including the antenna, pole extension and all related equipment must
be designed to withstand a wind force and ice loads in accordance with
applicable standards established in Chapter 25 of the National Electric Safety
Code for utility poles, Rule 250-B and 250-C standards governing wind, ice, and
loading forces on utility poles, in the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) in TIA/EIA Section 222-G established by the Telecommunications Industry
Association (TIA) and the Electronics Industry Association (EIA) for steel
wireless support structures and the applicable industry standard for other
existing structures. For any facility attached to village-owned infrastructure
or, in the discretion of the village, for a utility pole, tower, or alternative
antenna structure, the operator of the facility must provide the village with a
structural evaluation of each specific location containing a recommendation
that the proposed installation passes the standards described above. The
evaluation must be prepared by a professional structural engineer licensed in
the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.42 SIGNAGE.
   Other than signs required by federal law or regulations or identification
and location markings, installation of signs on a personal wireless
telecommunication facility is prohibited.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.43 SCREENING.
   If screening is required under §
159.41(D) above, it must be natural landscaping material or a fence subject to
the approval of the village and must comply with all regulations of the
village. Appropriate landscaping must be located and maintained and must
provide the maximum achievable screening, as determined by the village, from
view of adjoining properties and public or private streets. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, no such screening is required to extend more than nine feet in
height. Landscape screening when permitted in the right-of-way must be provided
with a clearance of three feet in all directions from the facility. The color
of housing for ground-mounted equipment must blend with the surroundings. For a
covered structure, the maximum reasonably achievable screening must be provided
between such facility and the view from adjoining properties and public or
private streets. In lieu of the operator installing the screening, the village,
at its sole discretion, may accept a fee from the operator of the facility for
the acquisition, installation, or maintenance of landscaping material by the
village.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.44 PERMISSION TO USE UTILITY POLE OR ALTERATIVE ANTENNA STRUCTURE.
   The operator of a personal wireless telecommunication facility must submit
to the village written copies of the approval from the owner of a utility pole,
monopole, or an alternative antenna structure, to mount the personal wireless
telecommunication facility on that specific pole, tower, or structure, prior to
issuance of the village permit.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.45 LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The operator of a personal wireless telecommunication facility must verify
to the village that it has received all concurrent licenses and permits
required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design,
construction, location and operation of said facility have been obtained and
will be maintained within the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.46 VARIANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Each location of a personal wireless telecommunication facility within a
right-of-way must meet all of the requirements of this subchapter, unless a
variance has been obtained in accordance with §
117.49, Variances.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.47 ABANDONMENT AND REMOVAL.
   Any personal wireless telecommunication facility located within the
corporate limits of the village that is not operated for a continuous period of
12 months, shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility must
remove same within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the village
notifying the owner of such abandonment. Such notice shall be sent by certified
or registered mail, return-receipt-requested, by the village to such owner at
the last known address of such owner. In the case of personal wireless
telecommunication facilities attached to village owned infrastructure, if such
facility is not removed within 90 days of such notice, the village may remove
or cause the removal of such facility through the terms of the applicable
license agreement or through whatever actions are provided by law for removal
and cost recovery.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.48 PERMITS AND APPLICATION FEES AND PROCEDURES.
   Permits for placement of personal wireless telecommunication facilities in
right-of-way within the village are required. Except as otherwise provided for
in this subchapter, the procedures for the application for, approval of, and
revocation of such a permit must be in compliance with village permit
application requirements in
Ch. 117, Construction of Utility Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way.
   Any applications must demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this
section. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar agreement,
or federal, state or local law, all applications for permits pursuant to this
section must be accompanied by a fee in the amount of no less than $3,000. The
application fee will reimburse the village for regulatory and administrative
costs with respect to the work being performed.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
§ 159.49 CONFLICT OF LAWS.
   Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter regarding the
siting and installation of personal wireless telecommunication facilities are
more restrictive than comparable conditions imposed elsewhere in any other
local law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation, the regulations of this
subchapter will govern.
(Ord. 17-19, passed 5-9-17)
CHAPTER 160: BILLBOARDS
Section
   
160.01   Definitions
   
160.02   Purpose
   
160.03   General construction, material, location and performance standards
   
160.04   Location restrictions
   
160.05   Enforcement
   
160.06   Non-conforming billboards
   
160.07   Nuisance declared
   
160.99   Penalty
§ 160.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLBOARD.   A billboard is an object, device, display, sign, or structure,
or part thereof displayed outdoors or visible from a public way, which is used
to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or
location, or to express a point of view, by any means, including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, advertising flags, fixtures, colors,
illuminations or projected images, which are not substantially related to the
primary economic activity or use conducted on the zoning lot. Billboards do not
include commercial signage related to the business conducted on the zoning lot,
nor signs temporarily placed in residential lawns by residents, owners,
contractors, real estate brokers or agents, or by or on behalf of political
candidates or issues.
   BILLBOARD AREA.   The facing of a billboard, including copy, insignia,
background, structural supports, and border and trim. The measurement shall be
determined by the smallest rectangle inclusive of all letters and images. The
structural supports shall be excluded if they do not constitute a major part of
the billboard or if the structure is not used to identify or attract attention
to the business or product. A double-sided billboard, with sign faces parallel
to each other, shall be deemed to have the billboard area of the larger sign
face.
   ILLUMINATED BILLBOARD.   A billboard having its characters, letters,
figures, designs or outlines illuminated by a source of artificial light.
   INTERSTATE 55 CORRIDOR.   An area including all land located within 1,000
feet of the east and west boundaries of the Interstate 55 right-of-way and
within the corporate limits of the village.
   ROUTE 4 CORRIDOR.   An area including all land located within 200 feet of
the east and west boundaries of the Illinois Route 4 right-of-way and within
the corporate limits of the village.
   SPACING.   Spacing of billboards shall be the minimum distance between
outdoor advertising billboard structures measured along the nearest edge of the
pavement between points directly opposite the billboards along each side of the
highway and shall apply to outdoor advertising billboard structures located on
both sides of the highway involved. Spacing shall be calculated with respect to
existing billboards whether or not the existing billboards are within the
corporate limits of the village.
   ZONING ORDINANCE.   
Chapter 158 of this code.
(Ord. 99-41, passed 8-10-99)
§ 160.02 PURPOSE.
   The regulations set forth in this chapter are established in order to
promote and protect generally public health, safety, comfort, prosperity and
welfare and in order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   (A)   To maintain and enhance the visual environment, and to preserve the
right of citizens to enjoy the village's scenic beauty;
   (B)   To improve pedestrian and traffic safety;
   (C)   To minimize the possible adverse effect of billboards on nearby public
and private property; and
   (D)   To provide a reasonable amortization period for non-conforming
billboards, in order to lessen the economic impact thereof on the owners
thereof.
(Ord. 99-41, passed 8-10-99)
§ 160.03 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION, MATERIAL, LOCATION AND PERFORMANCE  STANDARDS.
   (A)   Electrical requirements.
      (1)   The electrical components, connections and installations of all
billboards shall conform to the electric code of the village and all
regulations promulgated thereunder.
      (2)   In no case shall electrical wiring be exposed to the view of, or
access by, the public.
   (B)   Illumination and movement.
      (1)   The light from every illuminated billboard shall be shaded,
shielded or directed so that no ray emanating from any light fixture shall
directly impinge upon any residential structure or public road, and all light
visible from any residential structure or public road is either reflected from,
or diffused and filtered through, the sign.
      (2)   Flashing billboards, flashing or moving lights on billboards, and
reflective pennants are prohibited, except signs exhibiting time and
temperature, date or other similar information.
   (C)   Location.
      (1)   Billboards shall be located within the zoning lot in accordance
with the applicable setback and yard provisions of the zoning district in which
the lot is located.
      (2)   Billboards shall not be located on the public right-of-way, or
affixed to or upon public property on the public right-of-way, including but
not limited to any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, street lamp post,
hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, electric light or power, telephone
or telegraph system, fire alarm, lighting system, public bridge, drinking
fountain, trash receptacle, street sign or traffic sign.
   (D)   Maintenance. All billboards shall be properly maintained, free of
broken or missing parts, rust or oxidation, faded or chipped paint, and similar
conditions of disrepair.
(Ord. 99-41, passed 8-10-99) Penalty, see §
160.99 
§ 160.04 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Billboards are permitted only in areas of the village which meet all
of the following conditions:
      (1)   The applicable zoning classification is B-1, B-2, I-1 or I-2;
      (2)   The billboard is located within the Route 4 Corridor or the
Interstate 55 Corridor; and
      (3)   The zoning lot on which the billboard is located borders directly
on the right-of- way of Illinois Route 4 or Interstate 55.
   (B)   Billboards located within the Route 4 Corridor are subject to the
following additional regulations:
      (1)   Spacing shall be at least 500 feet;
      (2)   No billboard shall have a billboard area exceeding 175 square feet;
      (3)   The top of a billboard may not be more than 30 feet above the
surface of the lot; and
      (4)   Each billboard shall be so designed and located such that its
primary audience is the traveling public on Illinois Route 4.
   (C)   Billboards located within the Interstate 55 Corridor are subject to
the following additional regulations:
      (1)   Spacing shall be at least 1,000 feet;
      (2)   No billboard shall have a billboard area exceeding 350 square feet;
      (3)   The top of a billboard may not be more than 40 feet above the
surface of the lot; and
      (4)   Each billboard shall be so designed and located such that its
primary audience is the traveling public on Interstate 55.
(Ord. 99-41, passed 8-10-99) Penalty, see §
160.99
§ 160.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful to erect, or to structurally or electrically alter, any billboard
within the village unless a permit therefore has been issued by the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A written
application for such permit shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, and
the application shall contain, as a minimum, a site plan; a plan of the
proposed billboard; a map showing spacing with respect to existing billboards;
and evidence of any federal or state permits which the applicant has obtained
with respect to the billboard. The application shall be signed by the owner of
record of the zoning lot on which the billboard will be located. Prior to or
concurrently with the filing of such application, the applicant shall pay to
the village a permit fee in the amount of $10.00 for each sign, plus $.25 for
each square foot of surface area of such sign in excess of 20 square feet. If
the application shows that the proposed billboard would be in conformance with
this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall grant the application and issue a
permit. If the application shows that the proposed billboard would not be in
conformance with this chapter, the Zoning Administrator shall deny the
application in writing. The Zoning Administrator shall have five business days
to grant or deny the permit application; his decision shall be reviewable by
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the appeal provisions in the
Zoning Ordinance.
   (B)   Compliance with state law. No billboard permit shall be issued by the
Zoning Administrator unless the applicant has obtained all necessary state or
federal permits, if any. The issuance of such state or federal permits shall
not entitle the applicant to issuance of a village permit, unless the applicant
is in compliance with all applicable village, state and federal laws.
   (C)   Maintenance of billboards. Billboards shall be maintained in a safe
condition. If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any billboard has not
been properly maintained, as evidenced by damaged, dented, cracked, broken or
missing parts; the presence of rust or oxidation; faded or chipped paint; or
similar conditions of disrepair, he or she shall give written notice of such
violation to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which such sign is
located, stating the condition noted and providing not less than 15 days within
which to remedy the deficiency, unless the billboard presents an immediate
threat to life or property, in which case the notice shall provide that the
deficiency shall be remedied immediately.
(Ord. 99-41, passed 8-10-99) Penalty, see §
160.99
§ 160.06 NON-CONFORMING BILLBOARDS.
   (A)   Billboards which were lawfully erected prior to the adoption of this
chapter, but which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, may
continue in existence; however, they may not be enlarged, nor may the
illumination thereof be increased. This section shall not be construed as
permitting any billboard which was not in conformity with all village
ordinances prior to the effective date of the chapter, or which do not conform
to all safety, electrical and maintenance requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The village may in its discretion order the alteration or removal of
any non-conforming billboard, subject to any right of the owner thereof, and
the owner of the property on which the billboard is located, to just
compensation pursuant to Illinois eminent domain law.
   (C)   This chapter shall not affect any right which has vested pursuant to
any annexation agreement executed prior to the effective date hereof.
(Ord. 99-41, passed 8-10-99; Am. Ord. 00-04, passed 1-25-00)
§ 160.07 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   The village hereby declares that any billboard which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter, and is not allowed pursuant to the non-conforming
sign provisions of §
160.06, is a nuisance. In addition to any other remedies available to the
village, the village may sue the owner of any land on which a non-conforming
billboard is located, to abate such a nuisance.
(Ord. 99-41, passed 8-10-99)
§ 160.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who or which owns, leases (as lessor or
lessee) or controls a billboard which violates any provision of this chapter,
or owns a zoning lot on which such a billboard is located, or fails to remedy a
deficiency as to which notice has been sent by the Zoning Administrator as set
forth in §
160.05(C), shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $750
for each violation. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Ord. 99-41, passed 8-10-99)
CHAPTER 161: ADULT USES
Section
   
161.01   Definitions
   
161.02   Liquor sale and consumption prohibited
   
161.03   Location
   
161.04   Criminal background requirement
   
161.05   Permit review
   
161.06   Action by Chief of Police
   
161.07   Action by Corporate authorities
   
161.08   Exterior display
   
161.09   Existing adult uses
   
161.10   Permit renewal
   
161.11   Offenses
   
161.12   Penalties
   
161.13   Enlargement or change in nature of use
   
161.14   Guide to interpretation
   
161.15   Severability
   
Appendix A: Application for adult use permit
   
Appendix B: Application for adult use renewal permit
§ 161.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or for
viewing on premises by use of motion pictures devices or coin operated means,
and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating or “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas;” or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin
operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises or any
other factors showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
   ADULT CLUB. A public or private establishment, a primary purpose of which is
to provide members or guests with a venue to perform “specified sexual
activities” with other members or guests.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A public or private establishment which (I)
features topless dancers, strippers, “go-go” dancers, male or female
impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows; (ii) not infrequently
features entertainers who display “specified anatomical areas”; or (iii)
features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct perform in a
manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the
patron or features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in explicit
simulation of “specified sexual activities.”
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT FACILITY. As defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5 of the
Illinois Municipal Code, “a striptease club or a pornographic movie theatre
whose business is the commercial sale, dissemination, or distribution of
sexually explicit material, shows or other exhibitions or an adult book store
or adult video store whose primary business is the commercial sale,
dissemination, or distribution of sexually explicit material, shows or other
exhibitions.”
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT NOVELTY STORE. An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
“novelties,” lotion and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of
such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises or any other factors
showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such material.
   ADULT USE. Adult bookstore, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets, adult entertainment facility, adult novelty stores,
adult clubs, and other similar uses of property within the village.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered (I) human genitals, (ii)
pubic region, (iii) buttocks, or (iv) female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, public region,
buttock or female breasts; and
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
foregoing activities.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.02 LIQUOR SALE AND CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.
   No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or consumed on
the premises of any adult use.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.03 LOCATION.
   Adult uses are permitted in only areas zoned B-2 under the Zoning Chapter of
this Code of Ordinances, provided:
   (A)   No adult use shall be located within 500 feet of any property which is
zoned residential, or the property boundaries of any school, day care center,
cemetery, public park, forest preserve, public housing, and place of religious
worship; or another adult use;
   (B)   In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5 of the Illinois Muncipal Code,
no adult entertainment facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of the
property boundaries of any school, day care center, cemetery, public park,
forest preserve, public housing, and place of religious worship;
   (C)   No adult use shall be located in a building in which there is an
establishment selling alcoholic liquors.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.04 CRIMINAL BACKGROUND REQUIREMENT.
   No permit shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of any crime
involving prostitution, obscenity or other offense of a sexual nature, or to a
business entity, any manager or owner of 5% or more of the interest of which
has been convicted of such a crime.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.05 PERMIT REVIEW.
   (A)   Permits for constructing or occupying an adult use shall be issued
only after the following review process. The applicant shall apply to the
Zoning Administrator for the permit; the application shall be accompanied by a
$350 application fee. The application shall be on a form substantially in the
form attached hereto as
Appendix A.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall provide a copy of the application to
the Chief of Police, and shall process the portion of the application marked
“For Zoning Administrator’s Review” and shall forward the application to the
Planning Commission for review. Within 60 days of filing, the Planning
Commission shall conduct a review of the application for conformance with the
Zoning, Subdivision, and Adult Use Chapters of the Village Code of Ordinances.
The Planning Commission shall render a recommendation to the Village Board as
to whether the proposed adult use conforms with all village ordinances, and may
recommend conditions on the development and operation of the adult use related
to site plan, floor plan, construction materials, lighting, parking and
circulation, ingress and egress, landscaping and screening, and signage in
order to assure that the design and operation of the adult use is in
conformance with all village ordinances and is compatible with surrounding
uses.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.06 ACTION BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall run a criminal background check on all persons
disclosed by the application to have a 5% or greater ownership interest in the
permit application, in order to verify that no such persons have been convicted
of the crimes of prostitution, obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual nature.
The Chief of Police shall report his findings to the Village Board.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.07 ACTION BY CORPORATE AUTHORITIES.
   Within 30 days of receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the
Village Board shall, by resolution, duly made, seconded, passed, and signed by
the Village President grant or deny the permit. The Village Board’s action
shall specify the location, by legal description and common address, of the
adult use, and shall specify the nature of the adult use permitted. The Village
Board may place conditions on the adult use. The Village Board’s determination
is a final agency action subject to administrative review.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.08 EXTERIOR DISPLAY.
   No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation
of any material depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas” from any public way or from any
property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.09 EXISTING ADULT USES.
   Any adult use which existed lawfully, but which became nonconforming upon
the adoption of this chapter, may be continued as hereinafter provided:
   (A)   Upon written notice from the village to the owners or interests
therein that any building, structure, lot or regulated use is nonconforming
under the provisions of the Zoning Chapter as amended, the owners or interests
therein shall, within two months from the date of such notice, apply to the
Village Clerk for a certificate of nonconformance.
   (B)   Failure to apply for certificate of nonconformance within 60 days of
the notice provided in division (A) of this section will require the
amortization of the nonconformance within six months of the notice provided for
in division (A).
   (C)   Nonconformance that have applied for a certificate of nonconformance
from the Village Clerk shall be discontinued within one year of the notice
provided in division (A) of the section.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.10 PERMIT RENEWAL.
   (A)   Except as set forth in division (B) of this section, a permit granted
pursuant to this chapter is valid until December 31 of the year in which it is
granted. During the month of December of each year, each licensee shall apply
for a permit renewal, using the permit renewal application set forth as
Appendix B of this chapter. A renewal permit, when granted, shall be valid
until December 31 of the following year. The annual permit renewal fee shall be
$50.
   (B)   Upon any change in ownership of greater than 5% of a corporate or LLC
licensee, the licensee shall apply for a permit renewal, using application set
forth in
Appendix B of this chapter. The renewal permit shall be valid until December 31
of the year in which it was issued.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall run a criminal background check on all
persons disclosed by a renewal application under either divisions (A) or (B) of
this section to have a 5% or greater ownership interest in the applicant, in
order to verify that no such persons have been convicted of the crimes of
prostitution, obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual nature. The Chief of
Police shall report his findings to the Village President. Renewal permits
shall be granted by the Village President unless the Village President finds
that the applicant is in violation of this chapter or any other provision of
the Village Code of Ordinances, or of the conditions of the original permit.
Any denial of a renewal permit application is subject to administrative review.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.11 OFFENSES.
   (A)   No natural person, and no legal person such as a corporation, limited
liability company, or other business entity, shall own, manage, or operate an
adult use within the corporate limits of the village without a permit from the
village obtained in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   No natural person, and no legal person such as a corporation, limited
liability company, or other business entity shall provide false information on
an application for an adult use permit.
   (C)   No natural person, and no legal person such as a corporation, limited
liability company, or other business entity shall own, manage or operate an
adult use within the corporate limits of the village except in conformance with
this chapter.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.12 PENALTIES.
   Natural and legal persons found guilty of violating this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $250 or more than
$750. Each day a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate offense. Where a
corporation, limited liability company or other legal person owns or operates
an adult use, all officers, directors, managers, and employees who knowingly
participated in management decisions shall be liable to the same extent as the
legal person.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.13 ENLARGEMENT OR CHANGE IN NATURE OF USE.
   An adult use permit is specific to a location and to a use. No adult use may
be enlarged, nor the nature of the adult use changed, without the owner and
manager thereof securing a new permit.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.14 GUIDE TO INTERPRETATION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as permitting or endorsing any
activity or use which violates state or federal law, including but not limited
to laws pertaining to obscenity, prostitution, and solicitation.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
§ 161.15 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any provision of this
chapter, or if 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5 of the Illinois Municipal Code is invalidated
by a court of law, then the offending section of this chapter, shall be severed
and the remainder of the chapter shall be enforced to the fullest extent
possible.
(Ord. 01-50, passed 9-25-01)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FOR ADULT USE PERMIT
   VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, ILLINOIS
   APPLICATION FOR ADULT USE PERMIT
   Directions to Applicant: All information requested must be supplied.
   Use a continuation sheet if needed.
   The undersigned hereby applies for an adult use permit from the Village of
Chatham in accordance with Chapter 161 of the Village of Chatham Code of
Ordinances.
   1.   Name, address and telephone number of applicant:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
   2.   Type of business entity:
   None-the applicant is an individual or individuals. If proposed use is
"adult club" as defined in Chapter 161 of the Chatham Code of Ordinances,
identify all members on a separate sheet.
    Corporation      LLC*
   Other-please specify
                                                                        
      *Attach a certificate of good standing from the Illinois Secretary of
State.
   3.   Names and addresses of all persons with a 5% or greater ownership
interest in the applicant, if the applicant is other than an individual or
individuals:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
   4.   Name and address of person to contact regarding this application, and
such person's relationship to the applicant:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                     
   5.   Address and legal description of the premises at which the adult use
will be conducted:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                     
   6.   Nature of applicant's interest in the premises:
   Ownership (attach copy of deed)       Leasehold (attach copy of lease)
   Contract for deed (attach copy of contract)
   Other (please specify and attach evidence of interest)
                                                             
   7.   Narrative description of intended use of the property:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                     
   8.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of managers of adult use:
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
   9.    A site plan and floor plan drawn to scale, identification of
construction materials, and plans for lighting, parking and circulation,
ingress and egress, landscaping and screening, and signage, are attached.
   I hereby certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing statements are
true and correct. I have reviewed Chapter 161 of the Village of Chatham Code of
Ordinances and will abide by its terms. I attach a check in the amount of $350
to cover the cost of the permit application.
                        Signature:
                                                                                         
                        Date:
                                                                      
   For Zoning Administrator's use only
Present zoning of the property:
                                                                                                                         
Zoning classifications and uses of all properties within 1000 feet of property
line:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                     
   Recommend Approval          Recommend Denial for the following reasons:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Signature:
                                                                     Date:
                                                 
   For Planning Commission's Use Only
   Recommend Approval          Recommend denial, for the following reasons:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Minutes of the Planning Commission hearing on this application are attached.
                                                       Date:
                                                    
   For Chief of Police Use Only
   I have performed a criminal background check on all persons listed in this
application as owners of a 5% or greater interest in the applicant or as the
manager of the facility. I find that:
   no such persons have been convicted of the crimes of prostitution or
obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual nature.
   the following persons listed in this application have been convicted of the
crimes of prostitution or obscenity or other crimes of a sexual nature:
Name             Date of Conviction          Description of Crime
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                             
Date                        Chief of Police
   For Village Clerk's Use Only
This application was approved        denied by action of the Village Board of
the Village of Chatham on                                   pursuant to
Resolution No.                                             .
                                                                                                                           
                                             Village Clerk
APPENDIX B: APPLICATION FOR ADULT USE RENEWAL PERMIT
   VILLAGE OF CHATHAM, ILLINOIS
   APPLICATION FOR ADULT USE PERMIT
   Directions to Applicant: All information requested must be supplied.
   Use a continuation sheet if needed.
   The undersigned hereby applies for an adult use renewal permit from the
Village of Chatham in accordance with Chapter 161 of the Village of Chatham
Code of Ordinances.
   1.    Date of approval of original permit:
                                                                                  
   2.   Name, address and telephone number of applicant:
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
   3.   Type of business entity:
   None-the applicant is an individual or individuals. If proposed use is
"adult club" as defined in Chapter 161 of the Chatham Code of Ordinances,
identify all members on a separate sheet.
    Corporation*       LLC*
    Other-please specify
                                                                            
   *Attach a certificate of good standing from the Illinois Secretary of State.
   4.   Names and addresses of all persons with a 5% or greater ownership
interest in the applicant, if the applicant is other than an individual or
individuals:
                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
   5.   Name and address of person to contact regarding this application, and
such person's relationship to the applicant:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
   6.   Address of the premises at which the adult use will be conducted:
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
   7.   Nature of applicant's interest in the premises, if different from
original permit:
       Ownership (attach copy of deed)           Leasehold (attach copy of
lease)
       Contract for deed (attach copy of contract)
       Other (please specify and attach evidence of interest)
                                                   
   8.   Applicant hereby certifies that the use of the premises is the same as
set forth in the original permit.
   9.   Names, addresses and phone numbers of managers of adult use:
                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
   I hereby certify under penalty of perjury that the foregoing statements are
true and correct. I have reviewed Chapter 161 of the Village of Chatham Code of
Ordinances and will abide by its terms. I attach a check in the amount of
$50.00 to cover the cost of the permit application.
                     Signature:
                                                                                                         
                     Date:
                                                                           
   For Chief of Police Use Only
   I have performed a criminal background check on all persons listed in this
application as owners of a 5% or greater interest in the applicant or as the
manager of the facility. I find that:
   no such persons have been convicted of the crimes of prostitution or
obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual nature.
   the following persons listed in this application have been convicted of the
crimes of prostitution or obscenity or other crimes of a sexual nature:
Name             Date of Conviction          Description of Crime
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                             
Date                        Chief of Police
   For Village President's Use Only
   This renewal application is approved        denied for the following
reasons:
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           
                                             Village President
CHAPTER 162: MOBILE SIGNS
Section
   
162.01   Definition
   
162.02   Prohibition of mobile signs
   
162.03   Termination of nonconforming signs after amortization
   
162.04   Nuisance declared
 
   
162.99   Penalty
§ 162.01 DEFINITION.
   For purposes of this chapter, MOBILE SIGN shall mean any sign designed for
use and display out-of-doors which is mounted on a trailer with locking
devices, or which is otherwise capable of being easily transported or moved
from place to place. MOBILE SIGN does not include banners.
(Ord. 07-51, passed 9-11-07)
§ 162.02 PROHIBITION OF MOBILE SIGNS.
   No owner of a mobile sign, and no owner or occupier of land, shall place,
allow to be placed or allow to remain on any land within the corporate limits
of the village any mobile sign.
(Ord. 07-51, passed 9-11-07) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.03 TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING SIGNS AFTER AMORTIZATION.
   Mobile signs in existence within the corporate limits of the village as of
the effective date of this chapter may be continued until April 1, 2008. Upon
the expiration of this period, the mobile signs shall be removed.
(Ord. 07-51, passed 9-11-07) Penalty, see §
162.99
§ 162.04 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Any mobile sign in violation of §
162.02 is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other remedies,
the village may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an appropriate
injunction ordering the owner or occupier of land with a nonconforming mobile
sign to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 07-51, passed 9-11-07)
§ 162.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating §§
162.02 or
162.03 shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $250 and
not more than $750. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as having
been committed each day upon which said person shall continue any such
violation.
(Ord. 07-51, passed 9-11-07)
CHAPTER 163: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES DEPLOYMENT
Section
   
163.01   Purpose; scope
   
163.02   Definitions
   
163.03   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
163.04   Dispute resolution
   
163.05   Indemnification
   
163.06   Insurance
   
163.07   Severability
§ 163.01 PURPOSE; SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (“the Act”).
   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations.
(Ord. 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
§ 163.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an action
or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include village-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are  not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
§ 163.03 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
division (B)(9) below regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject
to zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively
for commercial or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      (1)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the village, together with the village's small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (2)   Application process. The village shall process applications as
follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 75 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit
shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after submission of the
complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed approved
notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall not
preclude the village's denial of the permit request within the time limits as
provided under this chapter.
         (c)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application. The permit shall be
deemed approved on the latter of the one hundred twentieth day after submission
of the complete application or the tenth day after the receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the village. The receipt of the deemed approved notice shall
not preclude the village's denial of the permit request within the time limits
as provided under this chapter.
         (d)   The village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter. If the village determines that applicable codes,
ordinances or regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or
wireless support structure be replaced before the requested collocation,
approval shall be conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or
wireless support structure at the cost of the provider. The village shall
document the basis for a denial, including the specific code provisions or
application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the documentation
to the applicant on or before the day the village denies an application. The
applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the village and resubmit the
revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial is sent to the
applicant without paying an additional application fee. The village shall
approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the applicant
resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to resubmit the
revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the application to
submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement of the
village's review period. The applicant must notify the village in writing of
its intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved
basis, which may be submitted with the revised application.
            Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement,
provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole
by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant
shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
      (3)   Completeness of application. Within 30 days after receiving an
application, the village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
30 days after all documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in
the village's permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the
village. Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
village; or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure. If an application
includes multiple small wireless facilities, the village may remove small
wireless facility collocations from the application and treat separately small
wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been
provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment or that are denied.
The village may issue separate permits for each collocation that is approved in
a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of permits. The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter. If
the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable village code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the village by personal
delivery at the village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation requirements and conditions.
      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      (3)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies. The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications. A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency's communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will
be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the
FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety
spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. If a small
wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been
given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the
wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference
with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970
through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The village may
terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if
the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations
cited above in this division (C)(3). Failure to remedy the interference as
required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities
on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the antenna and support
equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in the communications
space on the village utility pole and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise
unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with applicable codes for work
involving the top of the pole. For purposes of this division (C)(4), the terms
COMMUNICATIONS SPACE, COMMUNICATION WORKER SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY
ZONE have the meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety
Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (5)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and
local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      (6)   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards
that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable
stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a village
ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      (7)   Alternate placements. Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions division (C), a wireless provider shall not be
required to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole,
or category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna
systems on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for
the collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility
pole, the village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on
an existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within 100 feet
of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the
right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and
the alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or
additional material costs as determined by the applicant. If the applicant
refuses a collocation proposed by the village, the applicant shall provide
written certification describing the property rights, technical limits or
material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria in
this division (C)(7).
      (8)   Height limitations. The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. New or
replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         (a)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
         (b)   Forty-five feet above ground level.
      (9)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with and utilizing the same
procedures, terms and conditions set forth in the village's Development
Ordinance.
      (10)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and
a private property owner that concern design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-
of-way.
      (11)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      (12)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests
to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do
not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
      (13)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
      (1)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application
to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
      (2)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The village shall not require an application, approval or permit,
or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with §
163.03(B)(1)(d); or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled
by the village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      (3)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section l8c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18c-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or any
other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in
Section 16-102 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-102), without the
consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility.
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public
utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used,
developed and maintained consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of
Section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-1805(i)). For the
purposes of this division (E)(3), PUBLIC UTILITY has the meaning given to that
term in Section 3-105 of the  Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/3-105). Nothing
in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement
(a) to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable
service or video service or (b) to obtain any required permission to install,
place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small
wireless facilities subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-existing agreements. Existing agreements between the village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, for all small wireless
facilities collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall
comply with this chapter. A wireless provider that has an existing agreement
with the village on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees
and terms that the village makes available under this chapter for the
collocation of small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility
poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of
an application submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act
by notifying the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The
existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its
option under this division (F).
   (G)   Annual recurring rate. A wireless provider shall pay to the village an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year or (ii)
the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use
of space on the village utility pole. If the village has not billed the
wireless provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the
first day after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or
notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment. A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the
facility shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt
of written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider shall provide
written notice to the village if it sells or transfers small wireless
facilities within the jurisdiction of the village. Such notice shall include
the name and contact information of the new wireless provider.
(Ord. 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
§ 163.04 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Sangamon County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to
be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
§ 163.05 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the village harmless against
any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability.
(Ord 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
§ 163.06 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility. A wireless provider
may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit
requirement required by the village. A wireless provider that self-insures is
not required, to the extent of the self insurance, to comply with the
requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section.
   (C)   A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage limits required by the village.
(Ord. 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
§ 163.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or
circumstances is ruled unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions or applications of this chapter that can be
given effect without the invalid application or provision, and each invalid
provision or invalid application of this chapter is severable.
(Ord. 18-40, passed 7-10-18)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
       
I.   ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
      
III.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
IV.   EASEMENTS
      
V.   FRANCHISES
      
VI.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
VII.   STREET NAME CHANGES
      
VIII.   VACATIONS
      
IX.   VARIANCES AND SPECIAL USES
      
X.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
XI.   EMINENT DOMAIN PROCEEDINGS
TABLE I: ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
        7-20-67     Acceptance of the maintenance of Bonniebrook Road, Chatham
                     Knolls Subdivision, first plat, by the village.
                     Acceptance of the maintenance of Glenwood Lane and
        3-18-71     Bonniebrook Road, Chatham Knolls Subdivision, second plat
                     and third plat, by the village.
                     Transfer of jurisdiction and incorporation into part of
                     the municipal street system of the village of SBI Route
79-32    8-28-79     No. 4 Alternate extending westward from the intersection
                     of Main Street and Chestnut Street to the intersection of
                     Chestnut Street and Church Street; then south to the
                     intersection of Church Street and Illinois Route 4.
                     Acceptance of dedication of the sanitary sewerage
83-28    11-22-83    collection system serving lots 28 through 34 of the second
                     addition to Country Valley Subdivision.
89-40    9-26-89     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Southwinds
                     Subdivision Plat I.
90-5     2-13-90     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Southwinds
                     Subdivision Plat II.
90-8                Approving the final plat of subdivision of Sullivan
                     Addition.
90-38    10-9-90     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Southwinds
                     Subdivision Plat III.
91-1     2-11-91     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Prairie Grove
                     Subdivision Plat I.
91-28    6-11-91     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Mau's Lake
                     Subdivision.
91-43    9-10-91     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Southwinds
                     Subdivision Plat IV.
92-27    8-17-92     Approving the final plat of Subdivision of Southwinds
                     Subdivision Plat V.
92-28    8-25-92     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Park View
                     Estates Plat I.
92-33    9-22-92     Approving a plat of subdivision for the Ivan McBride Minor
                     Subdivision.
92-41    10-27-92    Approving the final plat of subdivision of Southwinds
                     Subdivision Plat VI.
92-44    11-10-92    Approving the final plat of subdivision of Breckenridge
                     Estates, Plat I.
92-47    11-24-92    Approving the Redevelopment Plan and Redevelopment Project
                     which are attached to Ordinance 92-47 as Exhibit E.
93-10    3-23-93     Approving the plat of survey of the James-Craig
                     Subdivision.
93-31    6-22-93     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Hurstbourne
                     Subdivision Plat I.
93-38    7-27-93     Approving the final plat of subdivision of Breckenridge
                     Estates Plats II and III.
94-08    2-8-94      Approving the final plat of subdivision of Manor Hill
                     Subdivision Plat I.
94-09    2-8-94      Approving the final plat of subdivision of Hurstbourne
                     Subdivision Plat II.
97-50    9-9-97      Accepting the dedication of public improvements for
                     Breckenridge Estates Subdivision, plats 2, 3, and 4.
13-45    11-26-13    Accepting School House Lane.
13-36    11-26-13    Accepting Hawthorn Court.
16-11    3-22-16     Approving the final plat of Breckenridge Manor 4th
                     Addition Subdivision.
16-49    9-27-16     Approving the final plat of Cardinal Ridge First Addition
                     Subdivision.
19-10    3-12-19     Approving the final plat of Glendale Subdivision - Fourth
                     Addition.
20-7     2-25-20     Approving the final plat of Peggy Ostermier Minor
                     Subdivision.
20-14    4-14-20     Approving the final plat of Spartan Park Minor
                     Subdivision.
22-24    6-28-22     Approving the plat of vacation of Oakbrook Estates
                     Subdivision Plat No. 16 A Part of Lot 1001.
23-14    5-9-23      Approving plat vacating a certain portion of Hawthorn Lane
                     that was inadvertently conveyed.
23-23    6-27-23     Approving the final plat for Manor Hill II Plat 2
                     Subdivision.
                    
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     (A) The southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
72-3     3-17-72     section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west of the third
                     principal meridian, except approximately 12 acres off the
                     east end thereof.
                     (B) The north 80 feet of the northeast quarter of the
                   northeast quarter of the northeast quarter of section 17,
                     township 14 north, range 5 west of the third principal
                     meridian.
                     All that part of Walnut Road right-of-way lying north of
                     the centerline of said highway; beginning at a point
78-7     3-28-78     1,074.61 feet east of the center of section 7; then east
                     along said centerline to a point 103 feet east of the west
                     line of section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of the
                     third principal meridian.
                     All that part of Walnut Road right-of-way lying south of
78-8     3-28-78     the centerline of said highway; beginning at a point
                     1,352.8 feet east of the west line of section 8; then east
                     along said centerline a distance of 3,776.6 feet.
                     Part of the north 1/2 of the north 1/2 of section 12,
78-21    9-12-78     township 14 north, range 6 west of the third principal
                     meridian.
                     That part of the north half of the southwest quarter of
                     section 6, township 14 north, range 5 west of the third
                     principal meridian, described as follows: Beginning at the
                     southwest corner of said half quarter section and running
                     thence north 4.37-1/2 chains; thence east parallel with
79-40    11-13-79    the south line of said half quarter section to the west
                     line of the right of way of the Illinois Traction Company;
                     thence in a southwesterly direction along the said right
                     of way line 4.67-1/2 chains to the south line of said half
                     quarter section; thence west along the south line of said
                     half quarter section, 32.15-1/4 chains to the place of
                     beginning, containing 14.44 acres;
                     That part of the north half of the southwest quarter of
                     section 6, township 14 north, range 5 west of the third
                     principal meridian described as follows: Beginning at a
                     point 4.37-1/2 chains north of the southwest corner of
                     said half quarter section, and running thence north 4.32-
                     1/2 chains; thence east 35.52 3/4 chains to the west line
                     of strip of land conveyed to the Decatur, Springfield, and
                     St. Louis Railroad Company by quit claim deed filed in the
                     Recorder's Office of Sangamon County, Illinois, on May 28,
                     1903, and recorded in Book 106 of Deeds, page 631; thence
                     in a southwesterly direction along the west line of said
                     strip of land, 4.62-1/4 chains and thence west 33.85
                   chains to the place of beginning excepting therefrom the
                     following described real estate: A plot of ground
                     beginning on the east right of way line of State Route 4
                     as it existed on February 11, 1976, (or 31 feet east of
                     the west line of said section 6) thence running east along
                     the north line of the above described tract 170 feet to a
                     point, thence running south 160 feet along a line parallel
                     to the said west line of section 6, to a point, thence
                     running west 170 feet parallel to the north line above
                     described, thence running north 160 feet along the east
                     right of way line of said State Route 4 to the point of
                     beginning of this plot; situated in the County of Sangamon
                     and State of Illinois.
                     The west 650 feet of the north 800 feet of the southeast
86-12    6-24-86     quarter of the southwest quarter of section 8, township 14
                     north, range 5 west of the Third principal meridian.
                     PARCEL A: All that part of the northeast quarter of
87-11    8-28-87     section 13, township 14 north, range 6 west of the third
                     principal meridian, lying east of the east R.O.W. Line of
                     the I.C.G. R.R., except the north 1864.06 feet thereof.
                     PARCEL B: All that part of the north half of the southeast
                   quarter of section 13, township 14 north, range 6 west of
                     the third principal meridian, lying east of the east
                     R.O.W. Line of the I.C.B. R.R.;
                     PARCEL C: The north 417.42 feet of the east 417.42 feet of
                   the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of section
                     13, township 14 north, range 6 west of the third principal
                     meridian.
                   AND
                     All that part of the section 18, township 14 north, range
                     5 west of the third principal meridian, lying east of the
                   section line and west of the east right- of-way line of
                     main street extended south and adjacent to parcels A, B,
                     and C.
                     The west half of the east half of the northwest quarter,
89-29    7-25-89     Section 12, Township 14 north, Range 6 west, except the
                     south 672.82 feet thereof.
                   The east 350 feet of the west half of the northwest
                     quarter, Section 12, Township 14 north, Range 6 west.
                     Annexing certain territory being the north 130 feet of the
90-9     3-13-90     east 12 acres of the southeast quarter of the southeast
                     quarter of Section 8, Township 14 north, Range 5 west,
                     (the Sullivan Property, 1.07 acres).
90-43    10-29-90    Annexing the following property:
                     Tract I: The east 493.70 feet of the south half of the
                   northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 17,
                     Township 14 north, Range 5 west. Also all adjacent road
                     right-of-way.
                     Tract II: The west 200.00 feet of the northeast quarter of
                   the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township 14 north,
                     Range 5 west. Also all adjacent road right-of-way.
                     Annexing municipally-owned property being part of the
91-14    4-9-91      northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 14 north, Range
                     5 west.
91-50    11-12-91    Annexing certain land being:
                     Tract I: The north 200 feet of the southwest quarter of
                   the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township 14 north,
                     Range 5 west, also all adjacent road right-of-way on the
                     easterly line.
                     Tract II: The east 200 feet of the southeast quarter of
                   the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter, excepting
                     the south 225 thereof, lying in Section 18, Township 14
                     north, Range 5 west.
                     Tract III: The east 275 feet of the south 225 feet of the
                   southeast quarter of the northeast quarter of Section 18,
                     Township 14 north, Range 5 west.
                     Annexing certain property being part of the northwest
92-07    4-14-92     fractional quarter of Section 18, Township 14 north, Range
                     5 west.
                     Annexing certain property being part of the northwest
92-08    4-14-92     quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 17, Township
                     14 north, Range 5 west.
                     Annexing certain property being the southeast quarter of
92-42    10-27-92    Section 7, Township 14 north, Range 5 west, except the
                     north 330 feet and the south 87.42 feet of the north
                     417.42 feet of the east 417.42 feet thereof.
                     Annexing certain land being part of the east half of the
94-32    6-28-94     northeast quarter of Section 17, Township 14 north, Range
                     5 west.
94-49    8-8-94      Annexing certain land being the west half of the northwest
                     quarter of Section 30, Township 14 north, Range 5 west.
                     Annexing certain land being the east half of the northwest
                     quarter of Sect. 30, Township 14 north, Range 5 west,
                     except the west 8 acres of part of the east half of the
                     northwest quarter of Sec. 30; also except a parcel
94-50    8-9-94      commencing at the northeast corner of the northeast
                     quarter of the northwest quarter of Sect. 30 in Township
                     14 north, Range 5 west; also except part of the east one-
                     half of the northwest quarter of Sect. 30, Township 14
                     north, Range 5 west, all in Sangamon County.
                     Annexing certain land being the northeast corner of the
94-51    8-9-94      northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 30
                     in Township 14 north, Range 5 west.
                     Annexing certain land being the northeast quarter of
                     Section 30, all in Township 14 north, Range 5 west, except
                     parts of the northeast quarter of Section 30, Township 14
94-52    8-9-94      north, Range 5; also except part of the southwest quarter
                     of the northeast quarter of Section 30, Township 14 north,
                     Range 5 west; also except a parcel commencing at the
                     center of Section 30 Township north, Range 5.
                     Annexing certain land being part of the southeast quarter
11-60    12-13-11    and part of the east half of the southwest quarter of
                     Section 21, Township 14 North, Range 5 West of the third
                     principal meridian in Sangamon County, IL.
20-26    10-27-20    Pre-annexation agreement for two parcels of land owned by
                     John and Marilyn Kennedy.
22-15    5-10-22     Pre-annexation agreements with certain individuals.
22-18    5-24-22     Annexing 8895 Old Indian Trail owned by Alexander and
                     Kelly Jones.
22-19    5-24-22     Annexing 225 Fox Creek Lane owned by Michael and Nancy
                     Neely.
22-20    5-24-22     Annexing 217 Fox Creek Lane owned by Meredith and Mary
                     Branham.
22-29    7-12-22     Pre-annexation agreements with certain individuals.
22-31    7-12-22     Pre-annexation agreement for 10041 Palm Road owned by
                     BOSAJE, LLC.
22-39    8-23-22     Pre-annexation agreements with certain individuals.
                    
                    
 
TABLE III: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Contract between village and the Central Illinois
                   Telephone Company concerning the supplying of electricity
                     for street lighting, and approving schedule of rates.
        10-11-37    Supplemental agreement to purchase water through the
                     Auburn Waterworks System.
                     Contract with Springfield, Illinois to provide for the
67-7     1-19-67     furnishing of water to the village, and establishing the
                     rates and conditions of use.
69-7     12-18-69    Amends contract of 1-19-67 concerning the furnishing of
                     water to the village.
70-1     1-22-70     Contract with General Telephone Company for telemetering
                     service of the village water system.
                     Contract between the village and the Auburn, Divernon,
70-14    12-8-70     Girard, Pawnee, Thayer, and Virden Water Commission for
                     operation and sharing costs of water metering equipment.
74-1                Contract with Central Illinois Light Company for the
                     furnishing of electric energy for resale by the village.
                     Agreement with the Springfield Sanitary District with
74-9     12-5-74     respect to the preparation of a facility plan for The
                     Springfield Facilities Planning Area.
75-1     1-16-75     Contract with Central Illinois Light Company for the
                     furnishing of electric energy for resale by the village.
77-8     5-10-77     Contract for legal services with the law firm of Giffin,
                     Winning, Lindner, Newkirk, Cohen & Bodewes.
79-6     1-23-79     Ratification of contract dated 4-13-76 between the village
                     and the Springfield Sanitary District.
79-17    5-8-79      Contract for legal services with the law firm of Giffin,
                     Winning, Lindner, Newkirk, Cohen & Bodewes.
79-22    7-12-79     Contract with the Central Illinois Light Company for the
                     furnishing of electric energy for resale by the village.
79-35    8-28-79     Contract with Franklin Data Services, Inc. for utility
                     billing services.
                     Agreement between the village and the Ball- Chatham
79-35    9-25-79     Community Unit School District Number 5 to provide police
                     protection at the Glenwood School complex.
80-8     5-13-80     Amendment of sewer service charges in the agreement
                     between the village and the Springfield Sanitary District.
80-19    8-12-80     Amendment of sewer service charges in the agreement
                     between the village and the Springfield Sanitary District.
                     Agreement between the village and the Ball- Chatham
80-28    8-12-80     Community Unit School District Number 5 to provide police
                     protection at the Glenwood School complex.
                     Agreement between the village and the Ball- Chatham
81-19    8-25-81     Community Unit School District Number 5 to provide police
                     protection at the Glenwood School complex.
81-25    10-13-81    Agreement with American Franklin Company- Data Services
                     adjusting prices for utility building services.
81-26    10-13-81    Contract for legal services with the law firm of Giffin,
                     Winning, Lindner, Newkirk, Cohen & Bodewes.
82-23    8-24-82     Agreement with American Franklin Company for utility
                     billing services
                     Agreement between the village and the Ball- Chatham
82-26    9-28-82     Community Unit School District Number 5 to provide police
                     protection at the Glenwood School complex.
82-35    12-14-82    Amendment of sewer service charges in the contract between
                     the village and the Springfield Sanitary District.
83-8     3-22-83     Contract with Central Illinois Light Company concerning
                     wholesale rate increases.
83-17    7-26-83     Amendment to contract with the Springfield Sanitary
                     District settling dispute over user charges.
                     Intergovernmental cooperation agreement between the
83-32    12-20-83    village and the city of Auburn for assistance in law
                     enforcement.
84-3     3-14-84     Intergovernmental cooperation agreement for assistance in
                     law enforcement.
                     Agreement to form a municipal power agency with other
84-5     4-10-84     municipalities for the purpose of supplying electric
                     energy.
                     Agreement between the village and the Ball- Chatham
84-17    10-9-84     Community Unit School District Number 5 to provide police
                     protection at the Glenwood School complex.
                     Amendment to contract between the village and the
85-1     1-8-85      Springfield Sanitary District concerning the rates and
                     charges for sewer use.
85-M-1   5-14-85     Contract for legal services with the Law firm of Sorling,
                     Northrup, Hanna, Cullen, and Cochran.
                     Agreement between the village and the Ball- Chatham
85-13    9-24-85     Community Unit School District Number 5 to provide police
                     protection at the Glenwood School complex.
                     Termination of the contract between the village and
85-16    10-29-85    Central Illinois Light Company for the furnishing of
                     electric energy for resale.
                     Agreement between the village and the Ball- Chatham
86-19    10-4-86     Community Unit School District Number 5 to provide police
                     protection at the Glenwood School complex.
89-18    5-9-89      Contract for legal services with the law firm of Simhauser
                     Law Office.
89-22    6-6-89      Contract for the extension of a water main extension.
                     Planning service agreement between the village and the
89-24               Springfield-Sangamon County Regional Planning Commission
                     for professional and technical services.
89-28    7-25-89     Approving an annexation agreement among Walter Luedke, the
                     Illinois National bank of Springfield and the village.
89-38    9-26-89     Approving the supplement to the Agency Agreement creating
                     IMEA for admission of the City of Roodhouse, Illinois.
89-39    9-26-89     Authorizing a contract for the extension of a water main,
                     South Area Home Owner's Association.
                     Authorizing a contract with Ball Chatham Community Unit
89-44    10-24-89    School District Number Five authorizing the village to
                     provide police service to the District and receive
                     compensation.
90-4     2-27-90     Contract for legal services with the law firm of Pfeifer &
                     Kelty, P.C.
                     Foster & Associates, Inc. is retained to advise the
90-18    5-15-90     village with respect to all matters concerning a long-term
                     wholesale power contract with the Illinois Municipal
                     Electric Agency or some other supplier.
90-27    7-24-90     Approving a contract between the village and Del McCord
                     hiring Del McCord has Village Administrator.
90-29    7-24-90     Approving a contract with Merrill's Contractors, Inc. for
                     improvements to College Street.
90-42    10-29-90    Approving an annexation agreement among Robert and Dorothy
                     Mau and the village.
90-47    11-19-90    Approving a contract with Sankey Construction, Inc. for
                     storm sewer improvements.
                     Executing a contract with Ball Chatham Community Unit
90-49    11-19-90    School District Number Five authorizing the village to
                     provide police service to the District and receive
                     compensation.
90-50    11-27-90    Approving two contracts with authorized recycling
                     collectors and implementing Ordinance No. 90-40.
                     Approving an agreement with Springfield Metropolitan
                     Sanitary District to construct or acquire, improve and
                     extend a sewerage system, impose and collect charges and
90-51    11-27-90    rates for the use thereof, issue revenue bonds payable
                     solely from the revenue derived from the operation of such
                     system or improvement or extension in payment thereof, to
                     provide for the operation of such sewerage systems.
91-6     3-12-91     Approving an agreement with the Illinois Department of
                     Transportation.
                     Approving an agreement with Sangamon County for a joint
91-10    3-26-91     project which consist of a 24-foot wide bituminous
                     concrete road surface with 8-foot wide shoulders and other
                     necessary appurtenances and incidentals.
91-15    4-9-91      Approving a contract between the village and Lauderback
                     Mowing Service.
91-16    4-9-91      Approving a contract between the village and Roy Barnett
                     for employment as Chief of Police.
91-21    5-7-91      Approving a Wholesale Power Agreement between the village
                     and the City of Springfield.
                     Approving a contract between the village and Gary Sandidge
91-23    5-14-91     and Carl Anderson to excavate and move earth to construct
                     baseball diamonds in the village Southside Park.
91-29    6-18-91     Approving an agreement with Greene and Bradford, Inc. for
                     engineering work on Gordon Drive.
91-33    7-9-91      Approving a settlement agreement between the village and
                     R.W. Beck & Associates.
91-38    8-13-91     Approving five construction contracts for construction of
                     the Chatham Park.
91-40    8-27-91     Approving an agreement for engineering consulting services
                     with Harza Engineering Company.
91-44    9-10-91     Approving a contract with Michael Janis to act as a
                     technical consultant as to inspection of zoos.
91-46    9-10-91     Approving a contract for the purchase of trees, mulch and
                     fertilizer for the Chatham Park.
                     An agreement between the village and the law firm of Long,
91-47    9-23-91     Morris, Myers & Rabic P.C. of Springfield, Illinois to
                     serve as attorneys for the President and Board of
                     Trustees.
                     Approving a Successor Paying Agent, Bond Registrar and
91-48    10-8-91     Custodian Agreement between the village and the United
                     Community Bank of Chatham.
                     Authorizing the contract between the village and Kankey
91-54    11-12-91    Brothers, Inc. for construction of the County Road Storm
                     Sewer Project.
91-55    12-10-91    Retaining Evans and Froehlich as bond counsel.
                     Approving a contract with Ball Chatham Community Unit
91-57    12-10-91    School District Number Five authorizing the village to
                     provide police service to the District and receive
                     compensation.
91-62    12-10-91    Approving a contract with Dwight Elliott, Ron Wood, Don
                     O'Connor and Garry Hawk as inspectors for the city.
92-06    4-14-92     Approving two consulting agreements between the village
                     and the Board of Regents.
92-12    4-28-92     Authorizing the execution of a contract of labor agreement
                     between the Village Electric Department and IBEW Local 51.
92-14    5-6-92      Approving four construction contracts for construction of
                     the Chatham Park.
92-21    6-9-92      Approving a consulting agreement being the village and the
                     Global Learning Institute, Inc.
92-22    6-23-92     Approving a contract between the village and Ball Chatham
                     Community District No. 5.
92-35    9-22-92     Approving an agreement for exchange of property with John
                     Schroeder.
92-37    9-24-92     Approving an annexation agreement with Breckenridge
                     Development Corporation.
                     Authorizing execution of a contract with ball Chatham
92-38    10-13-92    Community Unit School District Number Five regarding the
                     Chatham Tax increment financing district.
                     Authorizing execution of a contract with Ball Chatham
92-46    10-3-92     Community Unit School District Number Five to provide
                     police service to the district and receive compensation.
93-12    3-23-93     Approving a second amendment to the contract of January
                     19, 1967 between the village and the City of Springfield.
93-13    4-27-93     Approving an agreement with Clark Dietz, Inc. for
                     electrical engineering services.
93-14    4-13-93     Approving the annexation agreement with Robert Mau,
                     Dorothy Mau, Charles E. Robbins and Maurice E. Tippett.
93-16    4-13-93     Approving the annexation agreement with Chatham Baptist
                     Church.
93-20    4-27-93     Approving a contract with Chatham Baseball, Inc.
                     Approving membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk
93-27    5-25-93     Management Association and authorizing the execution of an
                     intergovernmental cooperation contract.
93-29    6-8-93      Approving a contract between the village and Roy Barnett
                     for acceptance of appointment as Chief of Police.
93-36    7-13-93     Approving an agreement with Greene and Bradford, Inc. for
                     engineering work on Trailway.
93-43    8-10-93     Approving a contract between the village and Del McCord to
                     serve as Village Administrator.
93-54    11-9-93     Approving an agreement with the Sangamon County Highway
                     Department for drainage work on Walnut Street.
                     Approving an agreement with Speer Financial, Inc. for
93-55    11-9-93     professional financial services on Bonds issued for
                     substation improvements.
93-56    11-23-93    Approving the contract for tree trimming from the power
                     distribution lines of the village.
                     Authorizing execution of a contract with Ball Chatham
93-59    12-14-93    Community Unit School District Number Five to provide
                     police service and receive compensation.
                     Approving an agreement with Hymans Engineering, inc. for
94-03    1-11-94     engineering services on pump station and system monitoring
                     upgrade.
94-13    3-22-94     Approving an agreement with Greene & Bradford, Inc. for a
                     water system study.
                     Approving an intergovernmental agreement on mutual aid in
94-16    3-22-94     connection with electric service between the village and
                     the Village of Riverton.
                     Approving an agreement between the village and Tonya
94-20    4-26-94     Nantkes to sell food items and Pepsi-Cola beverages at the
                     concession stand at the Chatham Community Park for the
                     period May 1 through September 1, 1994.
94-21    4-26-94     Approving an agreement with Clark Dietz, Inc. for
                     electrical engineering services.
94-31    8-9-94      Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the
                     village and the City of Springfield.
94-39    7-12-94     Retaining Lin Engineering, Ltd., for certain consulting
                     engineering work for the village.
                     Approving an amendment to the agreement of April 13,1976,
99-04    1-26-99     agreement between the village and the Springfield Metro
                     Sanitary District.
                     Approving an intergovernmental agreement between the
99-34    7-13-99     village and the Chatham Fire Protection District, relating
                     to health insurance coverage for district employees.
                     Authorizing execution of a contract between village and
00-42    7-25-00     International Union of Operating Engineers, Local 965,
                     AFL-CIO, pertaining to terms and conditions of employment.
                     Approving an Electronic Interconnection Agreement, dated
01-30    6-26-01     June 20, 2001, between the Village of Chatham and the City
                     of Springfield.
                     Approving an amendment to the Electronic Interconnection
15-06    2-24-15     Agreement, dated June 20, 2001, between the Village of
                     Chatham and the City of Springfield.
                     Authorizing a contract with All Weather Courts for the
19-08    3-12-19     conversion of three tennis courts into eight pickle ball
                     courts.
19-9     3-12-19     Authorizing a contract with Massie, Massie and Associates
                     for the Chatham Parks Master Plan Update 2019.
19-38    12-23-19    Approving a settlement agreement with Citizens Equity
                     First Credit Union (CEFCU).
20-2     1-28-20     Renewing the engagement contract with Sikich, LLP for
                     audit services.
                     Approving execution of Amendment No. 1 to
20-5     2-25-20     intergovernmental agreement with the Villages of Chatham
                     and New Berlin for the issuance of alternate bonds.
20-12    3-31-20     Approving a lease purchase agreement for the capital lease
                     financing of a police vehicle.
22-47    11-22-22    Approving contract with Hallelujah Holiday Lighting to
                     install holiday lights.
                     Approving the retention of Sikich LLP to conduct the
23-07    3-28-23     financial audits of the village for fiscal years ending
                     April 30, 2023 through April 30, 2025.
23-25    8-8-23      Approving contract with Agricycle, Inc. for disposal of
                     storm debris.
                    
 
TABLE IV: EASEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Tract A-5: Construction Easement. Beginning at the
                     southeast corner of lot 7, thence east 5', thence north
78-14    5-9-78      20', thence west to the southerly line of lot 7; thence
                     southeast to the Point of Beginning in Glenwood Park First
                     Addition.
                   Tract A-16: Construction Easement. The northeasterly 20'
                     of lot 21 in Glenwood Park First Addition.
                     Tract A-17: Construction Easement. Beginning at a point
                     20' north of the northeast corner of lot #29 in Glenwood
                     Park First Addition to the Village of Chatham, Illinois,
                     thence north perpendicular to the north line of said
                   addition a distance of 25', thence west parallel with the
                     north line of said addition a distance of 135', thence
                     south a distance of 25' to the north line of said
                     addition, thence east along said north line to the Point
                     of Beginning.
                   Tract A-23: Construction Easement. The north 20' of lot 20
                     in Glenwood Park First Addition.
                     Tract A-24: Construction Easement. Part of the southeast
                   quarter, of section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     the third principal meridian.
                     Tract A-31: Construction Easement. The northerly 25' of
                   lot 104 adjoining Public Area (P-1) in Glenwood Park 3rd
                     Addition.
                     Tract A-32: Construction Easement. The northwesterly 25'
                   of lot 103 that adjoins Public Area (P-1) in Glenwood Park
                     3rd addition.
                     Tract A-22A: Permanent Easement. Part of the southwest
                   quarter of section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the southeast quarter of
                   section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west of the 3rd
                     principal meridian.
                     Tract A-34: Construction Easement. The westerly 20' of lot
                   101 adjoining Public Area (P-1) in Glenwood Park 3rd
                     Addition.
                     Tract A-35: Construction Easement. The westerly 20' of lot
                   100 adjoining Public Area (P-1) in Glenwood Park 3rd
                     Addition.
                     Tract A-36: Permanent Easement. Part of the southeast
                   quarter, section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the southeast quarter,
                   section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian.
                   Tract A-42: Construction Easement. The west 20' of lot 79
                     in Glenwood Park 3rd Addition.
                   Tract A-44: Construction Easement. The west 20' of lot 77
                     in Glenwood Park 3rd Addition.
                     Tract A-33: Construction Easement. The westerly 20' of lot
                   102 adjoining Public Area (P-1) in Glenwood Park 3rd
                     Addition.
                   Tract A-53: Construction Easement. The south 20' of lot 73
                     in Glenwood Park 3rd Addition.
                   Tract A-56: Construction Easement. The south 20' of lot 69
                     in Glenwood Park 3rd Addition.
                   Tract A-59: Construction Easement. The east 15' of lot 99
                     in Glenwood Park 3rd Addition.
                     Tract B-12: Permanent Easement. Part of the northwest
                   quarter, of section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian.
                     Tract B-13: Permanent Easement. Part of the northwest
                   quarter, of section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     3rd principal meridian.
                     Tract B-25: Permanent Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter, of the southwest quarter, of section 8, township
                     14 north, range 5 west, of the 3rd principal meridian.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the northeast quarter, of
                   the southwest quarter, of section 8, township 14 north,
                     range 5 west, of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon
                     County, Illinois.
                     Tract B-31: Permanent Easement. Part of the northwest
                   quarter, of section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the northwest quarter, of
                   section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract C-1: Permanent Easement. Part of the southeast
                   quarter, of section 7, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of southeast quarter of
                   section 7, township 14 north, range 5 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County.
                     Tract D-2: Permanent Easement. Part of the northwest
                   fractional quarter, of section 18, township 14 north,
                     range 5 west, of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon
                     County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the northwest fractional
                   quarter, of section 18, township 14 north, range 5 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract D-4: Permanent Easement. Part of the southeast
                   quarter, of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west,
                     of the third principal meridian, Sangamon County,
                     Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the southeast quarter, of
                   section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west, of the third
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract E-3: Permanent Easement. Part of the southeast
                   quarter, of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the southeast quarter, of
                   section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract E-2A: Permanent Easement. Part of the southeast
                   quarter, of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract F-1: Permanent Easement. The southwesterly 25' of
                   lot 38 in Chatham Knolls Subdivision to the Village of
                     Chatham, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. The southwesterly 35' of lot 38 in
                   Chatham Knolls Subdivision to the Village of Chatham,
                     Illinois.
                     Tract F-2: Permanent Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter, of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the northeast quarter, of
                   section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract F-3: Permanent Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter, section 12, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the northeast quarter,
                   section 12, township 14 north, range 5 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract F-4: Permanent Easement. Part of lot 89 in Chatham
                   Knolls Subdivision 3rd plat, to the Village of Chatham,
                     Illinois.
                   Construction Easement. Part of lot 89 in Chatham Knolls
                     Subdivision 3rd plat, to the Village of Chatham, Illinois.
                     Tract F-38: Permanent Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter, section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the northeast quarter,
                   section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract F-6 & 7: Permanent Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter, of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the northeast quarter, of
                   section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                   Tract F-28 Construction Easement. The east 20' of lot 18
                     in Chatham Knolls.
                     Tract F-29: Permanent Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                   Construction Easement. Part of Stevens Addition to the
                     Village of Chatham, Illinois.
                     Tract F-32: Permanent Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter, of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract F-31: Construction Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter, of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract F-36: Permanent Easement. Part of the northeast
                   quarter, of section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract F-45: Construction Easement. Part of the northwest
                   quarter, of section 12, township 12 north, range 6 west,
                     of the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                   Tract F-47: Permanent Easement. The north 15' of lot 68 in
                     Quail Meadow Estates 2nd plat.
                   Construction Easement. The east 20' and the north 30' of
                     lot 68 in Quail Meadow Estates 2nd plat.
                   Tract F-48: Permanent Easement. The north 15' of lot 69 in
                     Quail Meadow Estates 2nd plat.
                   Construction Easement. The north 25' of lot 69 in Quail
                     Meadow Estate 2nd plat.
                     Tract G-7: Permanent Easement. The northwesterly 10' of
                   lot #42 being 10' parallel to and southeasterly from the
                     common lot line of lots 41 and 42, in Birch Grove 1st
                     Addition.
                     Construction Easement. The northwesterly 20' of lot #42
                   being 20' parallel to and southeasterly from the common
                     lot line of lots 41 and 42, in Birch Grove 1st Addition.
                     Tract H-1: Permanent Easement. Part of the southwest
                   quarter, of section 6, township 14 north, range 5 west, of
                     the 3rd principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the southwest quarter, of
                   section 6, township 14 north, range 5 west, of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Tract H-3: Permanent Easement. Part of the southwest
                   quarter, of section 6, and part of the northwest quarter,
                     of section 7, township 14 north, range 5 west of the 3rd
                     principal meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                     Construction Easement. Part of the southwest quarter, of
                   section 6, and part of the northwest quarter, of section
                     7, township 14 north, range 5 west of the 3rd principal
                     meridian, Sangamon County, Illinois.
                   Tract H-35: Permanent Easement. The north 10' of lot 30 in
                     Walnut Park Estates plat II.
                   Tract H-42: Construction Easement. The south 20' of the
                     east 75' of lot 40 in Walnut Park Estates plat II.
                     Tract H-43: Permanent Easement. The north 10' of lot 34
                   and the north 10' of the west 5' of lot 33 in Walnut Park
                     Estates plat II.
                   Tract H-53: Permanent Easement. The south 15 feet of lot
                     16 in Walnut Park Estates plat I.
                   Construction Easement. The south 30 feet of lot 16 in
                     Walnut Park Estates Plat I.
                   Tract H-62: Permanent Easement. The south 15' of lot 100
                     in Walnut Park Estates Plat IV.
                   Tract H-67: Permanent Easement. The south 15' of lot 105
                     in Walnut Park Estates Plat IV.
                     Tract H-71: Permanent Easement. South 15' of lot 109 and
                   the south 15' of the east 2' of lot 110 in Walnut Park
                     Estates Plat IV.
                   Tract H-87: Permanent Easement. The west 30 feet of lot 81
                     in Walnut Park Estates Plat II.
                     Relocation of easement at lots 156 and 158, Quail Meadows
83-24    9-13-83     5th addition, township 14 north, range 6 west, 3rd
                     principal meridian.
85-4     2-12-85     Permanent and temporary construction easement to construct
                     and maintain a sanitary sewer system.
91-9     3-19-91     Temporary construction easement purchased from Donald W.
                     and Arlene Johnson.
94-11    2-8-94      Approving the purchase of bicycle path easements.
19-11    4-9-19      Approving a water main easement with the Hindu Temple of
                     Greater Springfield.
23-03    1-24-23     Approving easement plat.
                    
 
TABLE V: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting to Central Illinois Light Company for 30 years
                     the authority to construct, operate and maintain a gas
                     distribution system.
                     Granting to the General Telephone Company of Illinois the
         9-7-65      authority to construct, operate and maintain a general
                     telephone system.
                     Granting to Central Illinois Public Service Company the
82-6     3-23-82     authority to construct, operate, and maintain a
                     multigrounded electric transmission line.
92-03    3-24-92     Approving a cable television franchise agreement with Cass
                     Cable, Incorporated.
 
TABLE VI: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Acquisition for cemetery purposes of a part of the
        4-1-58      southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of section 12,
                     township 14 north, range 6 west of the third principal
                     meridian.
                     Conveyance of all right, title, and interest of the
                     village to the Auburn, Divernon, Girard, Pawnee, Thayer,
        12-22-66    and Virden Water Commission in the water system located
                     south of Covered Bridge Road running east and west through
                     the center of sections 21 and 22, township 14 north, range
                     5 west of the third principal meridian.
                     Option to purchase part of the east half of the west half
75-11    12-9-75     of the northeast quarter of section 7, township 14 north,
                     range 5 west of the third principal meridian.
                     Acquisition in lieu of exercise of eminent domain of part
84-7     6-12-84     of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
                     section 12, township 14 north, range 6 west of the third
                     principal meridian.
                     (A) Acquisition in lieu of exercise of eminent domain of a
84-15    11-13-84    temporary construction easement over the east 15 feet of
                     the north 69 feet of lot 10 in block 2 of the original
                     town, now Village of Chatham.
                     (B) Acquisition of a permanent easement over and across
                   the east eight feet of the north 69 feet of lot 10 in
                     block 2 of the original town, now Village of Chatham.
89-50    11-20-89    Contract to purchase realty commonly known as the Chatham
                     train depot from Michael Scully and Nanchen Scully.
                     Contract to purchase certain real estate being part of the
90-45    11-9-90     northwest quarter of Section 18, Township 14 north, Range
                     5 west, except all coal and other mineral rights.
                     Lease of land consisting of 34.1 acres to use for
91-12    4-9-91      agricultural purposes, to Garry Niemeyer. Lease shall be
                     from April 1, 1991 to November 30, 1991.
92-01    1-14-92     Approving a lease between the village and SPCSL
                     Corporation for use of SPCSL Corporation property.
92-15    5-12-92     Authorizing the execution of a quit claim deed and bill of
                     sale relating to the AC & R property.
                     Approving the purchase of property being the 20- foot
93-17    4-13-93     square parcel from CILCO at ball and Walnut Streets in the
                     village.
94-18    4-12-94     Authorizing the purchase of a bicycle path easement.
22-36    7-26-22     Authorizing the sale of Lot 221 Oakbrook Estates Plat 16
                     to Jodi Springfield, Inc.
                    
 
TABLE VII: STREET NAME CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     The public alley running north from Chestnut Street to
12       10-2-62     Mulberry Street, between Main Street and State Streets to
                     be known as Alley No. 1.
93-46    9-14-93     Changing the name of Ball Street to Park Street and
                     rescinding Ordinance No. 93-39.
17-34    6-27-17     Naming an unnamed street Volunteer Drive.
                     Honorary designation of Volunteer Drive. Each year, a sign
                     shall be placed under the Volunteer Drive street sign
                     setting forth an honorary street name designation. This
                     honorary street name designation shall be the name of the
17-38    7-11-17     individual named as the Volunteer of the Year the third
                     weekend in July. After the individual is named, the
                     honorary sign shall be placed under the Volunteer Drive
                     street sign and remain at said location as an honorary
                     designation until the third weekend of July in the
                     following year.
                    
 
TABLE VIII: VACATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Abandonment of the cul-de-sac at the end of Glenn Drive in
                     Fite's Subdivision Plat I dedicated to the village and
         7-14-65     vacation of those parts of Glenn Drive forming the cul-de-
                     sac which are also parts of lots 6 and 7 of Fite's
                     Subdivision Plat I.
                     Vacating an alley located in the village which runs north
                     to south and is within the block bounded by Mulberry,
91-51    11-12-91    College, Chestnut and Taylor Streets and is bounded to the
                     north by Mulberry Street and to the south by Chestnut
                     Street (the Alley).
                     Vacating an east-west alley located in that part of block
97-49    8-26-97     17 lying west of the westerly right of way line of
                     Illinois Route 4 and east of Market Street between Locust
                     Street and Spruce Street.
 
TABLE IX: VARIANCES AND SPECIAL USES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Granting a special use to permit lot 33 in Cloyd's
81-20    9-22-81     Addition to be used for warehouse storage and wholesale
                     distribution of small automobile parts in an R-1 zoning
                     district.
                     Granting a variance to permit a room addition to be
81-21    9-22-81     erected within five feet of the rear property line of lot
                     92 of Birch Grove, 4th addition and lot 13 of Willow Glen
                     Ranch.
81-22    9-22-81     Granting a variance to permit a garage to be erected
                     within 3 feet of the side property line.
                     Granting a variance to permit a house addition to be
81-23    9-22-81     erected within 14 feet of the rear property line of lot 88
                     of Birch Grove, 4th addition.
                     Granting a variance to permit a room addition to be
81-24    9-22-81     erected within 9 feet of the rear property line of lot 22
                     of Ivy Glen Estates, 1st addition.
                     Granting a variance to permit extension of a garage to
81-29    10-27-81    within 5 feet of the side lot line of lot 33 in Buckingham
                     Place, Third addition.
                     Granting a special use to permit a day care center to be
84-14    8-28-84     erected upon lots 14, 15, and 16 of block 7 of the
                     original town of Chatham.
                     Granting a special use to permit a church to be erected
85-M-4   5-28-85     upon part of the east half of the northwest quarter,
                     section 8, township 14 north, range 5 west of the third
                     principal meridian of Kings Point Subdivision.
                     Granting a special use to permit a day care center to be
86-33    12-16-86    erected upon lots 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16 of block 9 of the
                     original town of Chatham.
89-16    5-9-89      Granting a variance to permit a condominium at 711 East
                     Mulberry Street and 201 No. Ball Street.
89-25    7-17-89     Granting a variance to permit a 150 feet minimum lot width
                     for the following described real estate:
                   (1) East Parcel I: part of the southeast quarter of
                     Section 24, Township 14 north, Range 6 west.
                   (2) East Parcel II: Easement for roadway and utility
                     purposes as created by easement dated July 31, 1974.
                     (3) West Parcel I: the west 150 feet of the southeast
                   quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 24, Township
                     14 north, Range 6 west.
                   (4) West Parcel II: Easement for roadway and utility
                     purposes as created by easement dated July 31, 1974.
                     Granting a variance to permit a 150 feet minimum lot width
89-37    9-26-89     for the Barnard Subdivision, which was approved on
                     Ordinance 89-35.
                     Granting a variance to permit a minimum area (square feet)
                     of 2011 per dwelling unit for part of the east 100 feet of
89-46    11-20-89    the south 202.52 feet of Lot 9 in Tier 1 of Thayer's
                     Addition to the town of Chatham, all in Section 7,
                     Township 14 north, Range 5 west.
                     Granting a variance to permit a 40 feet minimum lot width
89-55    12-12-89    for lot 14-014 of the Butlers West park Addition to be
                     described as 407 West Spruce Street. Also to permit the
                     sale and construction on the formerly described lot.
                     Granting certain variances for property being the west 77
90-32    7-24-90     feet of part of the southeastern quarter, Section 12,
                     Township 14 north, Range 6 west, as follows:
                   (1) Varied from 25 feet to 20 feet set back on the north
                     side of Parcel 1;
                   (2) Varied from 25 feet to 23 feet setback back on the
                     west side of Parcel 2;
                   (3) Varied from 10,000 square feet to approximately .8143
                     square feet on Parcel 2.
                     Granting a variances for property being the east 73 feet
                     of part of the southeast quarter of Section 12, Township
91-7     3-12-91     14 north, Range 6 west as follows: from 80 feet width
                     minimum to 73 feet, from 30 feet corner lot setback to 15
                     feet and from a ten feet interior setback to five feet.
91-19    4-23-91     Granting a variance to permit a single dwelling unit on
                     108 E. Mulberry.
93-61    12-14-93    Granting a variance to permit a minimum rear yard set back
                     of 14 feet from 20 feet for 211 North Main.
                     Granting a variance on Lots 201, 219, 220, 212, 239, 240,
                     245, 323, 324, 313, 312, 340, 341, 301, 357, 227, 352, 346
94-22    4-26-94     and 335 in Breckenridge Estates Plats 2 and 3, to permit
                     the side corner set back from 30 feet in R-1 and 25 feet
                     in R-2 to 20 feet on the above lots.
94-28    5-10-94     Granting a special use permit pertaining to library
                     property.
                     Granting variances from the requirements of the Zoning
13-45    11-26-13    Chapter with respect to Redivision of Lot 243, Oakbrook
                     Estates Plat 8.
13-46    11-26-13    Granting variances from Zoning Chapter with respect to
                     Tract Surveys.
20-20    8-25-20     Authorizing a variance to increase the height of an
                     accessory structure at 8989 Gordon Drive.
20-28    11-10-20    Authorizing a setback variance for an accessory structure
                     at 31 Tanglewood Drive.
20-29    11-10-20    Authorizing a setback variance for a primary structure at
                     45 Teal Drive.
22-48    11-22-22    Authorizing a variance to allow for a pool without fence
                     enclosure for a property at 2631 E. Walnut Street.
                     Authorizing a variance to increase the height of an
23-05    2-14-23     accessory structure above the allowable height of 17 feet
                     at 9245 Gordon Drive.
                     Authorizing a variance to increase the height of an
23-33    9-26-23     accessory structure above the allowable height of 17 feet
                     at 693 Homestead Drive.
                    
 
TABLE X: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     (A) The north 592.02 feet of that portion of the northeast
                     quarter of section 7, township 14 north, range 5 west of
72-5     6-15-72     the third principal meridian lying east of the G.M. & O.
                     Railroad and containing 13.04 acres more or less, Sangamon
                     County, Illinois, is classified and shall be included as
                     part of the R-1 Single Family Residence District.
                     (B) The south 600 feet of the west half of the northeast
                     quarter of section 7, township 14 north, range 5 west of
                   the third principal meridian, Sangamon County, is
                     classified and shall be included as part of the B-2 Retail
                     Business District.
                     (C) The west half of the west half of the northeast
                     quarter of section 7, township 14 north, range 5 west of
                   the third principal meridian, except the south 600 feet
                     thereof, Sangamon County, Illinois, is classified and
                     shall be included as part of the R-3 General Residence
                     District.
                     Reclassification of lots one and two of plat two, Butler's
83-31    1-10-84     Second Addition from the R-1 Residential district to the
                     R-2 Residential district.
                     Reclassification of lots four and five in Stevens Addition
84-1     2-13-84     from the B-2 General Business district to the RO-
                     5 Residence Office district.
                     Reclassification of approximately 12 acres described as
                     the north 396 feet of the northeast quarter of the
                     southwest quarter of Section 8, Township 14 north, Range 5
89-3     1-10-89     west, bounded by Gordon Drive on the west and Walnut
                     Street on the north: the westerly 200 feet thereof shall
                     be reclassified from P-1 to R-2 zone; the remainder of the
                     parcel, being the east 1,120 feet thereof shall be
                     reclassified from the P-1 district area to R-3.
                     Reclassification Lots 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 of Triangle Court
89-14    5-9-89      Subdivision from R-3 General Residential, multi-family,
                     high density zone district, to B-1 General Business
                     District.
                     Reclassification of 500, 510, 520 East Mulberry from R-1,
89-15    5-9-89      Residential, single-family, low density zone district, to
                     R-1A Residential, single-family, medium density zone
                     district.
89-54    12-12-89    Rezoning the following land:
                   R-1A:
                   Lots 1 - 29 inclusive
                   Lots 34 and 35 inclusive
                   Lots 40 - 44 inclusive
                   Lots 51 - 54 inclusive
                   Lots 68 - 151 inclusive
                   R-1A with variance reducing lot width at building line:
                   Lots 30 - 33 inclusive
                   Lots 36 - 39 inclusive
                   Lots 45 - 50 inclusive
                   R-2:
                   Lots 55 - 66 inclusive
                   Lots 152 - 164 inclusive
                   RO-5: Lot 67
                   B-1: Lot 165
90-2     1-23-90     Rezoning 503 East Spruce Street, Lots 9, 10 and 11, Block
                     3, Butler Second Addition to R-3.
                     Rezoning certain property being the north 130 feet of the
90-14    3-27-90     east 12 acres of the southeast quarter of the southeast
                     quarter of Section 8, Township 14 north, Range 5 west,
                     (the Sullivan Property) to R-1.
                     Rezoning certain property being Lots 77 - 88, 117 - 125,
                     and 171 - 174 as R-2. Lot 116 as R-05. Lot 175 as B-1.
90-23    5-29-90     Lots 102 - 115 retain their present zoning category of R-
                     1. All other land within the subject property is zoned R-
                     1A.
                     Rezoning certain property being the west 77 feet of part
90-31    7-24-90     of the southeastern quarter, Section 12, Township 14
                     north, Range 6 west.
91-8     3-12-91     Rezoning certain property being lot 115 of Prairie Grove
                     Subdivision from R-1 to R-3.
91-25    5-28-91     Rezoning certain property being Lot 9 and Lot 10 of
                     Triangle Court from R-3 to B-2.
                     Rezoning certain property being the north 396 feet of the
91-39    8-26-91     northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 8,
                     Township 14 north, Range 5 west, from R-2 and R-3 to R-1A.
                     Rezoning certain property being the north 198 feet of the
                     northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 17,
91-42    9-10-91     and the north 198 feet of the northeast quarter of the
                     northeast quarter of Section 18, all in Township 14 north,
                     Range 5 west, from R-3 to R-3 with a special use of
                     Private Outdoor Recreation Center.
91-58    12-10-91    Rezoning the following parcels from P-1 to R-1:
                     Parcel 1: West 5 acres of the southwest quarter of the
                   southeast quarter of Section 24, Township 14 north, Range
                     6 west.
                     Parcel 2: East 5 acres of the southwest quarter of the
                   southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 24,
                     Township 14 north, Range 6 west.
                     Parcel 3: West half of the southeast quarter of the
                   southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 24,
                     Township 14 north, Range 6 west.
                   Parcel 4: Lot 1, Casa Grande Subdivision, Plat I.
                     Parcel 5: Part of the southeast quarter of the northeast
                   quarter and part of the northeast quarter of the southeast
                     quarter of Section 24, Township 14 north, Range 6 west.
                   Parcel 6: Oaklawn Subdivision Second Plat, Lot 4.
                   Parcel 7: Oaklawn Subdivision, Lot 1.
                   Parcel 8: Part of the northwest quarter of the southwest
                     quarter of Section 19, Township 14, Range 5 west.
                   Parcel 9: Lot 11 of the Casa Grande Subdivision Plat I.
                   Parcel 10: Lot 9 of the Casa Grande Subdivision Plat I.
                   Parcel 11: Lot 3 of the Oaklawn Subdivision.
                   Parcel 12: Casa Grande Subdivision, Plat I, Lot 8.
                   Parcel 13: Oaklawn Subdivision, Second Plat, Lot 2.
92-16    5-12-92     Rezoning certain property being Lots 166, 167, 168, 169 of
                     Prairie Grove Subdivision, First Plat, from R-1(a) to R-2.
92-17    5-26-92     Rezoning certain property being Lot 170, Plat I of Prairie
                     Grove Subdivision from R-1(a) to R-2.
                     Rezoning certain property being the northwest quarter of
                     the northeast quarter: the west half of the northeast
92-36    9-24-92     quarter of the northeast quarter; the northeast quarter of
                     the northeast quarter of the northeast quarter, except the
                     North 80 feet thereof; all in Section 17, Township 14
                     north, Range 5 west, from P-1 to R-1.
                     Rezoning certain property being the west 417.42 feet of
92-43    11-10-92    the north 238.71 feet of the southeast quarter of Section
                     7, Township 14 north, Range 5 west, from P-1 to B-2.
                     Annexing certain property being the north 800 feet, except
93-15    4-13-93     the west 650 feet thereof, of the southeast quarter of the
                     southwest quarter of Section 8, Township 14 north, Range 5
                     west, containing 10.146 acres more or less.
93-18    4-27-93     Rezoning Chatham Baptist Church property from P-1 to B-1.
                     Rezoning certain property being the south 87.42 feet of
93-22    5-11-93     the north 417.42 feet of the east 417.42 feet of the
                     southeast quarter of Section 7, Township 14 north, Range 5
                     west, to B-1.
                     Rezoning certain property being part of the southeast
94-25    5-10-94     quarter of Section 7, Township 14 north, Range 5 west from
                     R-1 and R-2 to R-1A.
22-35    7-26-22     Rezoning certain property being L221 Oakbrook Est. Plat 16
                     from B-1 to R-3.
23-16    5-23-23     Rezoning certain property being 3800 Mansion Road from B-
                     2 to R-1.
23-17    5-23-23     Rezoning certain property being Goldenrod and Route 4 from
                     B-2 to I-1.
                    
 
TABLE XI: EMINENT DOMAIN PROCEEDINGS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
                     Authorizing eminent domain proceedings to condemn an
                     electrical easement over property being part of Lots 7 and
90-41    10-23-90    8 in Block 11 of the original town of Chatham located in
                     the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 7,
                     Township 14 north, Range 5 west.
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Ordinances
References to Resolutions
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cite Code Section
ILCS Cite                                            Code Section
5 ILCS 120/1                                         30.08
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.                                 33.50
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.                                 33.50
5 ILCS 140/1.1 et seq.                               36.40
5 ILCS 140/7                                         36.40
5 ILCS 140/11.5                                      36.52
5 ILCS 275/1                                         92.06
5 ILCS 315/3                                         37.01
5 ILCS 385                                           35.199
5 ILCS 425/1 et seq.                                 37.01
5 ILCS 430                                           31.03
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.                               Ch. 36, App. A
10 ILCS 5/1-3                                        37.01
10 ILCS 5/9 - 1.4                                    37.01
10 ILCS 5/9-3                                        37.01
15 ILCS 205/7                                        36.40
20 ILCS 700/4002                                     Ch. 36, App. A
30 ILCS 535/55                                       Ch. 36, App. A
35 ILCS 120/2-27                                     116.01
35 ILCS 200/18-50                                    31.53
35 ILCS 205/35                                       155.006
35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.                                117.02
35 ILCS 636/5-50                                     116.04
40 ILCS 5/3 - 101 et seq.                            32.24
40 ILCS 5/3 - 125                                    32.23
40 ILCS 5/3-128—130                                32.21
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.                                 38.02,
                                                     113.05
50 ILCS 751/1 et seq.                                Ch. 36, App. A
65 ILCS 5                                            35.003
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                                      152.01
65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1                                    39.01
65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1 et seq.                            39.12
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-10                                  31.54
65 ILCS 5/3.1 -35-40 - 3.1-35-85                     31.50
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-95                                  31.20
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40                                  30.52
65 ILCS 5/6-204                                      39.01
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1                                     115.02
65 ILCS 5/8-11-5                                     115.01
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.                           32.43,
                                                     32.44
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-3                                   32.42
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4                                   32.10,
                                                     32.43
                                                     161.01,
65 ILCS 5/11-5-1.5                                   161.03,
                                                     161.15
65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq.                            Ch. 158, App. A, Art. VII
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12                                   152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-21.5-5                                  Ch. 36, App. A
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2                                    152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8                                    152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-31-1                                    157.08
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2                                    152.01,
                                                     157.08
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1 et seq.                            39.01
65 ILCS 5/11-37-2                                    150.21
65 ILCS 5/11-40-3                                    99.01
65 ILCS 5/11-139-8                                   50.010
75 ILCS 70/1 et seq.                                 Ch. 36, App. A
77 ILCS 870                                          152.16
105 ILCS 10/1 et seq.                                Ch. 36, App. A
110 ILCS 979/50                                      Ch. 36, App. A
120 ILCS 40/14                                       10.18
210 ILCS 28/1 et seq.                                Ch. 36, App. A
210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.                               154.02
210 ILCS 125/1 et seq.                               156.01
220 ILCS 5/3-105                                     163.03
220 ILCS 5/5-108                                     Ch. 36, App. A
220 ILCS 5/9-221                                     116.01
220 ILCS 5/9-222.1                                   116.01
220 ILCS 5/9-222                                     116.01
220 ILCS 5/16-102                                    163.03
220 ILCS 5/16-1805(i)                                163.03
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)                                 113.02
220 ILCS 5/21-401                                    113.01
220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)                              113.02
220 ILCS 5/21-801                                    113.01
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)                                 113.01
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)                          113.01
220 ILCS 50/1                                        117.44
220 ILCS 65/4                                        117.24
225 ILCS 57/1 et seq.                                110.15,
                                                     110.28
225 ILCS 57/25                                       110.15,
                                                     110.18
225 ILCS 57/25(g)                                    110.18
225 ILCS 63/1 et seq.                                110.16
225 ILCS 90/1 et seq.                                110.16
225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.                               50.150
225 ILCS 320/3(1)                                    Ch. 50, App., § 5
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.                                118.02
235 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq.                              111.01
235 ILCS 5/3-12(11.1)                                111.23
235 ILCS 5/6-21                                      111.17
335 ILCS 75/1 et seq.                                110.16
410 ILCS 325/1 et seq.                               Ch. 36, App. A
410 ILCS 525/4                                       Ch. 36, App. A
415 ILCS 5                                           152.06
415 ILCS 5/4                                         Ch. 50, App., § 5
420 ILCS 44/30                                       Ch. 36, App. A
425 ILCS 25/9 - 14                                   157.07
425 ILCS 35/1                                        97.11
510 ILCS 5/1 et seq.                                 90.01
510 ILCS 5/15                                        90.23
510 ILCS 5/15.3                                      90.26
510 ILCS 50                                          93.20,
                                                     Ch. 93, App. A
510 ILCS 70                                          93.20,
                                                     Ch. 93, App. A
520 ILCS 5                                           93.20,
                                                     Ch. 93, App. A
605 ILCS 5/1 - 101                                   117.01
625 ILCS 5/1-101.5                                   99.01
625 ILCS 5/1-146                                     99.01
625 ILCS 5/3-314                                     99.06
625 ILCS 5/3-314.1                                   99.06
625 ILCS 5/4-201 et seq.                             99.02,
                                                     99.03
625 ILCS 5/4                                         99.04,
                                                     99.99
625 ILCS 5/11-204                                    73.02
625 ILCS 5/11-204.1                                  73.02
625 ILCS 5/11-212                                    Ch. 36, App. A
625 ILCS5/18c-7201                                   163.03
720 ILCS 5/11-20                                     130.30
720 ILCS 5/11-21                                     130.30
720 ILCS 550/11                                      130.16
720 ILCS 570/201 et seq.                             130.15
720 ILCS 600/5                                       130.17,
                                                     130.18
720 ILCS 675/0.01                                    130.40
720 ILCS 675/1(a), (a-5), (a-5.1), (a-6), (a-8), (a- 130.40
9), (b), (d), (e)
720 ILCS 675/(a-9)                                   130.41
720 ILCS 635/0.01 et seq.                            130.17
725 ILCS 124/10                                      Ch. 36, App. A
725 ILCS 124/15                                      Ch. 36, App. A
735 ILCS 5/2-203                                     39.11
740 ILCS 174/1 et seq.                               35.098
765 ILCS 77/70 et seq.                               Ch. 36, App. A
765 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.                            155.005,
                                                     155.006
765 ILCS 205/2                                       152.08
805 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3)—(a)(10)                      111.13
805 ILCS 5/28-3                                      111.13
810 ILCS 5/3-104                                     50.001
820 ILCS 130/5                                       36.40
                                                     
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     91.01 -
                     91.06,
                     91.10 -
                     91.13,
—      - -         91.20 -
                     91.26,
                     91.40,
                     91.42 -
                     91.44,
                     95.01
—      10-11-3     T.S.O., Table III
—      4-1-58      T.S.O., Table VI
—      7-14-65     T.S.O., Table VIII
—      9-7-65      T.S.O., Table V
—      12-22-66    T.S.O., Table VI
—      7-20-67     T.S.O., Table I
—      3-18-71     T.S.O., Table I
12       10-2-62     T.S.O., Table VII
13       10-2-62     Ch. 72, Sched. I
31       10-13-13    130.01,
                     130.99
67-7     1-19-67     T.S.O., Table III
69-3     9-3-69      115.01
69-4     9-3-69      115.02
69-7     12-18-69    T.S.O., Table III
70-1     1-22-70     T.S.O., Table III
                     50.021,
                     50.110,
70-7     5-7-70      50.114 -
                     50.116,
                     50.118
70-14    12-8-70     T.S.O., Table III
71-5     10-21-71    70.01,
                     70.99
                     50.021 -
72-8     - -         50.025,
                     50.999
72-3     3-17-72     T.S.O., Table II
72-5     6-15-72     T.S.O., Table X
73-9     10-4-73     157.01 -
                     157.08
73-11    12-20-73    50.117
74-1     - -         T.S.O., Table III
74-4     7-18-74     34.01
74-7     9-19-74     35.080
74-9     12-5-74     T.S.O., Table III
75-1     1-16-75     T.S.O., Table III
                     93.01 -
                     93.05,
                     93.40 -
75-9     10-14-75    93.42,
                     93.50,
                     93.51,
                     93.99
75-11    12-9-75     T.S.O., Table VI
76-1     2-10-76     50.171,
                     50.172
76-4     2-10-76     Ch. 71, Sched. I
                     156.01 -
                     156.03,
76-5     - -         156.10 -
                     156.14,
                     156.99
77-8     5-10-77     T.S.O., Table III
77-14    5-24-77     50.173
77-15    5-24-77     Ch. 72, Sched. I
77-16    6-14-77     94.01 -
                     94.06
77-20    6-28-77     50.173
77-25    9-27-77     50.117
                     112.01 -
78-4     2-14-78     112.07,
                     112.99
78-7     3-28-78     T.S.O., Table II
78-8     3-28-78     T.S.O., Table II
78-14    5-9-78      T.S.O., Table IV
78-21    9-12-78     T.S.O., Table II
78-28    11-14-78    50.101 -
                     50.103
78-32    11-28-78    50.206
79-6     1-23-79     T.S.O., Table III
                     50.104,
                     50.150 -
                     50.157,
                     50.170,
79-11    4-10-79     50.174 -
                     50.191,
                     50.211,
                     50.228 -
                     50.233
79-17    5-8-79      T.S.O., Table III
79-22    7-12-79     T.S.O., Table III
79-29    8-14-79     50.205
79-30    10-9-79     70.02,
                     70.99
79-31    8-14-79     130.02,
                     130.99
79-32    8-28-79     T.S.O., Table I
79-33    8-28-79     93.02
79-35    8-28-79     T.S.O., Table III
79-36    9-25-79     32.01
79-40    11-13-79    T.S.O., Table II
80-1     1-22-80     50.178
                     114.01 -
80-2     2-12-80     114.09,
                     114.99
80-3     2-26-80     50.233
80-8     5-13-80     T.S.O., Table III
                     91.01,
                     91.07,
80-17    6-24-80     91.09,
                     91.23,
                     91.40,
                     91.41
80-19    8-12-80     T.S.O., Table III
                     95.10 -
80-20    7-22-80     95.18,
                     95.99
80-28    8-12-80     T.S.O., Table III
                     50.001 -
80-33    12-16-80    50.010,
                     50.012
80-34    12-16-80    50.020
                     154.01 -
80-37    12-9-80     154.02,
                     154.99
81-1     1-27-81     31.02
81-4     2-24-81     50.225 -
                     50.227
81-10    5-26-81     50.001,
                     50.011
81-12    6-9-81      32.20 -
                     32.24
81-11    6-9-81      32.40 -
                     32.44
81-14    7-14-81     Ch. 71, Sched. III,
                     70.03
81-15    - -         50.026
81-19    8-25-81     T.S.O., Table III
81-20    9-22-81     T.S.O., Table IX
81-21    9-22-81     T.S.O., Table IX
81-22    9-22-81     T.S.O., Table IX
81-23    9-22-81     T.S.O., Table IX
81-24    9-22-81     T.S.O., Table IX
81-25    10-13-81    T.S.O., Table III
81-26    10-13-81    T.S.O., Table III
81-29    10-27-81    T.S.O., Table IX
82-6     3-23-82     T.S.O., Table V
82-23    8-24-82     T.S.O., Table III
82-26    9-28-82     T.S.O., Table III
82-28    10-26-82    31.20 -
                     31.23
82-30    11-9-82     154.02
82-35    12-14-82    T.S.O., Table III
83-1     1-25-83     154.02
83-8     3-22-83     T.S.O., Table III
83-17    7-26-83     T.S.O., Table III
83-24    9-13-83     T.S.O., Table IV
83-27    9-27-83     30.01 -
                     30.05
83-28    11-22-83    T.S.O., Table I
83-31    1-10-84     T.S.O., Table X
83-32    12-20-83    T.S.O., Table III
84-1     2-13-84     T.S.O., Table X
84-3     3-14-84     T.S.O., Table III
84-5     4-10-84     T.S.O., Table III
84-7     6-12-84     T.S.O., Table VI
84-14    8-28-84     T.S.O., Table IX
84-15    11-13-84    T.S.O., Table VI
84-17    10-9-84     T.S.O., Table III
85-M-1   5-14-85     T.S.O., Table III
85-M-4   5-28-85     T.S.O., Table IX
85-1     1-8-85      T.S.O., Table III
                     95.30,
85-3     3-12-85     95.31,
                     95.99
85-4     2-12-85     T.S.O., Table IV
85-13    9-24-85     T.S.O., Table III
85-14    10-8-85     35.175
85-16    10-29-85    T.S.O., Table III
86-11    6-24-86     154.02
86-12    6-24-86     T.S.O., Table II
86-19    10-4-86     T.S.O., Table III
86-25    11-25-86    50.130 -
                     50.136
86-33    12-16-86    T.S.O., Table IX
87-8     6-23-87     34.02
87-11    8-28-87     T.S.O., Table II
89-24    - -         T.S.O., Table III
89-50    11-20-84    T.S.O., Table VI
89-1     1-10-89     Ch. 71, Sched. I
89-2     1-18-89     70.04,
                     70.99
89-3     1-10-89     T.S.O., Table X
89-14    5-9-89      T.S.O., Table X
89-15    5-9-89      T.S.O., Table X
89-16    5-9-89      T.S.O., Table IX
89-18    5-9-89      T.S.O., Table III
89-22    6-6-89      T.S.O., Table III
89-25    7-17-89     T.S.O., Table IX
89-28    7-25-89     T.S.O., Table III
89-37    9-26-89     T.S.O., Table IX
89-38    9-26-89     T.S.O., Table III
89-39    8-8-89      32.11
89-39    9-26-89     T.S.O., Table III
89-44    10-24-89    T.S.O., Table III
89-46    11-20-89    T.S.O., Table IX
89-54    12-12-89    T.S.O., Table X
89-55    12-12-89    T.S.O., Table IX
90-2     1-23-90     T.S.O., Table X
90-4     2-27-90     T.S.O., Table III
90-10    3-13-90     36.02
90-11    5-8-90      31.04
90-13    4-10-90     30.50 -
                     30.52
90-14    3-27-90     T.S.O., Table X
90-16    - -         36.01
90-18    5-15-90     T.S.O., Table III
90-20    6-19-90     91.08
90-23    5-29-90     T.S.O., Table X
90-24    6-26-90     33.01 -
                     33.06
90-25    6-27-90     97.99
90-27    7-24-90     T.S.O., Table III
90-29    7-24-90     T.S.O., Table III
90-31    7-24-90     T.S.O., Table X
90-32    7-24-90     T.S.O., Table IX
90-35    - -         36.01
90-41    10-23-90    T.S.O., Table XI
90-42    10-29-90    T.S.O., Table III
90-45    11-9-90     T.S.O., Table VI
90-47    11-19-90    T.S.O., Table III
90-49    11-19-90    T.S.O., Table III
90-51    11-27-90    T.S.O., Table III
90-50    11-27-90    T.S.O., Table III
91-3     3-12-91     Ch. 72, Sched. I
91-4     3-12-91     50.105
91-6     3-12-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-7     3-12-91     T.S.O., Table IX
91-8     3-12-91     T.S.O., Table X
91-9     3-19-91     T.S.O., Table IV
91-10    3-26-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-12    4-9-91      T.S.O., Table VI
91-15    4-9-91      T.S.O., Table III
91-16    4-9-91      T.S.O., Table III
91-19    4-23-91     T.S.O., Table IX
91-21    5-7-91      T.S.O., Table III
91-23    5-14-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-25    5-28-91     T.S.O., Table X
91-26    6-11-91     53.01 - 53.06, 53.15 - 53.19, 53.30 - 53.33, 53.99
91-27    6-11-91     53.05, 53.33
91-29    6-18-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-33    7-9-91      T.S.O., Table III
91-37    8-13-91     36.01
91-38    8-13-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-39    8-26-91     T.S.O., Table X
91-40    8-27-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-41    9-10-91     Ch. 94, App. A,
                     94.25
91-42    9-10-91     T.S.O., Table X
91-44    9-10-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-46    9-10-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-47    9-23-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-48    10-8-91     T.S.O., Table III
91-51    11-12-91    T.S.O., Table VIII
91-54    11-12-91    T.S.O., Table III
91-55    12-10-91    T.S.O., Table III
91-57    12-10-91    T.S.O., Table III
91-58    12-10-91    T.S.O., Table X
91-60    12-10-91    31.01
91-62    12-10-91    T.S.O., Table III
92-01    1-14-92     T.S.O., Table VI
92-02    2-25-92     94.04
92-03    3-24-92     T.S.O., Table V
92-06    4-14-92     T.S.O., Table III
                     35.001 -
                     35.003,
                     35.015,
                     35.016,
                     35.025 -
                     35.030,
                     35.040 -
                     35.045,
                     35.055 -
                     35.060,
92-11    4-28-92     35.070,
                     35.072 -
                     35.079,
                     35.090 -
                     35.097,
                     35.110,
                     35.111,
                     35.120 -
                     35.127,
                     35.140 -
                     35.142,
                     35.165
92-12    4-28-92     T.S.O., Table III
92-14    5-6-92      T.S.O., Table III
92-15    5-12-92     T.S.O., Table VI
92-16    5-12-92     T.S.O., Table X
92-17    5-26-92     T.S.O., Table X
92-19    6-9-92      36.03
92-21    6-9-92      T.S.O., Table III
92-22    6-23-92     T.S.O., Table III
92-25    7-7-92      36.01
92-35    9-22-92     T.S.O., Table III
92-36    9-24-92     T.S.O., Table X
92-37    9-24-92     T.S.O., Table III
92-38    10-13-92    T.S.O., Table III
92-43    11-10-92    T.S.O., Table X
92-46    10-3-92     T.S.O., Table III
93-12    3-23-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-13    4-27-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-14    4-13-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-15    4-13-93     T.S.O., Table X
93-16    4-13-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-17    4-13-93     T.S.O., Table VI
93-18    4-27-93     T.S.O., Table X
93-20    4-27-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-22    5-11-93     T.S.O., Table X
93-26    5-11-93     30.20
93-27    5-25-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-28    5-25-93     33.20 -
                     33.22
93-29    6-8-93      T.S.O., Table III
93-35    7-13-93     36.01
93-36    7-13-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-42    8-10-93     31.35
93-43    8-10-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-46    9-14-93     T.S.O., Table VII
93-47    9-28-93     97.01,
                     97.99
93-54    11-9-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-55    11-9-93     T.S.O., Table III
93-56    11-23-93    T.S.O., Table III
93-58    12-14-93    91.14
93-59    12-14-93    T.S.O., Table III
93-61    12-14-93    T.S.O., Table IX
94-01    1-25-94     Ch. 155
94-03    1-11-94     T.S.O., Table III
94-06    1-11-94     33.07
                     150.01 -
                     150.08,
94-07    3-24-94     150.20 -
                     150.32,
                     150.99
94-10    2-8-94      155.092
94-11    2-8-94      T.S.O., Table IV
94-13    3-22-94     T.S.O., Table III
94-16    3-22-94     T.S.O., Table III
94-18    4-12-94     T.S.O., Table VI
94-20    4-26-94     T.S.O., Table III
94-21    4-26-94     T.S.O., Table III
94-22    4-26-94     T.S.O., Table IX
                     111.01,
                     111.10 -
                     111.22,
94-23    5-24-94     111.30 -
                     111.37,
                     111.50 -
                     111.55,
                     111.99
94-25    5-10-94     T.S.O., Table X
94-28    5-10-94     T.S.O., Table IX
94-31    8-9-94      T.S.O., Table III
94-39    7-12-94     T.S.O., Table III
94-40    8-9-94      Ch. 71, Sched. I
                     155.095,
94-53    8-9-94      155.096,
                     155.098,
                     155.099
                     155.041,
94-60    - -96       155.055,
                     155.076,
                     155.077
94-62    10-11-94    Ch. 151
94-70    11-29-94    155.041
509      5-8-34      T.S.O., Table III
511      6-5-34      T.S.O., Table III
515      11-7-34     T.S.O., Table III
                     35.003,
                     35.025,
                     35.040,
94-59    9-27-94     35.041,
                     35.059,
                     35.061,
                     35.078,
                     35.095
95-02    1-24-95     31.02
                     150.29,
95-10    3-14-95     150.30,
                     150.33
                     50.501,
                     50.502,
                     50.505,
                     50.506,
                     50.508,
                     50.509,
                     50.512 -
95-16    3-28-95     50.516,
                     50.530 -
                     50.540,
                     50.550 -
                     50.552,
                     50.554,
                     50.557,
                     50.570
95-50    - -95       35.096
95-58    11-28-95    36.20
96-21    2-27-96     50.122
96-54    3-26-96     Ch. 158
96-90    5-14-96     111.01,
                     111.22
96-93    5-28-96     33.20 -
                     33.22
96-106   7-9-96      Ch. 71, Sched. I
97-04    3-11-97     70.01
97-08    4-8-97      50.118
97-20    6-10-97     31.52
97-34    8-5-97      35.079
97-49    8-26-97     T.S.O. VIII
97-50    9-9-97      T.S.O. I
97-71    11-11-97    158.033
98-01    1-13-98     Adopting Ordinance
98-18    3-10-98     31.51
98-19    3-10-98     31.50
98-29    5-12-98     33.50 -
                     33.52
98-32    5-12-98     95.32,
                     95.99
98-49    9-22-98     50.130 -
                     50.136
98-57    9-8-98      117.17
98-58    9-8-98      Ch. 71, Sched. II
98-59    9-22-98     33.50 -
                     33.52
98-69A   12-22-98    155.006,
                     155.152
                     117.01 -
99-03    1-26-99     117.03,
                     117.23 -
                     117.31,
                     117.41 -
                   117.49,
                     117.99
99-04    1-26-99     T.S.O. III
99-06    2-9-99      50.118
                     159.01 -
99-14    3-23-99     159.05,
                     159.15 -
                     159.22
                     98.01 -
99-15    3-23-01     98.07,
                     98.99
99-20    5-11-99     70.01
99-27    6-8-99      111.22
99-33    6-22-99     50.570
99-34    7-13-99     T.S.O. III
99-40    7-27-99     111.01,
                     111.17
                     160.01 -
99-41    8-10-99     160.07,
                     160.99
99-45    9-28-99     33.51
99-61    12-21-99    Ch. 71, Sched. I
99-62    11-23-99    111.17
99-66    1-11-00     111.17
                     37.01,
00-03    1-25-00     37.03 -
                     37.05,
                     37.99
00-04    1-25-00     159.06
00-12    1-25-00     111.22
00-20    4-11-00     111.17
00-29    6-13-00     50.118
00-42    7-25-00     T.S.O. III
00-63    11-14-00    95.02
                     38.01 -
01-04    1-23-01     38.03,
                     38.14 -
                     38.16,
                     38.26 -
                   38.30,
                     38.40 -
                     38.45
01-13    3-27-01     91.08
01-27    5-8-01      111.17
01-28    5-8-01      31.50,
                     31.53
01-35    6-12-01     111.17A
01-41    7-10-01     111.38
                     31.35,
01-44    7-10-01     31.53,
                     31.55
01-45    8-14-01     33.60 -
                     33.63 
                     161.01 -
01-50    9-25-01     161.15,
                     App. A,
                     B
                     158.033,
01-51    8-28-01     158.034,
                     158.071;
                     Ch. 158, App. F
                     99.01 -
01-69    11-13-01    99.06,
                     99.99
01-70    11-13-01    111.17
01-73    11-27-01    33.70 -
                     33.73
01-83    12-18-01    50.570
02-42    10-8-02     158.004
02-45    10-22-02    Ch. 71, Sched. I
02-46    11-12-02    Ch. 71, Sched. I
02-52    12-17-02    Ch. 71, Sched. I
                     35.003,
                     35.015,
                     35.016,
                     35.028,
                     35.040,
                     35.041,
02-55    1-14-03     35.059,
                     35.070,
                     35.073 -
                     35.079,
                     35.155 -
                     35.157,
                     35.165,
                     35.166
03-04    1-14-03     Ch. 71, Sched. I
03-05    1-14-03     154.02
03-07    1-28-03     Ch. 71, Sched. I
                     99.01 -
03-08    1-28-03     99.06,
                     99.99
03-42    9-9-03      116.01 -
                     116.05
03-44    9-9-03      115.03
                     111.01,
03-49    10-28-03    111.17,
                     111.22
03-78    12-16-03    97.01,
                     97.99
04-03    2-10-04     32.11
                     37.01 -
04-21    5-11-04     37.06,
                     37.99
                     158.030,
04-36    6-22-04     158.033,
                     158.034
                     150.01,
                     150.02,
                     150.06,
                     150.08,
04-43    7-13-04     150.20 -
                     150.23,
                     150.25,
                     150.27,
                     150.28,
                     150.32
04-44    7-13-04     32.11
04-54    9-14-04     116.02
04-56    8-24-04     Ch. 71, Sched. I
04-66    11-9-04     111.17
                     155.032,
                     155.034,
                     155.042,
                     155.052,
                     155.055,
                     155.075,
                     155.092,
05-05    2-22-05     155.093,
                     155.097 -
                     155.100,
                     155.113,
                     155.133, Ch. 155,
                     App. A-5,
                     A-6,
                     A-7
05-12    4-2-05      Ch. 155,
                     App. A-5
                     90.01 -
05-31    7-26-05     90.27,
                     90.99;
                     Ch. 90, App. A
05-38    8-23-05     111.17
05-54    10-25-05    91.08
06-09    2-28-06     111.17B
06-15    4-25-06     50.118
                     50.117,
06-16    4-25-06     50.505,
                     50.506
06-17    4-25-06     115.03
06-46    8-22-06     50.552
06-58    10-10-06    31.04
07-07    3-27-07     Ch. 71, Sched. I
07-12    4-24-07     50.118
07-13    4-24-07     50.570
07-21    5-22-07     50.118
07-22    5-22-07     50.570
                     152.01 -
07-27    6-12-07     152.14,
                     152.99
                     162.01 -
07-51    9-11-07     162.04,
                     162.99
07-52    9-11-07     50.118
07-66    11-13-07    Ch. 71, Sched. I
07-69    11-13-07    111.17
08-04    1-22-08     36.20
08-05    1-22-08     Ch. 72, Sch. I
08-06    1-22-08     111.22
08-07    2-12-08     Ch. 71, Sch. III
08-13    4-22-08     50.570
08-14    4-22-08     50.118
08-16    4-22-08     111.17
08-25    5-27-08     158.072
08-40    9-23-08     39.01 -
                     39.12
09-06    2-24-09     91.08
09-07    3-10-09     111.17
09-10    4-28-09     158.072
09-18    5-12-09     50.118
09-19    5-12-09     50.206
09-20    5-12-09     50.570
09-37    7-28-09     50.552
09-38    8-11-09     32.10
09-40    8-11-09     31.54
09-45    8-11-09     31.56
09-56    10-13-09    35.076
09-63    10-27-09    50.570
                     155.003,
                     155.006,
                     155.008 -
                     155.010,
                     155.023,
                     155.032,
                     155.043,
                     155.072,
                     155.075,
                     155.091 -
                     155.093,
10-01    1-12-10     155.095,
                     155.096,
                     155.098,
                     155.111,
                     155.113,
                     155.116,
                     155.133,
                     155.136,
                     155.152,
                     155.153, Ch. 155, App.
                     A-8,
                     A-9,
                     A-10
                     36.40 -
10-02    1-12-10     36.57,
                     Ch. 36, App. A
10-06    2-9-10      111.17
10-20    4-27-10     50.118
10-21    4-27-10     50.206
10-28    5-11-10     Ch. 150, App. B
10-29    5-11-10     111.22
10-35    5-25-10     Ch. 150, App. B
10-47    8-10-10     116.02
10-51    8-24-10     111.17
11-02    1-25-11     50.118,
                     50.206
11-10    3-8-11      30.06
11-32    6-28-11     53.49
                     100.01 -
11-37    6-28-11     100.08,
                     100.99
11-41    9-27-11     33.01 -
                     33.04
11-50    11-8-11     90.03,
                     158.004
11-52    11-8-11     35.074
11-60    12-13-11    T.S.O. II
12-03    2-14-12     91.14
                     155.005,
12-06    2-28-12     158.004,
                     158.033,
                     158.034
12-08    2-28-12     91.08
12-11    3-27-12     111.17
12-14    5-8-12      73.01 -
                     73.08
                     110.01 -
12-16    5-22-12     110.08,
                     110.99
12-20    6-12-12     50.184
                     155.054 -
12-21    6-12-12     155.057,
                     155.076,
                     155.077
12-24    7-10-12     33.02
                     111.35,
12-29    7-10-12     118.01 -
                     118.04
12-38    10-9-12     35.190 -
                     35.199
13-01    1-8-13      150.28
13-13    5-14-13     111.17
13-19    7-9-13      Ch. 150, App. A
13-29    9-10-13     50.118
13-36    9-24-13     111.17
13-38    10-8-13     35.056
                     35.016,
                     35.028,
                     35.055,
13-42    10-22-13    35.056,
                     35.070,
                     35.074,
                     35.075,
                     35.076
13-45    11-26-13    T.S.O. I,
                     IX
13-46    11-26-13    T.S.O. I,
                     IX
                     94.07 -
13-49    12-10-13    94.09,
                     94.99
14-01    1-14-14     35.098
14-06    1-28-14     150.21
14-07    2-11-14     111.17
14-11    3-11-14     Ch. 150, App. A
14-20    4-22-14     36.70
14-22    5-13-14     130.01
14-24    5-13-14     50.570
14-29    5-27-14     150.06
14-35    7-22-14     92.01 -
                     92.13
14-43    8-26-14     150.28
                     155.092,
15-03    1-27-15     155.097,
                     155.099
15-04    2-10-15     50.120
15-06    2-24-15     T.S.O. III
15-09    3-10-15     50.009
15-21    5-26-15     33.30 -
                     33.32
15-26    6-23-15     50.570
15-27    6-23-15     50.206
                     50.117,
15-28    6-23-15     50.118,
                     50.123
                     93.20 -
15-34    8-11-15     93.26,
                     93.99,
                     Ch. 93, App. A
15-38    9-8-15      30.07
15-40    9-22-15     111.17
15-41    9-22-15     111.17,
                     111.30
15-43    10-27-15    150.21,
                     Ch. 150, App. B
15-50    12-8-15     30.01
16-11    3-22-16     T.S.O. I
16-14    3-22-16     155.044,
                     155.052
                     50.001 -
                     50.013,
                     50.020 -
                     50.034,
                     50.050 -
                     50.054,
                     50.101 -
                     50.105,
                     50.110,
                     50.114 -
                     50.120,
                     50.122,
                     50.123,
                     50.130 -
                     50.136,
                     50.150 -
                     50.157,
                     50.170 -
                     50.191,
                     50.205,
16-15    4-26-16     50.206,
                     50.211,
                     50.225 -
                     50.233,
                     50.501,
                     50.502,
                     50.505,
                     50.506,
                     50.508,
                     50.509,
                     50.512 -
                     50.516,
                     50.530 -
                     50.540,
                     50.550 -
                     50.552,
                     50.554,
                     50.557,
                     50.570,
                     50.571,
                     50.999
16-20    5-24-16     111.17,
                     111.35
16-22    5-24-16     50.117
16-26    5-24-16     111.17
16-32    6-28-16     33.30
16-34    6-28-16     150.28
                     155.006,
                     155.007,
                     155.022,
                     155.023,
                     155.032,
                     155.034,
                     155.040,
                     155.043,
                     155.050,
                     155.052 -
                     155.057,
                     155.072,
                     155.073,
16-35    6-28-16     155.076,
                     155.077,
                     155.090,
                     155.092,
                     155.096 -
                     155.100,
                     155.111,
                     155.113,
                     155.114,
                     155.132,
                     155.133,
                     155.151,
                     155.152;
                     Ch. 50, App.
16-47    9-27-16     94.10
16-48    9-27-16     155.151
16-49    9-27-16     T.S.O. I
16-56    10-25-16    130.15 - 130.21
17-10    2-28-17     30.01
17-12    3-14-17     158.013
17-13    3-28-17     31.54
17-16    3-28-17     30.01
17-18    5-9-17      73.02,
                     73.08
17-19    5-9-17      159.35 -
                     159.49
17-24    6-13-17     30.06
17-25    6-13-17     111.17
17-32    6-13-17     Ch. 158, App. E
17-34    6-27-17     T.S.O. VII
17-37    7-11-17     111.23
17-38    7-11-17     T.S.O. VII
                     150.45 -
17-44    9-12-17     150.58,
                     150.99
                     155.006,
17-45    9-12-17     155.151,
                     155.152
17-52    12-26-17    111.22
18-1     1-9-18      31.03
18-6     1-23-18     32.11
18-7     1-23-18     33.01 -
                     33.03
                     97.10 -
18-10    2-27-18     97.18,
                     97.99
18-12    2-27-18     111.17C
18-13    2-27-18     158.033
18-25    5-22-18     92.04,
                     92.13
18-26    5-22-18     50.117
18-34    6-12-18     111.17
18-35    6-12-18     111.35
18-38    7-10-18     91.08,
                     Ch. 150, App. B
                     159.03,
18-40    7-10-18     159.04,
                     163.01 -
                     163.07
18-42    7-24-18     31.57
18-43    7-24-18     92.04
18-46    8-14-18     Ch. 150, App. B
18-47    8-28-18     50.051
                     Ch. 50, App. A, §
                     1,
19-01    1-22-19     5,
                     6,
                     9,
                     11
19-6     2-26-19     111.17
19-7     2-26-19     111.13
19-08    3-12-19     T.S.O. III
19-9     3-12-19     T.S.O. III
19-10    3-12-19     T.S.O. I
19-11    4-9-19      T.S.O. IV
19-14    6-11-19     50.106
19-15    6-11-19     111.17
                     53.045 -
                     53.047,
                     53.060 -
                     53.062,
19-16    6-25-19     53.075,
                     53.090 -
                     53.091,
                     53.105 -
                     53.110,
                     53.999
19-18    6-25-19     111.22,
                     111.50
                     50.026,
19-24    8-27-19     91.08,
                     94.08
19-25    8-27-19     T.S.O. IV
                     119.01 -
19-30    9-24-19     119.03,
                     119.99
19-32    11-12-19    T.S.O. II
19-33    11-12-19    110.15 -110.33
19-34    11-26-19    30.08
19-38    12-23-19    T.S.O. III
19-39    12-23-19    130.15 -
                     130.18
20-2     1-28-20     T.S.O. III
20-5     2-25-20     T.S.O. III
20-7     2-25-20     T.S.O. I
20-12    3-31-20     T.S.O. III
20-14    4-14-20     T.S.O. I
20-16    5-12-20     111.17
20-18    6-23-20     50.106
20-20    8-25-20     T.S.O. IX
20-25    9-22-20     111.37,
                     111.99
20-26    10-27-20    T.S.O. II
20-28    11-10-20    T.S.O. IX
20-29    11-10-20    T.S.O. IX
20-32    12-8-20     111.17
20-35    12-8-20     Ch. 150, App. A
21-4     2-9-21      130.15,
                     130.16
21-5     2-9-21      70.01
                     39.05,
21-08    2-23-21     39.07,
                     70.99
21-14    4-13-21     113.01 -
                     113.05
21-21    6-22-21     158.033
21-28    9-28-21     90.03
                     111.01,
21-32    10-12-21    111.10,
                     111.17,
                     111.17B
21-33    10-12-21    111.17
21-40    10-26-21    30.05
21-42    11-9-21     31.50,
                     31.53
21-44    11-23-21    35.093
21-51    12-28-21    111.17
21-52    12-28-21    118.03
22-01    1-25-22     73.02
22-09    3-30-22     111.17
22-14    4-26-22     94.11
22-15    5-10-22     T.S.O. II
22-18    5-24-22     T.S.O. II
22-19    5-24-22     T.S.O. II
22-20    5-24-22     T.S.O. II
22-24    6-28-22     T.S.O. I
22-25    6-28-22     111.17
22-26    6-28-22     111.17
22-29    7-12-22     T.S.O. II
22-31    7-12-22     T.S.O. II
22-35    7-26-22     T.S.O. X
22-36    7-26-22     T.S.O. VI
                     53.046,
                     53.061,
22-38    8-9-22      53.062,
                     53.090,
                     53.091
22-39    8-23-22     T.S.O. II
22-42    9-27-22     111.17
22-47    11-22-22    T.S.O. III
22-48    11-22-22    T.S.O. IX
22-52    12-13-22    111.17
22-54    12-27-22    111.17
23-02    1-24-23     30.01
23-03    1-24-23     T.S.O. IV
23-05    2-14-23     T.S.O. IX
23-07    3-28-23     T.S.O. III
23-14    5-9-23      T.S.O. I
23-16    5-23-23     T.S.O. X
23-17    5-23-23     T.S.O. X
23-23    6-27-23     T.S.O. I
23-25    8-8-23      T.S.O. III
23-33    9-26-23     T.S.O. IX
                     111.01,
23-35    10-10-23    111.11,
                     111.17
23-36    10-24-23    53.047
23-41    11-14-23    Ch. 50, App. A, § 9
23-45    12-12-23    T.S.O. II
24-08    2-27-24     111.17
24-12    4-23-24     111.17
24-21    6-25-24     130.40, 130.41,
                     130.99
                     150.01,
24-22    6-25-24     150.02,
                     150.06,
                     Ch. 150, App. A
24-24    6-25-24     90.99,
                     Ch. 90, App. A
24-26    7-9-24      111.17
                    
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Description
13M85    9-10-85     130.30
                    
 
