CITY OF CHRISMAN, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-7 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord., passed 5-19-2025; and
State legislation current through 2025 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
No. 1
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310 Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   Penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Chrisman, Illinois,
shall be designated as the “Code of Chrisman, Illinois”, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code, other than the title, chapter and
section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   General purpose. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Chrisman, Illinois.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This code, as modified by
amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or sections.
      COUNTY. Edgar County, Illinois.
      ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5, as now
or hereafter amended.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Illinois.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   “And” or “or”. Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. 
      (1)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
      (2)   Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the
plural shall include the singular.
      (3)   The use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words were clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal law, shall
be the official time within the city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 8-13-1960;
Ord. 18, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example:(65 ILCS 5/102) (Ord. 25, passed 2-14-2010)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 31.10 MAYOR.
         The Mayor shall preside at all Council meetings.
      (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-1980)
      Statutory reference:
         Powers and duties of the Mayor, see 65 ILCS 5/102
§ 10.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $750. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
code shall, upon conviction in addition to the fine, be subject to court costs
and attorney's fees.
(Ord. 3, Series 2019, passed 3-4-2019)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   COUNCIL MEETINGS
      
31.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
      
32.   GENERAL CITY POLICIES
      
33.   REVENUE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: COUNCIL MEETINGS
Section
   
30.01   Regular meetings
   
30.02   Electronic attendance at meetings
   
30.03   Recording of meetings
§ 30.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   The regular meetings of the Council of the city shall be held on the
first and third Monday of each and every month during the year.
   (B)   The regular meetings of the Council of the city be held at 6:00 p.m.
at the City Building on the first and third Monday of each and every month
during the year.
(Ord. 3, Series 2013-2014, passed 12-9-2013; Ord. 1, Series 2015-2016, passed
5-18-2015; Ord., passed 9-3-2024)
§ 30.02 ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   (A)   The recitals contained in the preamble of the ordinance codified
herein are hereby incorporated herein by reference, the same as if set forth in
this section verbatim, as findings of the City Council.
   (B)   The City Council hereby adopts the Electronic Attendance at Meetings
Rules, set forth in divisions (B)(1) through (B)(6) below, that permits its
members to attend any meeting of the City Council (including committee
meetings), as defined in 5 ILCS 120/1.01 et seq., the Open Meetings Act, via
electronic means.
      (1)   Rules statement. It is the decision of the City Council that any
member of the City Council, including the Mayor, may attend any open or closed
meeting of the City Council (including committee meetings) via electronic means
(such as by telephone, video or internet connection); provided that, such
attendance is in compliance with these rules and any applicable laws.
      (2)   Prerequisites. A member of the City Council, including the Mayor,
may attend a meeting electronically if a quorum is physically present
throughout the meeting. In addition, the member should do the following.
         (a)   The member should notify the City Clerk, the City Clerk’s
designee or the City Administrator at least 24 hours before the meeting, unless
impractical, so that necessary communications equipment can be arranged.
Inability to make the necessary technical arrangements will result in denial of
a request for electronic attendance.
         (b)   The member must assert one of the following reasons why he or
she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
            1.   The member cannot attend because of personal illness or
disability;
            2.   The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the city;
            3.   The member cannot attend because of a family or other
emergency; or
            4.   The member cannot attend because of being out of town.
         (c)   The City Clerk, the City Clerk’s designee or the City
Administrator, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall inform
the City Council of the request for electronic attendance.
      (3)   Voting procedures. After a roll call establishing that a quorum is
physically present, the presiding officer shall advise the City Council that a
member is going to attend the meeting electronically after specifying the
reason entitling the absent member to attend electronically.
      (4)   Adequate equipment required. The member participating
electronically and other members of the City Council must be able to
communicate effectively, and members of the audience must be able to hear all
communications at the meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at
any meeting, the city shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this
objective at the meeting site.
      (5)   Minutes. Any member attending electronically shall be considered an
off-site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting. Said
meeting minutes shall reflect and state specifically whether each member is
physically present or present by electronic means.
      (6)   Rights of remote member. A member permitted to attend
electronically will be able to express his or her comments during the meeting
and participate in the same capacity as those members physically present,
subject to all general meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and
adhered to. The member attending electronically shall be heard, considered and
counted as to any vote taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending
electronically shall be called during any vote taken, and his or her vote
counted and recorded by the City Clerk, or the meeting’s recording secretary,
and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member attending
electronically may leave a meeting and return, as in the case of any member;
provided, the member attending electronically shall announce his or her leaving
and returning.
   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect following its passage
and publication in pamphlet form, as provided by law. These rules are effective
3-12-2012.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-12-2012)
§ 30.03 RECORDING OF MEETINGS.
   The policy of the City Council is that the recording of the City Council
meetings is done strictly to assist the Clerk with preparing minutes in the
future, and the decision as to whether to record or not record any meeting will
be the decision of the Clerk as the Clerk deems necessary to assist with
preparing the minutes from any meeting.
(Res. passed 8-15-2016)
CHAPTER 31: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
31.01   Regulations adopted by reference
   
31.02   Equal employment opportunity policy
§ 31.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The personnel policies of the city, including ethics policies, hiring
policies and general employment policies, are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Res. passed 1-25-1982; Res. passed 12-14-1983; Res. passed 1-12-1998; Ord. 1,
Series 1999-2000, passed 6-14-1999; Ord. 1, Series 2001-2002, passed 6-25-2001;
Ord. 2, Series 2004-2005, passed 9-27-2004; Ord. 3, Series 2011-2012, passed 7-
25-2011; Ord. passed 8-27-2012; Res. passed 4-22-2013)
§ 31.02 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The City of Chrisman desires to assure equal opportunity to
all individuals, regardless of race, color, religion, creed, national origin or
ancestry, sex, or disability, to avail themselves of gainful employment
opportunity. The city has determined that the passing of this section promoting
equal employment opportunity is an effective method of providing gainful
employment to minority, elderly, women, and persons with disabilities desiring
employment with the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      MINORITY. Refers to American Indians, Asians, Blacks, or Hispanics, or to
such protected classes as youth, elderly, women, or persons with disabilities.
   (C)   Policy.
      (1)   The city hereby declares to uphold, defend, enforce, and advocate
for all laws related to equal employment opportunity, including, but not
limited to, the following.
         (a)   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits
discrimination in the participation in or benefits of programs or activities
receiving federal financial assistance on the basis of race, color, or national
origin.
         (b)   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin in all
employment practices including hiring, firing, promotions, compensation, and
other terms, privileges, and conditions of employment.
         (c)   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which prohibits
discrimination in federally assisted education programs.
         (d)   The Equal Pay Act of 1963, which covers all employees who are
covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. The Act forbids pay differentials on
the basis of sex.
         (e)   The Age Discrimination Act of 1967, which prohibits
discrimination because of age against anyone between the ages of 40 and 65.
         (f)   Federal Executive Order 11246, which requires every contract
with federal financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination
because of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
         (g)   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Department of
Labor implementing regulations at 29 C.F.R. § 32, which prohibit any
discrimination based on disability.
         (h)   Section 188 of the Workforce Investment Act and the Department
of Labor regulations at 29 C.F.R. Parts 31 and 32, which provide that no person
in the United States shall be excluded from participation in, be denied the
benefits of, or be subject to discrimination on the basis of race, color, or
national origin, under any program or activity receiving federal financial
assistance from the Department of Labor.
         (i)   Chapter 68, Article I, §§ 17-19 of the Illinois Constitution,
which prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed, national ancestry,
disability, and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer.
         (j)   The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, which prohibits any
discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities on the basis of
their disability.
      (2)   The city will assure non-discriminatory employment practices in
recruitment, recruitment advertising, employment, placement, layoff or
termination, promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay or other forms of
compensation, and use of facilities.
      (3)   (a)   The city will not contract with other agencies, banks,
businesses, vendors, and the like, who practice or establish a pattern of
discrimination based on sex, color, race, religion, age, national origin,
political affiliation, or belief.
         (b)   The city will incorporate into any contract for construction
work, or modification thereof, subject to the relevant rules, regulations, and
orders of the Secretary of Labor or of any prior authority that remains in
effect, which is paid in whole or in part with the aid of such financial
assistance, the following “Equal Opportunity Clause”:
“a.   The contractor will not discriminate against any employee or applicant
for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, disability or national
origin. The contractor will take affirmative action to ensure that applicants
are employed, and the employees are treated during employment, without regard
to their race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or disability. Such
action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment,
upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment or recruitment advertising; layoff
or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for
training, including apprenticeship. The contractor agrees to post in
conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment,
notices setting forth the provisions of the nondiscrimination clause.
b.   The contractor will, in all solicitations or advertisement for employees
placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all qualified applicants
will receive consideration for employment without regard to race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, or disability.
c.   In the event of the contractor’s noncompliance with the Equal Opportunity
Clause or with any of the said rules, regulations, and orders, this contract
may be canceled, terminated, or suspended in whole or in part and the
contractor may be declared ineligible for further government contracts or
federally assisted construction contracts.
d.   The contractor will conclude the provisions of this Equal Opportunity
Clause in every subcontract or purchase order, unless exempted by the rules,
regulations, or orders of the Secretary of Labor so that such provisions will
be binding upon each such subcontractor or vendor.”
      (4)   The city assures that it will actively provide nondiscriminatory
outreach, selection, and service to all individuals.
      (5)   Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for all job
categories so that minority employment in all categories of the work force will
represent a proportionate share of minority populations in the city, as well as
surrounding areas.
      (6)   The city will provide accommodations to the best of its ability for
employees with disabilities, contingent on budget and structural limitations.
      (7)   All city employees are expected to adhere to the above policy and
to work actively for its implementation both internally and in carrying out
city program activities.
      (8)   The city designates the Mayor and City Council to carry out the
EEO/AA plan.
(Ord. 5, passed 8-20-2018)
CHAPTER 32: GENERAL CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   National Incident Management System adoption
   
32.02   Capitalization thresholds for capital assets
   
32.03   Multi-hazard mitigation plan adopted
   
32.04   Policy prohibiting sexual harassment
Blood-Borne Pathogen Exposure Control Plan
   
32.15   Purpose
   
32.16   Policy
   
32.17   Definitions
   
32.18   Departmental responsibilities
   
32.19   Procedures
   
32.20   Transport and custody
   
32.21   Disinfection and decontamination
   
32.22   Exposure incidents and follow-up
   
32.23   Interaction with health care professionals
   
32.24   Hepatitis B vaccination (HBV)
   
32.25   Records
Cross-reference:
   Franchises and Agreements, see
TSO Table III
   Investment policy, see §§
33.30 through
33.46
   Locally Imposed and Administered Taxes, see §§
33.01 through
33.19
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ADOPTION.
   It shall be the public policy of the city to adopt the NIMS concept of
emergency planning and unified command. It shall further be the policy of the
city to train public officials responsible for emergency management.
(Res. passed 10-11-2005)
§ 32.02 CAPITALIZATION THRESHOLDS FOR CAPITAL ASSETS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish capitalization
thresholds for capital assets; to establish responsibility for tracking
controllable items that fall below the capitalization threshold; and, to
provide guidance for future issuance of capital assets policies and procedures.
   (B)   Background. The term capital assets is used to describe assets that
are used in operations and that have initial lives extending beyond a single
reporting period. Capital assets may be either intangible (e.g., easements,
water rights) or tangible (e.g., land, buildings, building improvements,
vehicles, machinery, equipment and infrastructure). It is incumbent upon
public-sector managers to maintain adequate control over all of a government's
resources, including capital assets, to minimize the risk of loss or misuse. As
a practical application of the materiality principle, not all tangible capital-
type items with useful lives extending beyond a single reporting period are
required to be reported in a government's statement of position. Items with
extremely short useful lives (e.g., less than two years) or of small monetary
value are properly reported as an “expense” or “expenditure” in the period in
which they are acquired. When outlays for capital-type items are, in fact,
reported on the statement of position, they are said to be capitalized. The
monetary criterion used to determine whether a given capital asset should be
reported on the balance sheet is known as the capitalization threshold. A
government may establish a single capitalization threshold for all of its
capital assets, or it may establish different capitalization thresholds for
different classes of capital assets. Capitalization is, of its nature,
primarily a financial reporting issue. That is, a government's principal
concern in establishing specific capitalization thresholds ought to be the
anticipated information needs of the users of the government's external
financial reports. While it is essential to maintain control over all
potentially capitalizable items, there exist much more efficient means than
capitalization for accomplishing this objective in the case of a government's
smaller tangible capital type items. Furthermore, practice has demonstrated
that capital asset management systems that attempt to incorporate data on
numerous smaller items are often costly and difficult to maintain and operate.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BUILDINGS. A capital asset class that includes all buildings that are
owned by the city. Components of a building, not normally replaced, are
considered part of the building. This class also includes building improvements
such as subsequent additions of a new wing or extension, and also structural
renovations and improvements.
      CAPITAL ASSET. Tangible or intangible assets that meet all three of the
following: (1) it must have an initial useful like that extends beyond a single
reporting period, i.e., one year; (2) it must be used in the operations of the
entity, (3) it must not be specifically excluded by policy, e.g.,
capitalization threshold.
      CAPITALIZATION THRESHOLD. The dollar value at which a government elects
to capitalize its capital assets for financial reporting.
      CAPITALIZE. To report capital outlays as capital assets in the statement
of net assets or balance sheets.
      CONTROLLABLE ITEMS. Items that may require tracking due to one or more of
the following: (1) ensure legal compliance, (2) to protect public safety and
avoid potential liability, e.g. weapons; or (3) to reduce risk of loss.
      FAIR (MARKET) VALUE. Estimated dollar amount at which an asset may
exchange between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither being under
compulsion, each having reasonable knowledge of all relevant facts, and with
equity to both. “Estimated fair value” at acquisition may be obtained from
manufacturers' catalogs or price quotes in periodicals, from objective
appraisals, or similar sources. Estimated fair values is used in valuing
donations.
      HISTORICAL COST. The original cost of an asset at the time of acquisition
including all ancillary charges (e.g., freight, installation, site preparation,
etc.) to bring the capital asset to its intended location and to get it ready
for its intended use.
      IMPROVEMENTS OTHER THAN BUILDINGS. The capital asset class that includes
depreciable improvements to land other than those related to site preparation
or conversion to a public road. This also includes “infrastructure”-type assets
owned by enterprise funds (e.g. retaining walls, etc.)
      INFRASTRUCTURE. Capital assets that are stationary or immovable in nature
and that
have useful lives that can be preserved over a longer period than most capital
assets.
      LAND and LAND RIGHTS. The capital asset class which includes all land and
rights to land acquired by the city of its own use. Land can be acquired as fee
simple or land rights may be purchased without the transfer of title. The
latter may include regular easements, road right-of-way, conservation
easements, development rights, etc.
      MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT. The class of capital assets which generally
includes all movable personal property but also includes plant and other fixed
equipment.
      SYSTEM SOFTWARE. Includes purchased special application software. This
does not include general software applications that are needed for basic
computer applications or performing routine office tasks, the cost of which are
normally bundled with the hardware cost or expensed.
   (D)   Policies.
      (1)   (a)   Capitalization thresholds for applicable capital asset
classes are established as follows:
            1.   Machinery and equipment:         $ 2,500.
            2.   System software:            $ 2,500.
            3.   Buildings and building improvements:   $ 2,500.
            4.   Improvements other than buildings:      $ 2,500.
         (b)   The threshold amounts are to be applied to the historical cost
of capital assets at the time of acquisition. Acquisition includes direct
purchase, construction, donation or contribution, capital lease, or any other
means by which rights or title to property transfer to the city. Land and
governmental infrastructure are not subject to capitalization thresholds.
      (2)   The capitalization thresholds are generally applied to individual
items (per unit basis) and not to the total cost of grouped or combined
acquisitions.
      (3)   The change in capitalization threshold shall be applied to the
cities existing capital assets inventory retrospectively. All capital assets
having cost or assigned values that fall below the corresponding thresholds
shall be removed from the capital asset inventory and the general ledger. All
“controllable” equipment that falls below the threshold shall be moved to a
non-capital inventory for alternative tracking.
      (4)   Adequate controls must still be maintained for non-capitalized but
“controllable” items of personal property.
   (E)   Effective date. The effective date for capitalization thresholds for
capital assets is 7-21-2014.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 32.03 MULTI-HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN ADOPTED.
   The city adopts the Edgar County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan.
(Res. 1, passed 8-4-2014)
§ 32.04 POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   The policy prohibiting sexual harassment is hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 6, Series 2017, passed 12-18-2017)
BLOOD-BORNE PATHOGEN EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN
§ 32.15 PURPOSE.
   Police personnel must constantly be aware of the personal hazards presented
by contagious diseases. This policy is developed for the express purpose of
providing personnel with the maximum protection and guidance possible in order
to eliminate or minimize the employee’s risk of exposure. This policy will also
cover the steps to be taken after an exposure when there was contamination to
personnel by body fluids of another person.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.16 POLICY.
   It shall be the policy of the City Police Department to comply with OSHA
Blood-Borne Pathogens Standard, 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1030, as adopted by the State
Department of Labor. It is the responsibility of the Department to ensure that
its members are able to perform their duties in a safe and effective manner.
The City Police Department will provide employees with up-to-date safety
procedures and communicable disease information that will assist in minimizing
potential exposure, while increasing their understanding of the nature and
potential risks of communicable diseases.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOOD. Human blood, human blood components and products made from human
blood.
   BLOOD-BORNE PATHOGENS. Pathogenic microorganisms present in human blood that
can cause disease in humans. These pathogens include, but are not limited to,
Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).
   CONTAMINATED. Presence of reasonably anticipated presence of blood or other
potentially infectious materials.
   CONTAMINATED LAUNDRY. Laundry soiled with blood or other potentially
infectious materials or that may contain sharps.
   DECONTAMINATION. Using physical and/or chemical means to remove, inactivate
or destroy blood-borne pathogens on a surface or items to the point where they
are no longer capable of transmitting infectious particles and the surface or
item is rendered safe for handling, use or disposal.
   ENGINEERING CONTROLS. Controls (e.g., sharps disposal containers, self-
sheathing needles) that isolate or remove the blood-borne pathogen hazard from
the work place.
   EXPOSURE INCIDENT. A specific eye, mouth, other mucous membrane, non-intact
skin or parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials
that results from an employee’s duties.
   HAND-WASHING FACILITIES. A facility providing an adequate supply of running
potable water, soap and single use towels or hot air drying machines.
   HIV. Human Immunodeficiency Virus.
   OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE. Reasonably anticipated skin, eye, mucous membrane or
parenteral contact with blood or other potentially infectious materials that
may result from the performance of an employee’s duties.
   OTHER POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIAL (OPIM).
      (1)   Semen, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluid,
pleural fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva and
any body fluid contaminated with blood; all body fluids in situations where it
is difficult or impossible to differentiate between body fluids;
      (2)   Any unfixed tissue or organ (other than intact skin) from a human
(living or dead); and
      (3)   HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, organ cultures and HIV- or
HBV-containing culture medium or other solutions, and blood, organs or other
tissues from experimental animals infected with HIV or HBV.
   PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE). Specialized clothing or equipment such
as rubber gloves or goggles worn by an employee for protection against a
hazard. General work clothes (e.g., uniforms, pants, shirts or blouses) not
intended to function as protection against a hazard are not considered to be
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT.
   REGULATED WASTE. Liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious
materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items that are caked
with dried blood or other potentially infectious materials and are capable of
releasing these materials during handling; contaminated sharps, and
pathological and microbiological wastes containing blood or other potentially
infectious materials.
   STERILIZE. The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
   UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS. The approach to infection control that treats all
human blood and certain human body fluids as if known to be infectious for HIV,
HBV and other blood-borne pathogens.
   WORK PRACTICE CONTROLS. Controls that reduce the likelihood of exposure by
altering the manner in which a task if performed (e.g., prohibiting recapping
of needles by a two-handed technique).
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.18 DEPARTMENTAL RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Department will annually, through approved courses, provide blood-
borne pathogen training.
   (B)   The Department will annually review precautions, controls, equipment
and training. Revisions will be made when deemed appropriate.
   (C)   The Department will provide personal protective equipment (PPE) to the
employee, by maintaining an adequate amount of communicable disease control
supplies in all Departmental vehicles.
   (D)   The Department will coordinate and administer the Hepatitis B
immunization program and maintain an accurate, confidential record for each
employee with occupational exposure.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.19 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   In order to minimize potential exposure to communicable diseases,
officers should assume that all persons are potential earners of a communicable
disease. All contaminated material will be considered infectious despite the
perceived status of the source individual.
   (B)   Protective gloves shall be worn when handling any person, clothing or
equipment with body fluids on them. All used protective gloves will be disposed
of in the proper manner.
   (C)   Plastic mouthpieces or other authorized barrier devices shall be used
whenever an officer performs CPR or mouth-to-mouth resuscitation.
   (D)   After the proper removal of protective equipment, personnel will
immediately wash hands and any other potentially contaminated skin areas with
hot running water and antiseptic soap. In the field, officers will use an
antiseptic hand cleaner issued for this purpose. When antiseptic hand cleaners
are used, hands will be thoroughly washed with soap and water as soon as
possible.
   (E)   All sharp instruments such as knives, scalpels and needles shall be
handled with extraordinary care, and should be considered contaminated items.
      (1)   Officers shall not place their hands in areas where sharp
instruments might be hidden.
      (2)   Needles shall not be recapped, bent, broken, removed from a
disposable syringe or otherwise manipulated by hand.
      (3)   Needles shall be placed in a puncture-resistant container when
being collected for evidentiary or disposal purposes.
   (F)   Officers shall not eat, drink, smoke, apply cosmetics (including lip
balm) or handle contact lenses in areas where there is risk of exposure to body
fluids.
   (G)   Any evidence contaminated with body fluids will be double-bagged in
plastic bags, and marked to identify potential or known communicable disease
contamination.
   (H)   Officers shall bandage all open wounds while at work. Change bandages
that become wet or soiled. This will help prevent an infectious disease being
transferred by an infected person’s blood or body fluids contacting an open
wound.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.20 TRANSPORT AND CUSTODY.
   (A)   Where appropriate protective equipment is available, no officer shall
refuse to arrest or otherwise physically handle any person who may have a
communicable disease.
   (B)   Individuals with body fluids on their persons may be required to wear
suitable protective covering if he or she is bleeding or otherwise emitting
body fluids.
   (C)   Officers have an obligation to notify relevant support personnel
during a transfer of custody when the suspect has body fluids on his or her
person, or has stated that he or she has a communicable disease.
   (D)   Suspects taken into custody with body fluids on their person shall be
directly placed in the designated holding area for processing. The holding area
shall be posted with an “Isolated Area-Do Not Enter” sign.
   (E)   Officers shall document on the appropriate arrest or incident form
when a suspect taken into custody has body fluids on his or her person or has
stated that he or she has a communicable disease.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.21 DISINFECTION AND DECONTAMINATION.
   (A)   Laundry.
      (1)   Contaminated laundry shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Officer uniforms and clothing items worn on duty, including
undergarments, socks, shoes and outerwear, whether supplied by the Department
or personally owned, which have been exposed to blood or other potentially
infectious material while an officer was performing his or her official duties;
and
         (b)   All non-disposable blankets and wiping cloths of a non-
disposable nature, used in the Police Department regardless of whether the
aforementioned items were exposed to blood or other potentially infectious
material or not.
      (2)   Contaminated laundry shall be contained in the location where used,
and handled as little as possible, and bagged or containerized at the location
where it was used. Containers and bags used for storing contaminated laundry
shall be constructed of materials which prevent soaking through or leakage of
fluids to the exterior.
      (3)   Any officer handling contaminated laundry shall wear disposable
protective gloves.
      (4)   In the case of an officer’s uniform or clothing items being exposed
to blood or other potentially infectious materials, the officer shall change
clothes at the police facility as soon as possible after the exposure, and bag
the items with a biohazard label.
      (5)   In no case shall an officer launder any contaminated clothing
items, including uniform items, at his or her home.
      (6)   All contaminated laundry items shall be replaced or cleaned and
decontaminated at Department-approved cleaners. Replacement or decontamination
will be at the Department’s expense.
   (B)   Vehicles.
      (1)   A supervisor shall be notified and the vehicle shall be cleaned
with a prescribed disinfectant immediately.
      (2)   Service personnel shall remove any excess body fluids from the
vehicle with an absorbent cloth, paying special attention to any cracks,
crevices or seams that may be holding excess fluid.
      (3)   The affected area should be disinfected using hot water and
detergent/alcohol or detergent/bleach solution and allowed to air dry.
      (4)   All police vehicles taken to a service center for scheduled washing
and maintenance will be routinely cleaned in the interior with an approved
disinfectant.
   (C)   Non-disposable equipment.
      (1)   Any excess of body fluids should first be wiped up with approved
disposable absorbent material.
      (2)   A freshly prepared solution of one part bleach to nine parts water
should be used to clean the equipment.
   (D)   Supplies.
      (1)   Superiors are responsible for continuously maintaining and storing,
in a convenient location, an adequate amount of communicable disease control
supplies for all officers.
      (2)   Supervisors are responsible for dissemination of supplies for
infectious disease control. Protective gloves, other first aid supplies and
disinfecting materials will be made readily available at all times.
      (3)   All Departmental vehicles shall be continuously stocked with the
following:
         (a)   Disposable gloves;
         (b)   Puncture resistant containers and sealable plastic bags;
         (c)   Barrier resuscitation equipment, goggles and masks;
         (d)   Liquid antiseptic cleaner;
         (e)   Disposable towelettes (70% isopropyl alcohol);
         (f)   Water-proof bandages;
         (g)   Absorbent cleaning materials; and
         (h)   Police barricade tape.
      (4)   Officers using supplies stored in police vehicles are responsible
for their immediate replacement.
      (5)   Officers are required to keep disposable gloves in their possession
while on duty.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.22 EXPOSURE INCIDENTS AND FOLLOW-UP.
   (A)   When an exposure incident occurs in the line of duty, the officer
involved will immediately notify the Chief of Police to make a report of the
incident.
   (B)   The route(s) of exposure and circumstances of the incident will be
documented by the Chief of Police or by his or her designee.
   (C)   Immediately after exposure, the officer shall be transported to the
appropriate health care facility for clinical and serological testing for
evidence of infection.
   (D)   The source individual will be transported to the appropriate medical
facility for blood sampling and testing. Per 410 ILCS 305/7(c), “Written
informed consent is not required for a health care provider or health facility
to perform a test when a law enforcement officer is involved in the line of
duty in a direct skin or mucous membrane contact with the blood or bodily
fluids of an individual which is of a nature that may transmit HIV as
determined by a physician in his medical judgment”.
   (E)   The source individual will be tested for HIV and hepatitis. Treatment
will be based on the result of these tests.
   (F)   If the source individual is not immediately available, an assumption
will be made that the individual was infected.
   (G)   If the exposure is the result of a needle stick or other instance
where there is no source individual, the instrument of contamination will be
taken to the health care facility for evaluation.
   (H)   Results of the testing shall be made available to the exposed officer.
   (I)   The exposure incident will be reported to the City Clerk so that a
worker’s compensation case number can be obtained, and to ensure that the
proper paperwork is completed.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.23 INTERACTION WITH HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS.
   (A)   A written opinion will be obtained by the City Clerk from the health
care professional who evaluates an officer when the officer is sent to a health
care professional following an exposure incident.
   (B)   Health care professionals shall be instructed to limit their opinions
advising:
      (1)   If the Hepatitis B vaccine is indicated and if the officer has
received the vaccine;
      (2)   If the officer has been informed of the results of the evaluation;
and
      (3)   If the officer has been told about any medical conditions resulting
from the exposure to blood or other potentially infectious materials. The
written opinion to the employer is not to reference any personal medical
information.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.24 HEPATITIS B VACCINATION (HBV).
   (A)   All officers will be offered the Hepatitis B vaccine at no cost to the
officer. The vaccine will be offered within ten working days of the officer’s
initial assignment, unless the officer has previously received the vaccine or
provides proof of immunity.
   (B)   Officers declining the vaccine will sign the Hepatitis B vaccine
declination form.
   (C)   Any officer initially declined the HBV series may, at a later date,
request and receive the HBV at no cost to the officer.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
§ 32.25 RECORDS.
   (A)   The City Police Department will maintain records of persons trained,
the dates of the training sessions, the contents of the sessions, the names and
qualifications of persons conducting the training and the names and job titles
of persons attending the training. These records will be retained as part of
the officer’s permanent training record.
   (B)   The City Clerk will maintain a record for each officer with an
occupational exposure. Each individual employee record will consist of the
employee’s Hepatitis B vaccination status and the pertinent documentation from
each reported exposure incident.
   (C)   All medical records will be kept confidential, and will not be
disclosed without the employee’s express written consent, except as may be
required by law.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2009)
CHAPTER 33: REVENUE AND TAXATION
Section
Locally Imposed and Administered Taxes
   
33.01   Title
   
33.02   Scope
   
33.03   Definitions
   
33.04   Notices
   
33.05   Late payment
   
33.06   Payment
   
33.07   Certain credits and refunds
   
33.08   Audit procedures
   
33.09   Appeal
   
33.10   Hearing
   
33.11   Interest and penalties
   
33.12   Abatement
   
33.13   Installment contracts
   
33.14   Statute of limitations
   
33.15   Voluntary disclosure
   
33.16   Publication of tax ordinances
   
33.17   Internal review procedure
   
33.18   Application
   
33.19   Effective date
Investment Policy
   
33.30   Policy
   
33.31   Scope
   
33.32   Prudence
   
33.33   Objective
   
33.34   Delegation of authority
   
33.35   Ethics and conflicts of interest
   
33.36   Authorized financial dealers and institutions
   
33.37   Authorized and suitable investments
   
33.38   Collateralization
   
33.39   Safekeeping and custody
   
33.40   Diversification
   
33.41   Maximum maturities
   
33.42   Internal control
   
33.43   Performance standards
   
33.44   Reporting
   
33.45   Marking to market
   
33.46   Investment policy adoption
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAXES
§ 33.01 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance”.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.02 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the city’s procedures in
connection with all of the city’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq.
   CITY. The City of Chrisman, Illinois.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The city’s Mayor and City Council.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The city’s Mayor is charged with the administration
and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff
employees or agents, to the extent they are authorized by the local Tax
Administrator to act in the local Tax Administrator’s stead. The local Tax
Administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
subchapter to give effect to this subchapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local Tax Administrator shall not be inconsistent with this subchapter and
the Act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the city
that is collected or administered by the city not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
Property Tax Code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
city.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.04 NOTICES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given,
the notice is to be in writing, mailed not less than seven calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of
the local Tax Administrator.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local Tax Administrator as follows:
      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons’ last known addresses; or
      (2)   Personal service or delivery.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.05 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
city pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   (A)   Physically received by the city on or before the due date; or
   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the city, with adequate postage prepaid.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.06 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (A)   First, to the tax due for the applicable period;
   (B)   Second, to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (C)   Third, to the penalty for the applicable period.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.07 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four or less years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error
was made. The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the city.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local Tax Administrator in writing
claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however,
that, there shall be no refund and only credit given in the event the taxpayer
owes any monies to the city.
      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local Tax Administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local Tax Administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the local Tax Administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate as specified per annum, based on a year
of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to
the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.08 AUDIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any request for a proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered
tax shall comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (C)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (D)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days, nor more than
30 days, from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event the
taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that
is convenient to the taxpayer and the local Tax Administrator.
   (E)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
   (F)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the Tax Administrator’s determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
   (G)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
city’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (H)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.09 APPEAL.
   (A)   The local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local Tax Administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the assessment;
      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local Tax Administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.10 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under §
33.09 of this chapter, the local Tax Administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted, except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing, the local Tax Administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local Tax Administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.11 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment or non-payment of the tax to be 9% per
annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.12 ABATEMENT.
   The local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.13 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local Tax Administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14-day period or fails to demonstrate good
faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local Administrator,
the installment contract shall be canceled without further notice to the
taxpayer.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.14 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The city, through the local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
   (B)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (C)   If any tax return is not filed or if, during any four-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the city,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
   (D)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.15 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the
local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing
of the application, but not more than four years before the date of filing the
application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not
be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period before the
date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly determined
and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the underpaid
tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the local Tax
Administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be
paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local Tax
Administrator, whichever is longer.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.16 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk’s office.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.17 INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the
lien shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the local Tax Administrator
shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the city’s expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.18 APPLICATION.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to
supplement all of the city’s tax ordinances.
   (B)   To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict with or
inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be controlling.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
§ 33.19 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect after passage, approval
and publication as required by law.
(Ord. 9, Series 2000-2001, passed 1-22-2001)
INVESTMENT POLICY
§ 33.30 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a manner which will
provide the highest investment return with the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the city and conforming to all state and local
statutes governing the investment of public funds.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.31 SCOPE.
   This policy includes all funds governed by City Council.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.32 PRUDENCE.
   (A)   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances
then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence
exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for
investment, considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the
probable income to be derived.
   (B)   The standard of prudence to be used by investment officials shall be
the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the context of managing
an overall portfolio.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.33 OBJECTIVE.
   (A)   The primary objective, in order of priority, shall be:
      (1)   Legality: conformance with federal, state and other legal
requirements;
      (2)   Safety: preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal;
      (3)   Liquidity: maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements; and
      (4)   Yield: attainment of market rates of return.
   (B)   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the entity’s needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.34 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the City Treasurer who, under the delegation of the City
Council, shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment
program.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.35 ETHICS AND CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.36 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions
authorized to provide investment services.
   (B)   In addition, a list will also be maintained of approved security
brokers/dealers selected by credit worthiness.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.37 AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.
   (A)   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in state
statutes regarding the investment of public funds.
   (B)   Investments shall be made that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund
type being invested.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.38 COLLATERALIZATION.
   Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit and the like)
in excess of FDIC limits must be secured by some form of collateral, witnessed
by a written agreement and held at an independent third-party institution in
the name of the municipality.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.39 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the city, shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment (DVP)
basis. Securities will be held by an independent third-party custodian
designated by the City Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a
written custodial agreement.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.40 DIVERSIFICATION.
   The entity shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based
on the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in and length of maturity.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.41 MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   (A)   To the extent possible, the city shall attempt to match its
investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a
specific cash flow, the city will not directly invest in securities maturing
more than 18 months from the date of purchase.
   (B)   Reserve funds may be invested in securities exceeding 18 months if the
maturity of such investments are made to coincide as nearly as practicable with
the expected use of the funds.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.42 INTERNAL CONTROL.
   (A)   The City Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the entity are
protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be
designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met.
   (B)   The internal controls shall address the following points:
      (1)   Control of collusion;
      (2)   Separation of transaction authority from accounting;
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping; and
      (4)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.43 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   This investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the parameters
specified within this policy. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate of
return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates. Portfolio
performance should be compared to benchmarks with similar maturity, liquidity
and credit quality as the portfolio.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.44 REPORTING.
   The City Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The
report should be provided to the City Council and available on request. The
report should be in a format suitable for review by the general public. An
annual report should also be provided to the City Council.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.45 MARKING TO MARKET.
   A statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the City
Council at least quarterly.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
§ 33.46 INVESTMENT POLICY ADOPTION.
   The investment policy shall be adopted by the City Council. The policy shall
be reviewed on an annual basis by the City Treasurer and any modifications made
thereto must be approved by the City Council.
(Res. 3, passed 12-27-1999)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   WATER WELL SETBACKS
      
53.   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
      
54.   SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL UTILITY PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Electricity aggregation program plan
   
50.02   General water and sewer guidelines
   
50.03   Security deposits for water and sanitary sewer users who are non-owners
of property in the city
§ 50.01 ELECTRICITY AGGREGATION PROGRAM PLAN.
   (A)   The city’s Electricity Aggregation Program Plan of Operation and
Governance, in substantially the form of the copy of said Plan attached to the
resolution codified herein and hereby incorporated by reference, be and the
same is hereby authorized and approved.
   (B)   The city’s electricity aggregation program shall be operated and
governed in accordance with the Electricity Aggregation Program Plan of
Operation and Governance, the applicable provisions of 20 ILCS 3855/1-1 et seq.
(the Illinois Power Agency Act), and any applicable rules and regulations that
are now or in the future adopted pursuant to the Act.
(Res. 2, passed 4-22-2013)
§ 50.02 GENERAL WATER AND SEWER GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Reading of meters. On or about the twenty-fifth of the month, meters
will be read and given to the office to key in. At this time, if any account
indicates that there is exceptional high usage, the Water Department will re-
check the reading.
   (B)   Billing. Water bills will be mailed to the customers the first of each
month.
   (C)   Penalty. Past due is after 3:30 p.m. the bill is due (fifteenth). If
you are paying after 3:30 p.m. on the due date (fifteenth), you will be charged
the penalty amount. This is the account of a bill plus a 10% late fee.
   (D)   Shut offs. On the twenty-sixth, all paid accounts will be posted and a
delinquent list of all customers will be given to water supervisor for shut off
of water and sewer service.
   (E)   Non-payment fee. A flat rate of $20 will be charged for re-connection
after delinquent water bill payment.
   (F)   Bad checks. Bad checks will result in an automatic shut off service
and a $50 NSF fee and a $20 re-connection fee will be charged.
   (G)   Tampering. No water from the city water supply shall be turned on for
service on any premises by any person, but the Superintendent of Water or some
person authorized by him or her to perform this service. A fine will be charged
along with a $20 re-connection fee.
   (H)   Rental property and buying on contract. 
      (1)   Renters and customers buying on contract will be required to have a
service deposit of $80 in full so that water bill will be placed in their name.
When the officer has knowledge of renters moving out of the property, owners of
the property will be contacted to determine if water is to be left on or turned
off. The owners of any property will be responsible for any bill that is not
paid by renters or customers buying on contract after application of the
service deposit on the bill.
      (2)   Deposits will be refunded when a customer moves and a final bill is
paid. Transfers of deposits can only be done if the final bill at the previous
address is paid in full. If a renter or customer buying on contract moves out
of a property and there is a balance owed after application of the deposit,
that balance must be paid before any customer, whether renter or buying on
contract, can receive water service at any location. That customer, in addition
to paying the outstanding bill, will be required to pay an $80 deposit again to
have the bill placed in his, her or their name.
   (I)   Leaks. All adjustments will be approved by Council.
      (1)   Leaks or frozen pipes may qualify for an adjustment under these
conditions.
      (2)   No adjustment will be made if the leak or frozen pipe is inside
house or under foundation.
      (3)   Adjustments are made if leak is in the customers yard in the ground
between the water meter and the foundation of the house. The average usage for
the household the past six months will be used to make adjustments.
      (4)   Customers will only have one adjustment a year.
      (5)   Leaks not going into the sewer line inside house or under
foundation may qualify for a sewer adjustment. The average usage for the past
six months will be charged.
   (J)   Meter hook-up. The following fees shall apply and be paid for each
connection to a water main for the city water works:
      (1)   $750 for a five-eighths inch meter in the city limits;
      (2)   $950 for a five-eighths inch meter outside the city limits; and
      (3)   Any meter in excess of five-eighths inch shall be $750 or $950,
plus cost of meter.
      (4)   Service pipe installations. If the water service must cross a city
or state road or alley that requires boring and casing, the cost of that boring
and casing shall be borne by the applicant for the service or the owner of the
property being served.
   (K)   Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect from
and after its passage and approval.
   (L)   Disconnection for nonpayment.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill; and
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, service
will be discontinued for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer's complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
(Ord. 10, Series 2009-2010, passed 3-22-2010; Ord. 5, Series 2010-2011, passed
2-14-2011; Ord. passed 8-17-2015; Ord. -, Series 2017-2018, passed 3-20-2017;
Ord. 3, Series 2018, passed 5-7-2018; Ord. 50, Series .02, passed 2-1-2021;
Ord. passed 7-11-2022; Ord., passed 5-5-2025)
§ 50.03 SECURITY DEPOSITS FOR WATER AND SANITARY SEWER USERS WHO ARE NON-OWNERS
OF PROPERTY IN THE CITY.
   (A)   Turning on. No water from the city water supply shall be turned on for
service into any premises by any person, but the Superintendent of Water or
some person authorized by him or her to perform this service.
   (B)   Application. Application to have water turned on shall be made in
writing to the City Clerk, and shall contain an agreement by the applicant to
abide by and accept all of the provisions of this section as conditions
governing the use of the city water supply to the applicant.
   (C)   Deposit. A deposit of $80 for resident users who do not own their home
and who reside in the city; for commercial users who do not own their place of
business in the city; for resident users who are purchasing their home in the
city on contract; for commercial users who are purchasing their place of
business in the city on contract; deposits shall be made with each application,
this sum to be retained by the city to ensure payment of all bills. When
service to the applicant is discontinued permanently, this deposit, less any
amount still due the city for water service, shall be refunded without
interest. When any purchaser of a residence or commercial building on contract
shall record his, her or their deed to such residence or building, this deposit
shall be refunded without interest. Any applicant for water service, who is the
owner of the premises to be served, shall not be required to make any deposit.
   (D)   Re-connection fee. In the event a re-connection of the water supply is
necessitated due to a reinstatement of a previous delinquent account, a fee of
$20 shall be charged to the applicant for the service of re-connecting the
water supply.
   (E)   Effective date. The effective date of this section shall be 7-1-1991.
(Ord. 2, Series 1991-1992, passed 6-24-1991; Ord. passed 8-17-2015)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
   
51.01   Maintenance fee
   
51.02   Water rates
   
51.03   Accepting responsibility for water quality management
§ 51.01 MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   There shall be a $20 water maintenance fee added to each monthly bill
for each water meter in the city.
   (B)   Said maintenance fee shall be commenced on 5-1-2013.
(Ord. 9, Series 2013, passed 5-1-2013; Ord., passed 4-7-2025)
§ 51.02 WATER RATES.
   (A)   Rates. The following shall be the rates of charge of water from the
city water supply system.
      (1)   The basis user rate of $6.02 per 1,000 gallons shall be applied to
all users for water consumption in excess of 1,000 gallons per month. A minimum
charge of $6.02 per month shall be applied to all users whose water consumption
does not exceed 1,000 gallons per month.
      (2)   Service outside city limits. Customers who are outside city limits
shall have the same rates as customers who are in city limits.
   (B)   Effective dates. Rates and service charges shall be effective as of 1-
1-2020, and on the bills to be rendered for the month being 1-2-2020.
   (C)   Increases. The stated charges for water rates shall be automatically
adjusted upon review and approval of the City Council at the beginning of the
calendar year to partially compensate for the effect of economic inflation on
operations, in the amount of 5%. The City Clerk is hereby empowered and
directed to determine the amount of the increase and to thereafter, effective
for the billing period next following the effective date of changes or rates,
charge the adjusted rates to all users of the water system of the city.
   (D)   Penalty fee. A penalty of 10% will be added to any bill not paid by 3:
30 p.m. on the fifteenth of the month.
(Ord. 6, Series 2011-2012, passed 9-12-2011; Ord. 10, Series 2019, passed 12-
16-2019; Ord. 51, Series 2, passed 11-1-2021; Ord., passed 1-6-2025)
§ 51.03 ACCEPTING RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT.
   The city hereby agrees to accept its responsibilities as a designated
management agency under the Water Quality Management Plan for the state as
these responsibilities (as modified), which is attached to the resolution
codified herein and made a part of this section. This acceptance of management
responsibilities is made in recognition of the fact that water quality
management planning will continue at the local level. This acceptance shall be
subject to withdrawal or modification if the city finds on the basis of such
planning that the commitments made by this resolution are no longer technically
or financially feasible or if amendments to the 203 Plan make such commitments
no longer necessary. This acceptance shall remain in force unless and until
withdrawn or modified by the city.
(Res. passed 4-9-1979)
CHAPTER 52: WATER WELL SETBACKS
Section
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Definitions
   
52.03   Prohibitions
   
52.04   Waivers, exceptions and certifications of minimal hazard
   
52.05   Exclusion
   
52.06   Topographic map displaying well locations
   
52.07   Aerial photographic map showing setback zones
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by 65 ILCS 5/11-125-4 (1992), 415 ILCS
5/14.2 and 5/14.3 (1992); and in the interest of securing the public health,
safety and welfare; to preserve the quality and quantity of groundwater
resources in order to assure a safe and adequate water supply for present and
future generations; and to preserve groundwater resources currently in use and
those aquifers having a potential for future use as a public water supply, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply to all properties located within the
minimum setback zone established under § 14.2 of the Environmental Protection
Act (“Act”) (415 ILCS 5/14.2 (1992)) and this chapter, and the maximum setback
zone established under § 14.3 of the Act (415 ILCS 5/14.3 (1992)) and this
chapter.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-23-1995)
§ 52.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as stated in this chapter and unless a different meaning of a word or
term is clear from the context, the definition of words or terms in this
chapter shall be the same as those used in the Act and the State Groundwater
Protection Act (415 ILCS 55/1 (1992)).
   ACT. The Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/1 (1992)).
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   BOARD. The Illinois Pollution Control Board.
   MAXIMUM SETBACK ZONE. The area around a community water supply well
established under § 14.3 of the Act and this chapter.
   MINIMUM SETBACK ZONE. The area around a community water supply well
established under § 14.2 of the Act and this chapter.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-23-1995)
§ 52.03 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §§
52.04 or
52.05 of this chapter, no person shall place a new potential primary source,
new potential secondary source or new potential route within the minimum
setback zone.
   (B)   Except as provided otherwise in §
52.04 of this chapter, no person shall place a new potential primary source
within the maximum setback zone.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-23-1995) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.04 WAIVERS, EXCEPTIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS OF MINIMAL HAZARD.
   (A)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(b) of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source, new potential secondary source or new potential route is
granted a waiver by the Agency, such owner shall be deemed to have a waiver to
the same extent from §
52.03(A) of this chapter.
   (B)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(c) of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source (other than landfilling or land treating), new potential
secondary source, or new potential route is granted an exception by the Board,
such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the same extent from §
52.03(A) of this chapter.
   (C)   If, pursuant to § 14.2(c) of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source (other than landfilling or land treating) is granted an
exception by the Board, such owner shall be deemed to have an exception to the
same extent from §
52.03(B) of this chapter.
   (D)   If, pursuant to § 14.5 of the Act, the owner of a new potential
primary source, new potential secondary source or new potential route is issued
a certificate of minimal hazard by the Agency, such owner shall not be subject
to §
52.03(A) of this chapter to the same extent that such owner is not subject to §
14.2(d) of the Act.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-23-1995)
§ 52.05 EXCLUSION.
   Section
52.03(A) of this chapter shall not apply to new common sources of sanitary
pollution as specified pursuant to § 17 of the Act and the regulations adopted
thereunder by the Agency; however, no such common sources may be located within
the applicable minimum distance from a community water supply well specified by
such regulations.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-23-1995)
§ 52.06 TOPOGRAPHIC MAP DISPLAYING WELL LOCATIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/80b83199f00a317f5647944ae35ba4faa252112b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-76.jpg]
 
(Ord. 5, passed 1-23-1995)
§ 52.07 AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHIC MAP SHOWING SETBACK ZONES.
   The aerial photographic map is adopted by reference and made a part hereof
as if appearing in total. A copy of this map is on file in the city office.
(Ord. 5, passed 1-23-1995)
CHAPTER 53: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
Section
   
53.01   Compliance with State Plumbing Code
   
53.02   Connection to public water supply
   
53.03   Surveys and investigations
   
53.04   Inspector’s right of entry
   
53.05   Discontinuance of water service
   
53.06   Consumer’s responsibility
   
53.07   Effective date
§ 53.01 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If, in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgement of the
Superintendent of Water, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary
for the safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent of Water
will give notice to the water customer to install such an approved device
immediately.
   (B)   The water customer shall, at his or her own expense, install such an
approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the Illinois
Plumbing Code, State Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable local
regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
upon installation and as required by the Illinois Plumbing Code, State
Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations.
(Ord. 4, Series 1989-90, passed 3-14-1990) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.02 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY.
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Superintendent of Water and the State Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 4, Series 1989-90, passed 3-14-1990) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.03 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Water to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of commercial, industrial and other properties served
by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to
the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years,
or as often as the Superintendent of Water shall deem necessary. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at
least five years.
(Ord. 4, Series 1989-90, passed 3-14-1990)
§ 53.04 INSPECTOR’S RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the right
to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply or distribution system of the city’s public water supply
for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and
that the Water Superintendent or his or her authorized agent shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the city’s public water
supply for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross-connection control inspection. On demand, the
owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
Superintendent of Water any information which he or she may request regarding
the piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent
of Water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 4, Series 1989-90, passed 3-14-1990)
§ 53.05 DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE.
   The Superintendent of Water of the city’s public water supply is hereby
authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant
thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation
of the provisions of this chapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service
to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been
eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and
until a re-connection fee of $20 is paid to the city. Immediate disconnection
with verbal notice can be effected when the Superintendent of Water is assured
that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system
exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of
disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be
effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the
public water supply; provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the
Superintendent of Water or the State Environmental Protection Agency, such
action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of
the public water supply. Neither the Public Water Supply, the Superintendent of
Water or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury,
damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer’s
water supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not said
termination was with or without notice.
(Ord. 4, Series 1989-90, passed 3-14-1990; Ord. passed 8-17-2015)
§ 53.06 CONSUMER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The consumer is responsible for backsiphoned or back-pressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.
(Ord. 4, Series 1989-90, passed 3-14-1990)
§ 53.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after 4-9-1990.
(Ord. 4, Series 1989-90, passed 3-14-1990)
CHAPTER 54: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
54.01   Use of public sewers required
   
54.02   Private sewage disposal
   
54.03   Building sewers and connections
   
54.04   Use regulations
   
54.05   Protection of sewage works from damage
   
54.06   Inspectors; powers and authority
   
54.07   Definitions
   
54.08   Applications for sewer permits
   
54.09   Connection of house sewers with storm or sanitary sewers
Wastewater Service Charges
   
54.20   Basis for wastewater service charges
   
54.21   Measurement of flow
   
54.22   Basic user rate
   
54.23   Surcharge rate
   
54.24   Computations
   
54.25   Inspections and connections
   
54.26   Maintenance fee
Billing and Payment
   
54.40   Bills
   
54.41   Delinquent bills
   
54.42   Lien; notice of delinquency
   
54.43   Foreclosure on lien
   
54.44   Revenues
   
54.45   Accounts
   
54.46   Notice of rates
   
54.47   Access to records
 
   
54.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.01 USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
city or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located
or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby
required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein,
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in
accordance with official notice to do so; provided that, said public sewer is
within 100 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.
(Ord. 5, Series 198-1982, passed 8-24-1981) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.02 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
§
54.01(D) of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city. The
application for such a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city
(reference § 54.08 of this chapter), which the applicant shall supplement by
any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
city. A permit and inspection fee of $10 shall be paid to the city at the time
the application is filed.
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city.
They shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in
any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is
ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of written notice
by the city.
   (D)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of 225 ILCS 225/1 et seq., the
State Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and with the State Environmental
Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than 7,000 square feet (650.3 square meters). No septic tank or
cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
54.01(D) of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer
in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in an sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the city.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Commissioner of
Public Health.
   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system
shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. 5, Series 198-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.03 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful, except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards.
   (C)   (1)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential and commercial service; and
         (b)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
      (2)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city (reference §
54.08 of this chapter). The permit application shall be supplemented by any
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgement of the city. A permit and inspection fee of $750 for each tap for a
residential or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at
the time the application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit
authorization, must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity.
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (E)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss of damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by
the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except that, where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the city, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   (H)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
city. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois shall
apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with division (B) above and discharged to the building
sewer.
   (J)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in
the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city
before installation.
   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the city or its
representative.
   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Street, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
(Ord. 5, Series 198-1982, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 54, Series 3, passed 11-1-
2021)  Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.04 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the city. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process
waters may be discharged on approval of the city, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; and
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, mild containers and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No industrial user may discharge sewage into any public sewer until
the city has adopted an industrial cost recovery system which:
      (1)   Meets the requirements of 33 U.S.C. § 1284(b)(1)(B) § 204(b)(1)(B)
of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendment of 1972) and applicable
federal regulations; and
      (2)   Has been approved by the Agency in accordance with the conditions
of any grant made to the city by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or by the state for the construction of any part of the sewer system or
sewage treatment works of the city.
   (E)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the city, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream;
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by
regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150°F (0°
and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject at the review and
approval of the city;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city for
such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time, except as permitted by the city in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time, except as
permitted by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal
regulations;
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
“slugs”, as defined herein.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (F)   (1)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in division (E) above, and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in Ch. 1, EPA Rules and
Regulations, Subch. D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment Standards,
Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, 11-8-1973 and any amendments
thereto, and which in the judgement of the city may have a deleterious effect
upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city
may:
         (a)   Reject the wastes;
         (b)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         (c)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         (d)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the
provisions of division (K) below.
      (2)   If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (G)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients; except that, such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (H)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (I)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the city, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or her so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (J)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, test and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the city or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory
analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the city, but
no less than once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the
federal, state and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the city at such times and
in such manner as prescribed by the city. The owner shall bear the expense of
all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the city. At such times as
deemed necessary, the city reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   (K)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular
analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of
a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.)
   (L)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with §
54.01 of this chapter, by the industrial concern; provided, such payments are
in accordance with federal and state guidelines for user charge system and
industrial cost recovery system.
(Ord. 5, Series 198-1982, passed 8-24-1981) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.05 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 5, Series 198-1982, passed 8-24-1981) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.06 INSPECTORS; POWERS AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   (1)   The city and duly authorized employees of the city, the State
Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all
properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The city or its representative shall have no authority to inquire
into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic,
paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway of facilities for waste
treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the city or duly authorized employees of the city, the
State Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by
the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage
to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out
of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in
§
54.04(I) of this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   The city and duly authorized employees of the city bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within said easement.
      (2)   All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be
done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 5, Series 198-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.07 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Mayor and City Council of the City of Chrisman.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standards laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CITY. The City of Chrisman, Illinois.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, stormwater, surface and groundwater drainage.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the city representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of (loan, bond and the like) outstanding
and shall be computed as outlined in §
54.40(A) of this chapter.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the State Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA. Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of
1972 (Pub. Law No. 92-500) and (Pub. Law No. 93-243).
   FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. Government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Subchapter II Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works, of the Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1281 et seq.) and
implementing regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of product.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
      (1)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste;
      (3)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under § 307(a) of the Federal Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a)); or
      (4)   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissible.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by
the Administrator or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of
the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the
discharge of pollutants pursuant to § 402 of the Federal Act (33 U.S.C. §
1342).
   ORDINANCE or CHAPTER. This chapter, based on Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982.
   PERSON. Any and all person, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.20 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids.
   ppm. Parts per million by weight.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city sanitary (or
combined sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with city funds. It shall also include that portion of the service sewer that
lies within the street right-of-way or other city owned property.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term “operation and maintenance” includes
REPLACEMENT.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. Used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   STATE ACT. The State Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
   STATE GRANT. The state participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by the State Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for
making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the state.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage,
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of the precipitation that is drained into the
sewers.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in §
54.40(A) of this chapter.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
lavatory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED SOLIDS
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated and shall be 30 years from the date of start-
up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a state grant.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance.
   USER CLASS.
      (1)   The type of user either “residential or commercial” (non-
industrial) or “industrial”, as defined herein.
         (a)   RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL OR NON-INDUSTRIAL USER. Any user of
the treatment works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an
industrial user as provided for in this section.
         (b)   INDUSTRIAL USER. Any non-governmental user of publicly owned
treatment works identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:
            1.   Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
            2.   Division B: Mining;
            3.   Division D: Manufacturing;
            4.   Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
            5.   Division I: Services.
      (2)   A USER in the Divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined
by the city that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outlined in §
54.41 of this chapter and shall consist of the total or the basic user charge,
the debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous
with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. Defined in the water pollution regulations of the
state.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 5, Series 198-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.08 APPLICATIONS FOR SEWER PERMITS.
   (A)   Residential or commercial building sewer.
 
To the City of Chrisman:
 
A.   THE UNDERSIGNED, being the  (owner, owner’s agent)  of property located at  (number) (street)  DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install and connect a building to serve the  (residence, commercial building, etc.)  at said location.
 
1. The following indicated fixtures will be connected to the proposed building sewer:
 
Number      Fixtures                     Number      Fixtures
                 Kitchen sinks                                   Water closets
                 Lavatories                                   Bath tubs
                 Laundry tubs                                   Showers
                 Urinals                                      Garbage grinders
Specify other fixtures                                                                                                                .
 
2. The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is                                                           .
3. The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the proposed work is                                                                                                                                                                      .
4. Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached hereunto as Exhibit “A”.
 
B.   In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
 
1. To accept and abide by all provisions of the City Code of the City of Chrisman, and of all other pertinent ordinances or regulations that may be adopted in the future.
2. To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the City.
3. To notify the City when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer, but before any portion of the work is covered.
 
DATE:                                                                       SIGNED:                                                                      
(Applicant)
 
                                                                                     
(Address of Applicant)
                                                                               
(Certification by City Treasurer)
 
$                     connection fee paid.
$                     inspection fee paid.
 
Application approved and permit issued:
DATE:                                                                         SIGNED:                                                                         
(Mayor)
 
   (B)   Private sewage disposal application.
 
To the City of Chrisman:
 
A.   THE UNDERSIGNED, being the  (owner, owner’s agent)  of the property located at  (number) (street)  DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install sanitary sewage disposal facilities to serve the  (residence, commercial building, etc.)  at said location.
 
1. The proposed facilities include                                                                                                       to be constructed in complete accordance with the plans and specifications attached hereunto as Exhibit”A”.
2. The area of the property is                     square feet (or                   square meters).
3. The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work is                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .
4. The maximum number of persons to be served by the proposed facilities is                                   .
5. The locations and nature of all sources of private or public water supply within the one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of any boundary of said property are shown on the plat attached hereunto as Exhibit “B”.
 
B. In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
1. To furnish any additional information relating to the proposed work that shall be requested by the City.
2. To accept and abide by all provisions of the City Code, of the City of Chrisman, and of all other pertinent ordinances or regulations that may be adopted in the
future.
3. To operate and maintain the wastewater disposal facilities covered by this application in a sanitary manner at all time, in compliance with all requirements of the
City, and at no expense to the City.
4. To notify the City at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of the work proposed, and again at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the covering of any
underground portions of the installation.
 
 
DATE:                                                                       SIGNED:                                                                      
(Applicant)
 
                                                                                     
(Address of Applicant)
                                                                               
(Certification by City Treasurer)
 
$                     inspection fee paid.
 
Application approved and permit issued:
 
DATE:                                                                         SIGNED:                                                                         
(Mayor)
 
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.09 CONNECTION OF HOUSE SEWERS WITH STORM OR SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   A building or house sewer is that part of the horizontal pipe which
begins outside of the wall of the building and connects the house drain with
the main public sewer, septic tank or other disposal terminal.
   (B)   The following specific requirements are hereby established.
      (1)   Rain water leaders, including roof leaders, surface drains or
ground water drains shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer except upon
approval by the Sewer Inspector.
      (2)   Each house sewer and drainage system shall be independent of that
of any other building, except as provided below: where one building stands in
the rear of another building located on an interior lot, the house sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one house sewer.
      (3)   Where a public sewer is accessible in a street or alley to a
building or premises abutting thereon the liquid wastes from any plumbing
system in said building shall discharge into the public sewer unless otherwise
authorized by the governing body.
      (4)   Before any connection is made to the public sewer, an approved
permit for such connection must be obtained from the governing body or its
designated representative. Each connection shall be made at the “Y” designated
for that property. The only exception shall be where the designator “Y” is not
located within three feet of the point of measurement furnished by the local
governing body. Any connection not made at the designated “Y” in the main sewer
shall be made under the direct supervision of the Sewer Inspector. A “Y” or “T”
fitting shall be installed near the building foundation to provide for cleaning
purposes.
   (C)   A Sewer Inspector shall be appointed pursuant to the laws of the city
and state and shall, under the direction of the governing elective officers of
the municipality, supervise all house sewer connections and excavations for the
purpose of installing or repairing the same.
   (D)   The following specifications shall be followed.
      (1)   No house sewer shall be less than four inches in diameter. No
building or house sewer for a commercial building or a multiple dwelling shall
be less than six inches in diameter.
      (2)   Unless otherwise authorized all house sewers shall have a grade of
not less than one-eighth inch per foot. A grade of one-fourth inch per foot
shall be used wherever practical.
      (3)   All excavations shall be open trench work unless otherwise
authorized by the Sewer Inspector. The foundation in the trench shall be formed
to prevent any subsequent settlement of the pipes. If the foundation is good,
firm, earth, the earth shall be pared or molded to give a full support to the
lower quadrant of each pipe. Bell holes shall be dug. Where the floor of the
trench is of hard or rocky material, the trench shall be excavated to four
inches below grade and brought back to the proper grade with fine gravel,
coarse sand or similar material so as to provide a firm foundation and uniform
support for the house sewer line. Backfilling shall be placed in layers and
solidly tamped or packed up to two feet above the pipe. Backfilling shall not
be done until final inspection is made by the Sewer Inspector.
      (4)   All old house sewers or portions thereof may be approved for use by
the Sewer Inspector. The Sewer Inspector may request that the old sewer be
excavated for the purpose of facilitating inspection. No old cesspool or septic
tank shall be connected to any portion of a house sewer that is also connected
to a public sewer, except when approved by the Sewer Inspector.
   (E)   Each and every part of the house sewer shall be inspected and approved
by the Sewer Inspector before being concealed or backfilled.
   (F)   The inspection and connection fees shall be as follows.
      (1)   The connection fee for strictly non-sanitary sewers shall be $50.
      (2)   The connection fee shall be $750 for strictly sanitary sewers.
      (3)   No person other than city employees shall be permitted to tap
sewers.
   (G)   This section shall be effective immediately upon passing.
(Ord. 7, Series 1969-70, passed 10-13-1969; Ord. passed 7-13-1987; Ord. passed
9-27-2004; Ord. 11, Series 2019, passed 12-16-2019; Ord., passed - -)
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 54.20 BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied
by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a basic user charge
for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt service charge and a
surcharge, if applicable.
   (B)   The monthly debt service charge shall be computed by dividing the
annual debt service of all outstanding bonds by 12 and further dividing by the
number of gallons billed for that month arriving at a charge per gallon billed.
   (C)   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following normal
concentrations:
      (1)   A five-day 20°C BOD of 240 mg/l; and
      (2)   A SS content of 240 mg/l.
   (D)   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs, plus replacement
and shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories;
      (2)   Proportion the estimated costs to the wastewater facility
categories by 40% of cost attributed to volume, 30% attributed to suspended
solids and 30% attributed to BOD;
      (3)   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be
treated;
      (4)   Proportion the estimated costs to non-industrial and industrial
users by volume, suspended solids and BOD;
      (5)   Compute costs per 1,000 gallons for normal sewage strength; and
      (6)   Compute surcharge costs per 1,000 gallons per mg/l in excess of
normal sewage strength for BOD and SS.
   (E)   A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the normal
concentrations for BOD (240 mg/l) and SS (240 mg/l). The surcharge will be
based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for all
wastes which exceed the 240 mg/l and 240 mg/l concentration for BOD and SS
respectively. Division (F) below specifies the procedure to compute a
surcharge.
   (F)   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed
annually by certified public accountants for the city in their annual audit
report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to reflect
a change in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance costs,
including replacement costs.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.21 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges and surcharges
shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even increments of
100 gallons.
   (A)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type
approved by the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
   (B)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
   (C)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is cancelled,
without the consent of the city.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.22 BASIC USER RATE.
   (A)   A basic user rate of $5.25 per 1,000 gallons shall be applied to all
users for sewer usage in excess of 1,000 per month. A minimum charge of $5.25
per month shall be applied to all users whose sewer usage does not exceed 1,000
gallons per month. All non-metered residential users of the wastewater
facilities shall pay a minimum flat rate charge per month adequate to cover the
costs of the minimum service charge and the basic user rate of $9.00. The flat
rate charge will allow a maximum of 4,500 gallons per month. In the event use
of the wastewater facilities is determined by the city to be in excess of 4,500
gallons per month, the city may require such flat rate user to install metering
devices on the water supply or sewer main to measure the amount of service
supplied.
   (B)   The rates and service changes established for user charges in § 54.20
(D) through (G) of this chapter shall be effective as of 9-12-2011 and on bills
to be rendered for the month being 11-1-2011.
   (C)   Sewer rates starting January, 2012, will see an increase of $0.25 per
1,000 gallons with similar increases in years 2013 and 2014. Minimum water and
sewer bills for in-town residents shall not exceed $10.25.
   (D)   Beginning January 1, 2022, a basic user rate of $5.25 per 1,000
gallons shall be applied to all metered users. Also beginning January 1, 2022,
a basic user rate of $24.00 shall be applied to all non-metered users. Non-
metered users using in excess of 4,500 gallons per month as determined by the
city shall install a metering device on the water or sewer main and become a
metered user.
   (E)   In addition to the basic user rate, beginning January 1, 2022, all
metered and non-metered users will be charged a flat capital improvements fee.
The capital improvements fee will increase by $5.00 per month starting January
1, 2022 until January 1, 2026 and remain at $25.00 per month thereafter. The
additional flat capital improvements fee will be charged according to the
following schedule:
 
Starting        Capital Improvements Fee
January 1, 2022 $5 per month
January 1, 2023 $10 per month
January 1, 2024 $15 per month
January 1, 2025 $20 per month
January 1, 2026 $25 per month
 
   Examples:
      In 2023, a metered user using 3,500 gallons per month will be charged
$5.25/1,000 gallons x 3,500 gallons + $10 = $28.38 per month.
      In 2024, a non-metered user will be charged $24 + $15 = $39 per month.
      In 2026, a metered user using 4,930 gallons per month will be charged
$5.25/1,000 gallons x 4,930 gallons + $25 = $50.88 per month.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981; Ord. 7, Series 2011-2012, passed
9-12-2011; Ord. 54, Series 3, passed 11-1-2021; Ord., passed - -)
§ 54.23 SURCHARGE RATE.
   The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as follows:
   (A)   BOD surcharge rate, per 100 gallons: $0.000108 per mg/l in excess of
240 mg/l; and
   (B)   SS surcharge rate, per 100 gallons: $0.000108 per mg/l in excess of
240 mg/l.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.24 COMPUTATIONS.
   (A)   Surcharge. The concentration of wastes used for computing surcharges
shall be established by waste sampling. Waste sampling shall be performed as
often as may be deemed necessary by the city and shall be binding as a basis
for surcharges.
   (B)   Computation of wastewater service charge. The wastewater service
charge shall be computed by the following formula:
CW = CM + (Vu-X)CU + CS
         Where
         CW = Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period.
         CM = Minimum Charge for Operation, Maintenance and Replacement.
         Vu = Wastewater Volume for the billing period.
         X = Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge.
         CU = Basic User Rate for Operation, Maintenance and Replacement.
         CS = Amount of Surcharge.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.25 INSPECTIONS AND CONNECTIONS.
   The inspection and connection fee for connecting to a strictly sanitary
sewer shall be $750.
(Ord. 9, Series 2009-2010, passed 3-22-2010; Ord., passed - -)
§ 54.26 MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   A $9 monthly fee for sewer maintenance shall be imposed and billed
with each monthly sewer bill statement.
   (B)   Said sewer maintenance fee shall commence on 6-1-2017.
(Ord. 9, Series 2013, passed 3-25-2013; Ord. -, Series 2017-2018, passed 5-15-
2017)
BILLING AND PAYMENT
§ 54.40 BILLS.
   (A)   Said rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly. The owner
of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the
service is furnished to the premised by the city only upon the condition that
the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and
severally liable therefor to the city.
   (B)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the City Treasurer on the
first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service is billed.
   (C)   All sewer bills are due and payable on the fifteenth of the month. A
penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by 3:30 p.m. on the
fifteenth of the month.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981; Ord., passed - -)
§ 54.41 DELINQUENT BILLS.
   If the charges for such services are not paid by 3:30 p.m. on the twenty-
fifth after the rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be
discontinued, subject to the disconnection procedures set forth in §
50.02(M).
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981; Ord., passed - -)
§ 54.42 LIEN; NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 17 days for
monthly service after it has been rendered, the City Treasurer shall file with
the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid
bill and a notice that the city claims a lien for this amount as well as for
all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
   (B)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and
the City Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of
the premises if his or her address be known to the Treasurer, whenever such
bill remains unpaid for the period of 45 days after it has been rendered.
   (C)   The failure of the City Treasurer to record such lien or to mail such
notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice, shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in division (B)
above.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.43 FORECLOSURE ON LIEN.
   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for non-payment
of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay the charges,
after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens.
Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the city. The City
Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such proceedings in the
name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any
property for which the bill has remained unpaid 45 days after it has been
rendered.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.44 REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the Sewerage Account of the Sewerage Fund. All
such revenues and moneys shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and apart
from his or her private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of
the city and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the City Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the
same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed
by the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the sewerage
system and all other funds and moneys incident to the operation of such system
as the same may be delivered to him or her, and deposit the same in the account
of the fund designated as the Sewerage Fund of the city. The Treasurer shall
administer the fund in every respect in the manner provided by the Municipal
Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.45 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system and,
at regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant
for the current fiscal year;
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed;
      (3)   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year;
      (4)   Number of users connected to the system;
      (5)   Number of non-metered users; and
      (6)   A list of users discharging non-domestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.46 NOTICE OF RATES.
   A copy of this subchapter, properly certified by the City Treasurer, shall
be filed in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewerage
system of said city on their properties.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.47 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The State Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the city which
are applicable to the city system of user charges or industrial cost recovery
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions
thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any state grant.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter,
except §
54.05 of this chapter, shall be served by the city with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The city may revoke
any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in division (A)(1) above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $25 for each
violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed
a separate offense.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city by reason of such violation.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of §§
54.40 through
54.47 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750,
for each offense.
(Ord. 5, Series 1981-1982, passed 8-24-1981)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
71.   PARKING RULES
      
72.   SNOWMOBILES
      
73.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
74.   GOLF CARTS, ALL-TERRAIN UTILITY VEHICLES AND ELECTRIC SCOOTERS
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Speeding; speed zones
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 SPEEDING; SPEED ZONES.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in the city on
SR 1 at a speed in excess of 35 mph, or 20 mph in a school zone.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle in the city on
any street other than SR 1 at a speed in excess of 25 mph, or 20 mph in a
school zone.
   (B)   Any and all police officers of the city are hereby authorized to use a
radar detecting device to determine the speed of any motor vehicle being driven
on the streets in the city.
   (C)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall post such speed zone signs as may be
necessary to give proper warning relative to speed regulations in the city.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall post such signs as may be necessary to
give proper warning that radar speed detecting devices are in operation in the
city.
(Ord. 6, Series 1968-1969, passed 1-13-1969) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of §
70.01 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $1, nor more than $750.
   (B)   For any violation of §
70.01 of this chapter, police officers, after making note of the license number
of the vehicle, may issue a traffic violation ticket notifying the offender to
appear in the proper court at the proper time.
(Ord. 6, Series 1968-1969, passed 1-13-1969)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING RULES
Section
   
71.01   Short title
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   Storing, parking or leaving motor vehicles prohibited; declared
nuisance; exceptions
   
71.04   Citations
   
71.05   Effective date
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Street Parking
Ordinance”.
(Ord. 4, Series 1992-1993, passed 10-13-1992; Ord. passed 7-6-2023)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   CITY. The City of Chrisman, Illinois.
   DIRECTOR OF TRAFFIC. The Chief of Police of the City of Chrisman.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but is not limited to, automobiles, buses,
motor bikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf
carts, campers and trailers.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not public property, as defined in this chapter.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street, highway or alley which shall include the entire
width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the
purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned
property or facility.
(Ord. 4, Series 1992-1993, passed 10-13-1992 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 71.03 STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED; DECLARED
NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS.
    (A)   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind whether attended or not, upon any
public street within the city which is designated as a “no parking” area .
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building
on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business
enterprise lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the
appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, or to any
motor vehicle with a city-issued permit.
(Ord. 4, Series 1992-1993, passed 10-13-1992 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 ) Penalty,
see §
71.99
§ 71.04 CITATIONS.
   Whenever it comes to the attention of the Director of Traffic that any
nuisance, as defined in §
71.03 of this chapter, exists in the city, a citation shall be served upon the
vehicle parked in a designated “no parking” zone.
(Ord. 4, Series 1992-1993, passed 10-13-1992 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 71.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication, as required by law.
(Ord. 4, Series 1992-1993, passed 10-13-1992 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $10, nor more than $750. Each act in violation of any of the
provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (B)   Vehicles illegally parked on any public street or alley are also
subject to tow and storage after a reasonable attempt has been made by the
Chief of Police or his designees to locate the registered owner and request the
immediate removal of the vehicle. Such tow and storage will be provided by a
local towing company at the vehicle’s registered owner’s expense. All
arrangements for settlement with the towing company for the cost of towing and
storage will be the registered owner’s responsibility.
(Ord. 4, Series 1992-1993, passed 10-13-1992; Ord. passed 7-6-2023)
CHAPTER 72: SNOWMOBILES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Definitions
   
72.02   Enforcement and inspection
   
72.03   Registration required
   
72.04   Equipment
Control and Usage
   
72.15   Operation on streets
   
72.16   Speed limits
   
72.17   Reckless driving
   
72.18   Racing
   
72.19   Driving on right side of the roadway
   
72.20   Limitations on overtaking on the left
   
72.21   Following too closely
   
72.22   Starting parked snowmobile
   
72.23   Signals
   
72.24   Right-of-way
   
72.25   Entering stop and yield intersections
   
72.26   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
72.27   Accidents
   
72.28   Persons under the influence of alcohol, narcotics
   
72.29   Obstructions
   
72.30   Operator’s licenses
   
72.31   Firearms
   
72.32   Operation on state highways
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICATION AND JURISDICTION. No portion of this chapter shall preclude the
state or its officers or agents from enforcing the State Snowmobile
Registration and Safety Act, 625 ILCS 40/1-1 et seq.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Any drug defined as a “depressant” or “stimulant substance”
in 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq., the State Controlled Substance Act, and “cannabis”
as defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., the Cannabis Control Act of the state.
   DEALER. A person, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of
manufacturing, selling or leasing snowmobiles at wholesale or retail.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between boundary lines of any highway, road,
street, avenue, alley or public driveway.
   INTOXICATING BEVERAGE. Any beverage enumerated in 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.,
the Liquor Control Act of the state.
   LOCAL AUTHORITY. The municipal board or body having authority to adopt local
police regulations under the Constitution and laws of the state.
   NARCOTIC DRUG. Any substance defined as a narcotic drug in the State
Controlled Substance Act.
   OPERATE. To ride in or on, other than as a passenger, use or control the
operation of a snowmobile in any manner, whether or not the snowmobile is
underway.
   OPERATOR. Every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile.
   OWNER. A person other than a lien holder having title to a snowmobile.
   PEACE OFFICER. Any person authorized under the statutes of the state to make
arrest for a violation of any statute or ordinance, whether it be a total
arrest power of all statutes or a portion of any statute.
   REGISTER. The act of assigning a registration number to a snowmobile by
state statute and by local ordinance.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway, improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY, as used in this
chapter, refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roads
collectively.
   SNOWMOBILE. A self-propelled device designed for travel on snow or ice or
natural terrain, steered by skis or runners and supported in part by skis,
belts or cleats.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979)
§ 72.02 ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   Enforcement. It is the duty of all Sheriffs, Deputy Sheriffs and other
police officers to arrest any person detected in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Inspection. Duly authorized police officers may stop and inspect any
snowmobile at any time for the purpose of determining if the provisions of this
chapter are being complied with. If the inspecting officer discovers any
violation of the provisions of this chapter, he or she may issue a summons to
the operator of such snowmobile requiring that the operator appear before the
Circuit Court for the county in which the offense was committed. Every
snowmobile subject to this chapter, if underway, and upon being hailed by a
designated law enforcement officer must stop immediately.
   (C)   Resistance to officers. It is unlawful for any person to resist or
obstruct any peace officer in a discharge of his or her duties under this
chapter.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided in 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., no person shall,
after the effective date of this chapter, operate any snowmobile within the
corporate limits unless such snowmobile has been registered and numbered in
accordance with the provisions of the State Snowmobile Registration and Safety
Act, and said numbers shall be properly displayed on each side of the cowling.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Headlamp. All snowmobiles in operation shall display at least one
lighted headlamp, white in color, having a minimum candle power of sufficient
intensity to exhibit a white light plainly visible from a distance of at least
500 feet ahead during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
   (B)   Taillights. All snowmobiles, while in operation, shall display at
least one red taillight having a minimum candle power of sufficient intensity
to exhibit a red light plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear
during hours of darkness under normal atmospheric conditions.
   (C)   Brakes. All snowmobiles shall have an operating brake system in good
mechanical condition.
   (D)   Mufflers. No snowmobile shall be sold or offered for sale or operated
unless it is equipped with a sound muffling device installed by the
manufacturer and under no circumstances shall this muffler device be modified
or removed by the owner or operator.
   (E)   Flag. All snowmobiles in operation shall display an orange or red flag
which extends a minimum of six feet above the top of the snowmobile.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
CONTROL AND USAGE
§ 72.15 OPERATION ON STREETS.
   Snowmobiles may be operated on any street within the city limits in
accordance with the terms of this chapter with the following exceptions.
   (A)   Snowmobiles may be operated on city streets only for the purpose of
leaving and entering the city or for visitation within. Recreational
snowmobiling within the city limits is not permitted.
   (B)   Snowmobiles shall not be operated on the streets in the business
district which surrounds the city park, or in either of the city parks.
   (C)   Snowmobiles shall not be operated on any state highway or
thoroughfare.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.16 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Unless some other speed restriction is established by the posting of
speed limit signs under the authority of the City Council, the maximum speed
limits within the corporate limits shall be the same for snowmobiles as it is
for automobiles.
   (B)   No person shall drive a snowmobile at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation of his or her snowmobile or in compliance
with the direction of a peace officer.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.17 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives any snowmobile with a willful or wanton disregard for
the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.18 RACING.
   No person shall engage in any race on any roadway within the corporate
limits. RACE means the act of two or more individuals competing or racing on
any street or highway, in a situation in which one of the snowmobiles is beside
or to the rear of a snowmobile operated by a competing driver and the one
driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from passing or overtaking him
or her, either by acceleration or maneuver or one or more individuals competing
in a race against time on any street or roadway in the city.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.19 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF THE ROADWAY.
   (A)   Snowmobiles shall be operated on all roadways as close to the right-
hand side of the roadway as possible.
   (B)   Snowmobiles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right and, upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the
main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.20 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   No snowmobiles shall be driven to left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.21 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   The operator of a snowmobile shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and condition of the highway.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.22 STARTING PARKED SNOWMOBILE.
   No operator shall start a snowmobile which is stopped, standing or parked
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.23 SIGNALS.
   (A)   Signals required. A signal of intention to turn right or left when
required must be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the snowmobile before turning within a business or residence
district.
   (B)   Signal by hand or arm or signal device. Any stop or turn signal when
required shall be given either by means of a hand and arm or by electric turn
signal device conforming to the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
   (C)   Method of giving hand and arm signals. All signals required by this
chapter shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following
manner:
      (1)   Left turn: hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn: hand and arm extended upward; and
      (3)   Stop or decrease of speed: hand and arm extended downward.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Any snowmobile approaching or entering an intersection from a
different roadway shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle on the opposite
roadway which is entering at approximately the same time. The driver of the
snowmobile must always yield the right-of-way to other motorized vehicles.
   (B)   The operator of a snowmobile intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close
as to constitute an immediate hazard, but said snowmobile operator having so
yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
   (C)   The operator of all snowmobiles shall yield the right-of-way, slowing
down or stopping if need be to so yield to a pedestrian crossing a roadway
within a crosswalk; but, in any case, every driver of a snowmobile shall
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated or
intoxicated person.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.25 ENTERING STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a peace officer or traffic-control
signal, every operator of a snowmobile approaching a stop intersection
indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none,
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none,
then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the operator has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the operator of the snowmobile shall yield
the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another
roadway or which is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when the operator is moving across or within
the intersection, but said operator having so yielded may proceed at such time
as a safe interval occurs.
   (B)   The operator of a snowmobile approaching a yield sign shall in
obedience to such signs slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing
conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the operator has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting
roadway. After slowing or stopping, the operator shall yield the right-of-way
to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely
as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such operator is moving
across or within the intersection. If a snowmobile is involved in a collision
at an intersection or interferes with the movement of other vehicles after
driving past the yield right-of-way sign, such collision or interference shall
be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver’s failure to yield right-of-way.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.26 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The operator of any snowmobile shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and it shall be unlawful for any snowmobile
operator to leave the roadway and travel across private property to avoid an
official traffic-control device.
   (B)   Snowmobile traffic facing a steady red signal at an automatic traffic-
control device must stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication
to proceed is indicated by a green traffic-control signal.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.27 ACCIDENTS.
   Operators of snowmobiles involved in any accident with another snowmobile or
any other motor vehicle or pedestrian shall make accident reports in accordance
with the provisions of the State Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, 625
ILCS 40/6-1. Snowmobiles are operated at the driver’s risk and, if involved in
an accident, the operator shall be considered guilty of contributory
negligence.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.28 PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, NARCOTICS.
   (A)   (1)   No person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor may
drive or be in actual physical control of any snowmobile within the city.
      (2)   Further, no person who is an habitual user of or under the
influence of any narcotic drug or who is under the influence of any other drug
to a degree which renders him or her incapable of safely driving a snowmobile
may drive or be in actual physical control of any snowmobile within the
corporate limits.
   (B)   No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor while operating a
snowmobile within the city and any alcoholic liquor transported in a snowmobile
shall be in its original package and with the seal unbroken.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.29 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   Obstruction of operator’s view or driving mechanism. No person shall
operate a snowmobile when it is so loaded with passengers as to obstruct the
operator’s view or his or her operation of the driving mechanism.
   (B)   Obstructing roadways. No operator shall willfully or unnecessarily
hinder, obstruct or delay, or attempt to delay, hinder or obstruct, any other
person unlawfully driving or traveling along or upon any roadway within the
corporate limits.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.30 OPERATOR’S LICENSES.
   No person shall operate a snowmobile within the city on any roadway unless
he or she is in possession of a valid operator’s license issued by the state or
are a resident of another state and possess a valid operator’s license from
that state.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.31 FIREARMS.
   No person, except persons permitted by law, shall operate or ride any
snowmobile with any firearm in his or her possession unless it is unloaded and
enclosed in a carrying case, or any bow unless it is in a carrying case.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.32 OPERATION ON STATE HIGHWAYS.
   No person may operate a snowmobile on any state highway within the limits of
the city, except to cross said state highway at a 90-degree angle, yielding to
all traffic and crossing only when it is safe to do so.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $1, nor more than $750, for each offense.
(Ord. 4, Series 1978-1979, passed 1-22-1979)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Prohibited parking
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING.
 
Street              Side(s) Location            Ord./Res. No.  Date Passed
Monroe Street       Both    From Maryland       Res. -         6-22-1983
                            Avenue to SR 1
                            From the south
Pennsylvania Street         corporate limits to Ord. 5, Series 1-22-2001
                            the north corporate 2000-2001
                            limits
 
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 74: GOLF CARTS, ALL-TERRAIN UTILITY VEHICLES AND ELECTRIC SCOOTERS
Section
   
74.01   Purpose and intent
   
74.02   Definitions
   
74.03   Requirements
   
74.04   Permits
   
74.05   Suspension or revocation
   
74.06   Rights and duties
 
   
74.99   Penalty
§ 74.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to protect, maintain, and enhance
health, safety and general welfare of citizens of the city. After consideration
of the volume, speed, and character of traffic on the city street, the City
Council has determined that golf carts, all-terrain utility vehicles and
electric scooters may safely travel on city streets.
   (B)   Therefore, the intent of this section is to regulate use of motorized
carts within the corporate limits of the city as authorized by 625 ILCS 5/11-
1428, operation of golf carts, all-terrain utility vehicles and electric
scooters on streets, roads and highways.
(Ord. 6, Series 2013-2014, passed 2-3-2014)
§ 74.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY STREETS. Any of the streets within the boundaries of the city except
for state and county roads.
   COUNTY ROADS. Include what is known as the “Ocean to Ocean Road.”
   GOLF CART, ALL-TERRAIN UTILITY VEHICLE and ELECTRIC SCOOTERS. Shall be not
capable of speeds exceeding 20 miles per hour. The definition of GOLF CART,
ALL-TERRAIN UTILITY VEHICLE and ELECTRIC SCOOTERS specifically excludes ATVs or
any vehicle that is not a golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric
scooters.
   STATE ROADS. Include Illinois State Route 1.
(Ord. 6, Series 2013-2014, passed 2-3-2014)
§ 74.03 REQUIREMENTS.
   All persons wishing to operate a golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and
electric scooters on the streets of the city must insure compliance with the
following requirements:
   (A)   Proof of liability insurance.
   (B)   Must display city decal front windshield right hand corner.
   (C)   Must be inspected by the City Police Chief or designated
representative.
   (D)   Must have a valid Illinois driver's license.
   (E)   Must be equipped with windshield, horn, brakes, turn signals, steering
wheel apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, an approved slow moving vehicle
emblem on the rear of the golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric
scooters, a headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the front, a tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100
feet from the rear, brake lights, turn signals and seatbelts. When operated on
a roadway, a golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric scooters shall
have its headlight and tail lamps lighted. (625 ILCS 5/11-1428)
   (F)   Must obey all traffic laws of State of Illinois and city.
   (G)   Side street use only.
   (H)   Must not exceed 20 mph.
   (I)   They shall not be operated in inclement weather or when visibility is
impaired by weather, smoke, fog or other conditions, or at anytime when there
is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at the
distance of 500 feet.
   (J)   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of a golf cart,
all-terrain utility vehicle and electric scooters on a roadway while under the
influence is subject to §§ 11-500 through 11-502 of the Illinois Compiled
Statutes (625 ILCS 6/11-500 through 11-502).
   (K)   Golf carts, all-terrain utility vehicles and electric scooters shall
not be operated on sidewalks or in city parks other than parking areas.
   (L)   Golf carts, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric scooters may not
be operated on streets and highways and roads under the jurisdiction of the
Illinois Department of Transportation (Illinois Route 1) or the county highway
department known as (“Ocean to Ocean”).
   (M)   Golf carts, all-terrain utility vehicles and electric scooters shall
follow the same guidelines for infant car seats that pertain to motor vehicles.
(Ord. 6, Series 2013-2014, passed 2-3-2014)
§ 74.04 PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart, all-terrain
utility vehicle and electric scooters without obtaining a permit from the City
Clerk or City Treasurer as provided herein. Permits shall be granted for a
period of one year from January 1 through December 31 and must be renewed
annually. The cost of a permit is $25. Insurance coverage is to be verified in
effect by the City Clerk or City Treasurer when renewing the permit.
      (2)   The cost of a permit is $25. Insurance coverage is to be verified
in effect by the City Clerk or City Treasurer when renewing the permit.
   (B)   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form applied by the
city and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Name of liability insurance carrier;
      (3)   The serial number, make, model and description of the golf cart,
all-terrain utility vehicle and electric scooters;
      (4)   Signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the city from and
all future claims resulting from the operation of their golf cart, all-terrain
utility vehicle and electric scooters on the city.
      (5)   Photo static copy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric
scooters to be operated on city streets.
      (6)   Such other information as the city may require.
   (C)   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric scooters
must be inspected by the City Chief of Police (or designee) to insure that the
vehicle is safe to operate on city streets and is in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The handicapped applicant is able to safely operate a motorized
golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric scooters on the roadways
designated.
      (3)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of Illinois Statutes regarding minimum liability insurance for
passenger motor vehicles to be operated on the roads of the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 6, Series 2013-2014, passed 2-3-2014) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.05 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or if there is evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate the
motorized golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric scooters on the
designated roadways.
(Ord. 6, Series 2013-2014, passed 2-3-2014)
§ 74.06 RIGHTS AND DUTIES.
   Every person operating a golf cart, all-terrain utility vehicle and electric
scooters pursuant to permit hereunder on designated city streets has all the
rights and duties applicable to a driver of any vehicle pursuant to the state
highway traffic laws and regulations except when those provisions cannot
reasonably be applied to motorized golf carts, all-terrain utility vehicles and
electric scooters.
(Ord. 6, Series 2013-2014, passed 2-3-2014)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violated any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty or a
petty misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $20 and not
more than $100. Any second or subsequent offense of any provision of this
chapter shall result in the revocation of the golf cart, all-terrain utility
vehicle and electric scooters license for a period of not less than three or
more than five years.
(Ord. 6, Series 2013-2014, passed 2-3-2014)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
92.   ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
      
93.   FAIR HOUSING
      
94.   LIBRARY
      
95.   PUBLIC NUISANCE; MOTOR VEHICLES
0CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Injury to property
   
90.03   Manner of keeping
   
90.04   Dogs and cats in public places
   
90.05   Barking dogs and crying cats
   
90.06   Cruelty to animals
   
90.07   Wild or vicious animals
   
90.08   Limitation on number of cats and dogs
   
90.09   Effective date
   
90.10   Dogs kept under restraint within city limits
   
90.11   Regulating fowl
   90.12   Livestock within city limits
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAT. Any feline, regardless of age or sex.
   DOG. Any canine, regardless of age or sex.
   SHADE. Protection from the direct rays of the sun during the months of June
through September.
   SHELTER. As it applies to dogs, a moisture-proof structure of suitable size
to accommodate the dog and allow retention of body heat, made of durable
material with a solid floor raised at least two inches from the ground and with
the entrance covered by a flexible, wind-proof material. Such structure shall
be provided with a sufficient quantity of suitable bedding to provide
insulation and protection against cold and dampness.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has previously attacked or bitten any
person or which has behaved in such a manner that a person who harbors said
animal knows or should reasonable know that the animal is possessed of
tendencies to attack or bite persons.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey or ape, raccoon, skunk, fox, snake or other
reptile, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other animal or any bird of
prey which can normally be found in a wild state.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 90.02 INJURY TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   Unlawful. It is unlawful for any person owning or possessing a dog or
cat to permit such dog or cat to go upon any sidewalk, parkway or private lands
or premises without the permission of the owner of such premises and break,
bruise, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant shrub, tree or
garden in any manner whatsoever, or to defecate thereon.
   (B)   Waste products accumulations. It is unlawful for any person to cause
or permit a dog or cat to be on property, public or private, not owned or
possessed by such person, unless such person has in his or her immediate
possession an appropriate device for scooping excrement and an appropriate
depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle located upon
property owned or possessed by such person. This section shall not apply to a
person who is visually or physically handicapped.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 MANNER OF KEEPING.
   (A)   Pens, yards or runs. All pens, yards or runs or other structures
wherein any animal is kept shall be of such construction so as to be easily
cleaned and kept in good repair.
   (B)   Fences. Fences which are intended as enclosures for any animal shall
be securely constructed, shall be adequate for the purpose, kept in good repair
and shall not be allowed to become unsightly.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 DOGS AND CATS IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No dog or cat shall be permitted in any cemetery or shall be allowed in any
park during functions.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 BARKING DOGS AND CRYING CATS.
   (A)   Harboring. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly keep of harbor
any dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps, or any cat which habitually
cries or howls to the great discomfort of the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, or in such manner as to materially disturb any persons in the
neighborhood who are of ordinary sensibilities. Such dogs and cats are hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   Petitions of complaint. Whenever any person shall complain to the
Police Department that a dog which habitually barks, howls or yelps or a cat
which habitually cries or howls is being kept by any person in the city, the
Police Department shall notify the owner or keeper of said dog or cat that a
complaint has been received and that such owner or keeper should take whatever
steps are necessary to alleviate the howling, yelping or crying.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   Cruelty to animals prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
willfully or maliciously inflict unnecessary or needless cruelty, torture,
abuse or to cruelly beat, strike or abuse any animal or, by any act, omission
or neglect, cause or inflict any unnecessary unjustifiable pain, sufferable,
injury or death to any animal, whether such animal belongs to such person or to
another; except that, reasonable force may be employed to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals.
   (B)   Food and shelter. It is unlawful for any person in charge of any
animal to fail, refuse or neglect to provide such animal to fail, refuse or
neglect to provide such animal with food, potable water, shade or shelter, or
to cruelly or unnecessarily expose any such animal to hot, stormy, cold or
inclement weather, or to carry any such animal in or upon any vehicle in a
cruel or inhumane manner.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept on his or
her premises any wild or vicious animal as described in this chapter for
display or for exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This
section shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions or circuses.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any wild
animal as a pet, unless a permit is granted by the Department of Natural
Resources of the state.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to harbor or keep a vicious animal
within the city. Any animal which is found off the premises of its owner may be
seized by any police officer or humane officer and, upon establishment to the
satisfaction of any court of competent jurisdiction of the vicious character of
said animal, it may be killed by a police officer or humane officer; provided,
however, that, this section shall not apply to animals under the control of a
law enforcement or military agency, nor to animals which are kept for the
protection of property; provided that, such animals are restrained by a leash
or chain, cage, fence or other adequate means from contact with the general
public or with persons who enter the premises with the actual or implied
permission of the owner or occupant.
   (D)   The licensing authority may issue a temporary permit for the keeping,
care and protection of any infant animal native to this area which has been
deemed to be homeless.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF CATS AND DOGS.
   (A)   Nuisance. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats in the
city for a considerable period of time detracts from and, in many instances, is
detrimental to the healthful and comfortable life for which such areas were
created. The keeping of an unlimited number of dogs and cats is, therefore,
declared to be a public nuisance. The terms “dog” and “cat” shall be construed
as provided in §
90.01 of this chapter.
   (B)   Limitation; exception.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person or persons to keep more than three
dogs and/or three cats within the city, with the exception that a litter of
pups, a litter of kittens or a portion of a litter may be kept for a period of
time not exceeding five months from birth.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment
wherein dogs or cats are kept for breeding, sale, sporting purposes or
boarding.
   (C)   Kennels. In the areas where kennels are permitted, no kennel shall be
located closer than 200 feet to the boundary of the nearest adjacent
residential lot.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 90.10 DOGS KEPT UNDER RESTRAINT WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   Each owner shall keep and maintain his or her dog under restraint;
provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any dog being used for
rescue or law enforcement work. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow his
or her dog to cross outside the property line of its owner to any extent,
including reaching through, over or under a fence, unless the dog is leashed or
caged and under the control of its owner or another responsible person.
   (B)   Violation of any provisions of this section shall be unlawful and
punished with a $25 fine for the first offense, a $50 fine for the second
offense and a $100 fine for the third offense. Any violations after the third
offense shall be punished in accordance with §
90.99 of
Chapter 90 of the City of Chrisman, Illinois Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 2, Series 2019, passed 2-4-2019)
§ 90.11 REGULATING FOWL.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, fowl shall be defined as a chicken,
hen, rooster, pigeon, duck, goose, guinea, turkey, peacock or water fowl.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep fowl within the city, except as provided
in this section.
   (C)   No more than six fowl may be kept at any residence within the city,
kept in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   The yard or the area in which fowl may be kept shall be fully enclosed
in such a manner as to prevent their escape.
   (E)   All enclosures shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner as
to be free of rodent infestations at all time.
   (F)   Every coop, shelter or yard in which fowl are kept shall be maintained
in a clean, dry and sanitary manner to prevent the accumulation of waste, the
emanation of noxious odors, or the presence of pests, rodents or other vermin.
Any dirt or refuse resulting from the fowl shall be disposed of in a clean and
sanitary fashion.
   (G)   All feed and other items that are associated with the keeping of fowl
that are likely to attract or become infested with rats, mice or other rodents
shall be protected in a container with a tightly fitted lid so as to prevent
rodents from access.
   (H)   No person shall allow fowl to produce noise loud enough to disturb the
peace of persons or reasonable sensitivity, and all such noise is hereby
declared a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to allow such a
nuisance to exist.
   (I)   Any person keeping fowl within the city as provided in this section
shall first obtain a permit to do so, on an application form provided by the
city, the fee of which shall be $10, and which shall be valid for a period of
one year (January 1 to December 31) and must be renewed annually at the
permitted address. Permit applications shall not be accepted until enclosure
has passed a final inspection by a City Official or City Police Officer. Each
permit shall include written permission for any City Official or City Police
Officer to access the yards of the residence for the purpose of verifying the
compliance with the provisions of this section from time to time. Fowl permits
are non-transferable. A person found to be keeping fowl without a fowl permit
will have seven days from notification to achieve compliance with these
standards resulting from inspection by City Official or City Police Officer.
   (J)   A permit holder found in violation of any of the provisions of this
section will have seven days from notification to achieve compliance with these
standards. If it is not achieved, the permit will be revoked. The owner may
reapply, subject to site inspection.
   (K)   Violation of any provisions of this section shall be unlawful and
punished with a $25 fine for the first offense, a $50 fine for the second
offense and a $100 fine for the third offense. Any violations after the third
offense shall be punished in accordance with § 90.99 of Chapter 90 of the City
of Chrisman, Illinois Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 1, Series 2019, passed 2-4-2019; Ord., passed 5-19-2025)
§ 90.12 LIVESTOCK WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, within annexed city limits
(city), any animal which is not a companion animal (i.e. dog/cat) and which
would typically only be found on a farm. This shall include but not limited to
swine, sheep, mules, donkeys, horses and cattle, as well as any other form of
bovine. This section does not however exclude the animal commonly known as
goats.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to keep goats within the city, except as provided
in this section.
      (1)   Any person may keep up to but not to exceed three goats at any
residence within the city, kept in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
      (2)   Any person keeping goats within the city as provided in this
section shall obtain a petition with signatures of all neighbors within a one
city block radius consenting to the keeping of goats at said property.
      (3)   Every shelter and yard in which goats are kept shall be maintained
in a clean, dry and sanitary manner to prevent the accumulation of waste, the
emanation of noxious odors, or the presence of pests, rodents or other vermin.
Any dirt or refuse resulting from the goats shall be disposed in a clean and
sanitary fashion.
      (4)   All feed and other items that are associated with the keeping of
goats that are likely to attract or become infested with rats, mice or other
rodents shall be protected in a container with a tightly fitted lid so as to
prevent rodents from access.
      (5)   Any person keeping goats within the city as provided in this
section shall first obtain a permit to do so, on an application form provided
by the city, the fee of which shall be $10 and which shall be valid for a
period of one year (January 1 to December 31) and must be renewed annually.
Permit applications shall not be accepted until enclosure has passed a final
inspection by a city official or City Police Officer. Each permit shall include
written permission for any city official or City Police Officer to access the
yards of the residence for the purpose of verifying the compliance with the
provisions of this section from time to time. Goat permits are non-
transferable. A person found to be keeping goats without a permit will have
seven days from notification to achieve compliance with these standards
resulting from inspection by city official or City Police Officer.
      (6)   At any time if the goats become a nuisance to the neighborhood and/
or neighbors (who previously signed consent) petition a complaint, said owner
must take whatever steps are necessary to alleviate the nuisance including
having to remove the goats from the city limits.
   (B)   Violation of any provisions of this section shall be unlawful and
punished in accordance with § 90.99 of Chapter 90 of the City of Chrisman,
Illinois Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 3, Series 2020, passed 7-6-2020; Ord., passed 5-19-2025)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Upon conviction for a violation of this chapter, the person so convicted
shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750, and shall be adjudged to
pay court costs.
(Ord. 11, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012)
CHAPTER 91: NUISANCES; HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Trash, Rubbish and Weed Control
   
91.01   Allowing to accumulate or remain on premises
   
91.02   Duty of owner, occupant or agent to clean premises
   
91.03   Weeds declared a nuisance; duty of owner of premises
   
91.04   Height of vegetation
   
91.05   Abatement at expense of owner of premises
   
91.06   Costs of cleaning and/or mowing
   
91.07   Effective date
Refuse and Burning
   
91.20   Combustible refuse not to constitute fire hazard; on public ways
   
91.21   Blocking or obstructing city walks, streets or alleys by trash barrels
   
91.22   Green vegetation not to be burned, not put on city ways
   
91.23   Hours of burning; smoke, fumes to constitute a nuisance
   
91.24   Effective date
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned, Wrecked Vehicles, see
Ch. 92
TRASH, RUBBISH AND WEED CONTROL
§ 91.01 ALLOWING TO ACCUMULATE OR REMAIN ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person owning, occupying or controlling any property within the
city shall allow any trash, refuse, debris or rubbish to accumulate or remain
on any private or public property within the city for a period of time in
excess of five days.
   (B)   The presence of such trash, refuse or rubbish is declared a public
nuisance which shall be abated in accord with this subchapter.
(Ord. 12, Series 2011-2012, passed 4-9-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 DUTY OF OWNER, OCCUPANT OR AGENT TO CLEAN PREMISES.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or agent to clean the same and
haul away all rubbish, filth, debris or other accumulation, at his or her
expense, and the Street Superintendent or any other officer of said city shall
notify such owner, occupant or agent to clean such property within five days
after service of such notice, then the said owner, occupant or agent shall be
deemed guilty of creating and maintaining a nuisance.
(Ord. 12, Series 2011-2012, passed 4-9-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE; DUTY OF OWNER OF PREMISES.
   Any weeds, such as jimsonweed weed, poison ivy, burdock, thistle, cocklebur,
wild lettuce any other weeds of a like kind, found growing in any lot or tract
of land or in any alley or on any boulevard in the city, are hereby declared to
be nuisance and it shall be unlawful to permit any such weeds to grow or remain
in any such places. Property owners and occupants thereof are hereby made
liable for the destruction of weeds growing on their own property and also
those found growing in the alleys and on the boulevards adjoining their
property.
(Ord. 12, Series 2011-2012, passed 4-9-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 HEIGHT OF VEGETATION.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any other uncultivated plants,
including hay crops, other than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental
plants, to grow to a height exceeding eight inches anywhere in the city; any
such plants exceeding this height limit are hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 12, Series 2011-2012, passed 4-9-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.05 ABATEMENT AT EXPENSE OF OWNER OF PREMISES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or agent to mow weeds and
vegetation at his or her own expense and the Street Superintendent or any other
officer of said city shall notify such owner, occupant or agent to mow such
property within five days after service of such notice.
   (B)   Any nuisance, as defined in this subchapter, may be abated by the
city, and the expense of abatement shall be charged to and paid by the owner or
occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists. The cost of such
abatement shall include an assessment of $50 for administrative costs.
(Ord. 12, Series 2011-2012, passed 4-9-2012) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 COSTS OF CLEANING AND/OR MOWING.
   Further, the owner shall be liable for costs of cleaning and/or mowing upon
the premises.
   (A)   Charges for abatement for a nuisance defined in this subchapter made
by the city shall be a lien upon the premises where such a nuisance is abated.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a bill for such charges remained unpaid for 60 days
after it has been rendered, the City Clerk may file with the Recorder of Deeds
of the county a statement of claim of lien.
      (2)   This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises,
the expenses and costs incurred and the date the weeds were cut and a notice
that the city claims a lien for this amount.
   (C)   Notice of the lien shall be mailed to the owner of the premises if his
or her address is known.
   (D)   Failure of the City Clerk to record a lien under this section or to
mail the prescribed notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice,
shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien of such charges as provided in
division (E) below.
   (E)   (1)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charged for nuisance
abatement shall be sold for non-payment of the charges and the proceeds of such
sale shall be applied to pay the charges after deducting the costs, as is the
case with the foreclosure of statutory liens.
      (2)   Such foreclosure proceedings shall be equity in the name of the
city.
(Ord. 12, Series 2011-2012, passed 4-9-2012)
§ 91.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 12, Series 2011-2012, passed 4-9-2012)
REFUSE AND BURNING
§ 91.20 COMBUSTIBLE REFUSE NOT TO CONSTITUTE FIRE HAZARD; ON PUBLIC WAYS.
   It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way
as to create a fire hazard or to store or throw away any refuse of any kind in
any alley, street or other public way in the city.
(Ord. 5(5), Series 1997-98, passed 9-8-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.21 BLOCKING OR OBSTRUCTING CITY WALKS, STREETS OR ALLEYS BY TRASH BARRELS.
   It shall be unlawful to block or obstruct city walks, streets or alleys by
trash barrels. All containers for refuse shall be located and maintained on
private property.
(Ord. 5(5), Series 1997-98, passed 9-8-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 GREEN VEGETATION NOT TO BE BURNED, NOT PUT ON CITY WAYS.
   No garbage, green leaves, green grass or other green vegetation shall be
burned at any time within the city. No green vegetation or mowing refuse shall
be deposited on city streets or alleys.
(Ord. 5(5), Series 1997-98, passed 9-8-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.23 HOURS OF BURNING; SMOKE, FUMES TO CONSTITUTE A NUISANCE.
   Combustible material may be burned only between dawn and 5:30 p.m. within
the city, provided that such burning shall not cause the emission of smoke or
fumes which are annoying or discomforting to the residents of the city or which
constitute a nuisance as defined by the laws of the state.
(Ord. 5(5), Series 1997-98, passed 9-8-1997) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.24 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 5(5), Series 1997-98, passed 9-8-1997)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
91.02 of this chapter, a person shall be fined the sum of $200 for the first
offense and $750 for consequent offenses and $25 each day thereafter.
      (2)   The said owner, occupant or agent, in regards to §
91.05 of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of creating and maintaining a
nuisance and, upon conviction, shall be fined any sum not exceeding $750.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
91.20 through
91.24 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50. Each act in violation of any
of the provisions of §§
91.20 through
91.24 of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 5(5), Series 1997-98, passed 9-8-1997; Ord. 12, Series 2011-2012, passed
4-9-2012)
CHAPTER 92: ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
Section
   
92.01   Short title
   
92.02   Definitions
   
92.03   Storing, parking or leaving dismantled or other such motor vehicles;
prohibition; nuisance; exceptions
   
92.04   Notice to remove
   
92.05   Responsibility for removal
   
92.06   Notice; procedure; content
   
92.07   Hearings; request; procedure
   
92.08   Removal of vehicle from property
   
92.09   Notice of removal
   
92.10   Disposition of vehicles
   
92.11   Reserved
   
92.12   Reserved
   
92.13   Reserved
   
92.14   Effective date
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Abandoned, Wrecked,
Dismantled or Inoperative Motor Vehicle Ordinance”.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 92.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   CITY. The City of Chrisman.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, as defined hereby, which does not
have lawfully affixed thereto either an unexpired license plate or plates, or
the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled,
inoperative, abandoned or discarded, or both conditions.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts,
campers and trailers.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the city which is privately owned
and which is not public property as defined in this section.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street or highway which shall include the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or
facility.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 92.03 STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING DISMANTLED OR OTHER SUCH MOTOR VEHICLES;
PROHIBITION; NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or
leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition
whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the city
for a period of time in excess of 72 hours. The presence of an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled
vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property is hereby declared a
public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
   (B)   Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property;
      (2)   Any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or
designed for operation on drag strips or raceways;
      (4)   Any vehicles maintained for demolition derby purposes under the
following circumstances:
         (a)   This exception shall only apply from May 1 for the respective
year through September 30 of that same year;
         (b)   There may only be two vehicles visible to the general public on
each property;
         (c)   The vehicles must be maintained on the driveway and not extend
over any sidewalk area and not to be maintained on the boulevard area of the
property;
         (d)   There are to be no parts or tires for the vehicles, or any other
vehicles, accumulating in the yard where these vehicles are maintained; and
         (e)   The property where the vehicles are maintained must be kept in
an orderly fashion without car parts, various car pieces, tools or equipment
visible to the public other than during use in active repair or maintenance.
   (5)   Any vehicles retained by the owner for antique collection purposes,
and registered with a currently valid antique plate.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997; Ord. 7, Series 2019, passed 10-7-
2019; Ord. passed 7-6-2023) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   Whenever it comes to the attention of the Chief of Police that any nuisance,
as defined in §
92.03 of this chapter, exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served
upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists; or, in case there is
no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his or her agent,
notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in
the time specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 92.05 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.
   Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the
private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be
responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the
city, the owner or occupant of the private property where same is located shall
be liable for the expenses incurred.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 92.06 NOTICE; PROCEDURE; CONTENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police of the city shall give notice of removal to the
owner or occupant of the private property where it is located, at least ten
days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when
a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on
which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail
to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or her last known
address.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time
specified in this section, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to
comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such
removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or occupant of
the property.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 92.07 HEARINGS; REQUEST; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized
agents, may file a written request for hearing before the City Council within
the ten-day period of compliance prescribed herein for the purpose of defending
the charges by the city.
   (B)   The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of
the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised
of the time and place of said hearing at least three days in advance thereof.
At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the notices have been
directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems
necessary.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 92.08 REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PROPERTY.
    If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the
ten-day period of compliance or, in the event that a notice requesting a
hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had and the existence of the violation is
affirmed by the Council of the city or its designee, the Chief of Police or his
or her designee shall have the right to have the vehicle removed from the
premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or
refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the
purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997 ; Ord. passed 7-6-2023 ) Penalty, see
§
92.99
§ 92.09 NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
    Within 48 hours of the removal of such vehicle, the Chief of Police shall
give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the
owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed,
that said vehicle, or vehicles, has been impounded and stored for violation of
this chapter. The notice shall give the name of the towing company that towed
and is storing the vehicle.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997;  Ord. passed 7-6-2023 )
§ 92.10 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES.
   Vehicles being removed under this chapter will be towed and stored by a
local towing company at the registered owner’s or property owner’s expense.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997; Ord. passed 7-6-2023)
§ 92.11 RESERVED.
§ 92.12 RESERVED.
§ 92.13 RESERVED.
§ 92.14 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in force effect from and after its passage, approval
and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $750. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 4, Series 1997-98, passed 8-11-1997)
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   Declaration of policy
   
93.02   Definitions
   
93.03   Unlawful practices
   
93.04   Exemptions
   
93.05   Procedure
   
93.06   Other remedies; complaints
   
93.07   Violations
   
93.08   Effective date
§ 93.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in the exercise of its
police power for the public safety, public health and general welfare, to
assure equal opportunity to all persons to live in decent housing facilities
regardless of race, color, religion, sex or national origin and, to that end,
to prohibit discrimination in housing by any persons.
(Ord. 4, Series 1980-1981, passed 8-25-1980)
§ 93.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATION or DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. Any difference in
treatment based upon race, color, religion, sex or national origin; or any act
that is unlawful under this chapter.
   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Includes any person, as defined herein, engaged in
the business of lending money or guaranteeing losses.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION or DWELLING. Any building, mobile home or trailer,
structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed, or intended for
occupancy, as a residence by one
or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for
the construction or location thereon of any such building, mobile home or
trailer, structure or portion thereof or any real property, as defined herein,
used or intended to be used for any of the purposes set forth in §
93.01 of this chapter.
   MORTGAGE BROKER. An individual who is engaged in or who performs the
business or services of a mortgage broker as the same are defined by state
statutes.
   OPEN MARKET. The market which is informed of the availability for sale,
purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, whether informed
through a real estate broker or by advertising by publication, signs or by any
other advertising methods directed to the public or any portion thereof,
indicating that the property is available for sale, purchase, rental or lease.
   OWNER. Includes a lessee, sublessee, co-tenant, assignee, managing agent or
other person having the right of ownership or possession, or the right to sell,
rent or lease any housing accommodation.
   PERSON. Includes individuals, children, firms, associations, joint
adventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates,
fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER or REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON. Includes any individual,
qualified by law, who, for a fee, commission, salary or for other valuable
consideration, or who with the intention or expectation of receiving or
collecting same, lists, sells, purchases, rents or leases any housing
accommodations, including options thereupon, or who negotiates or attempts to
negotiate such activities; or who advertises or holds himself or herself out as
engaged in such activities; or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan,
secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance, upon transfer of any housing
accommodation; or who is engaged in the business of charging an advance fee or
contracting for collection of a fee in connection with a contract, whereby he
or she undertakes to promote the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing
accommodation through its listing in the publication issued primarily for such
purpose; or an individual employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes buildings, structures, lands, tenements, leaseholds,
cooperatives and condominiums.
(Ord. 4, Series 1980-1981, passed 8-25-1980)
§ 93.03 UNLAWFUL PRACTICES.
   In connection with any of the transactions set forth in this section which
affect any housing accommodation on the open market, or in connection with any
public sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation, it shall
be unlawful within the city for a person, owner, financial institution, real
estate broker or real estate salesperson, or any representative of the above,
to:
   (A)   Refuse to sell, purchase, rent or lease, or deny to or withhold any
housing accommodation from a person because of his or her race, color,
religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or place of birth;
   (B)   To discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or
privileges of the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation,
or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith;
   (C)   To refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase,
rent or lease any housing accommodation from or to a person because of his or
her race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or place of birth;
   (D)   To refuse to negotiate for the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any
housing accommodation to a person because of his or her race, color, religion,
ancestry, national origin, sex or place of birth;
   (E)   To represent to a person that any housing accommodation is not
available for inspection, sale, purchase, rental or lease when in fact it is so
available, or to refuse to permit a person to inspect any housing
accommodation, because of his or her race, color, religion or national origin,
sex or place of birth;
   (F)   To make, publish, print, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made,
published, printed, circulated, posted or mailed, any notice, statement or
advertisement, or to announce a policy, or to sign or to use a form of
application for the sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing
accommodation, or to make a record of inquiry in connection with the
prospective sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing
accommodation, or to make a record of inquiry in connection with the
prospective sale, purchase, rental, lease or financing of any housing
accommodation, which indicates any discrimination or any intent to make a
discrimination;
   (G)   To offer, solicit, accept or use a listing of any housing
accommodation for sale, purchase, rental or lease with the understanding that a
person may be subjected to discrimination in connection with such sale,
purchase, rental or lease, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in
connection therewith;
   (H)   To induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or
indirectly, the sale, purchase, rental or lease, or the listing for any of the
above, of any housing accommodation by representing that the presence or
anticipates presence of persons of any particular race, color, religion, sex or
national origin or place of birth in the area to be affected by such sale,
purchase, rental or lease will or may result in either:
      (1)   The lowering of property values in the area;
      (2)   An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area; or
      (3)   A decline in the quality of schools serving the area.
   (I)   To make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale,
purchase, rental or lease, or the anticipated listing for any of the above, or
the sale, purchase, rental or lease of any housing accommodation in any area in
the city for the purpose of including or attempting to induce any such listing
or any of the above transactions;
   (J)   To engage in, or hire to be done, or to conspire with others to commit
acts or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause
panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear, with the purpose of either
discouraging or inducing or attempting to induce, the sale, purchase, rental or
lease, or the listing for any of the above, of any housing accommodation;
   (K)   To retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he
or she has opposed a practice declared unlawful by this chapter, or because he
or she has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner
in any investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this chapter;
   (L)   To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of
the practices prohibited by this chapter; or to obstruct or prevent any person
from complying with the provisions of this chapter; or any order issued
thereunder;
   (M)   By canvassing, to commit any unlawful practices prohibited by this
chapter;
   (N)   Otherwise to deny to, or withhold any housing accommodation from a
person because of his or her race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin,
sex or place of birth;
   (O)   For any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or
other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in
whole or in part, in the matter of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan
or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of
purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to
discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount, interest rate,
duration or other terms or conditions of such loans or other financial
assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex or national origin of
such person or of any person associated with him or her in connection with such
loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other
financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants
or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or
other financial assistance is to be made or given; and/or
   (P)   To deny any qualified person access to or membership or participation
in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers’ organization or other
service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her in other terms or
conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race,
color, religion, sex or national origin.
(Ord. 4, Series 1980-1981, passed 8-25-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   A religious organization, association or society or any non-profit
institution or organization operating, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association or society, which limits
the sale, rental or occupancy, of dwellings which it owns or operates for other
than commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or which gives
preference to such persons, unless membership in such a religion is restricted
on account of race, color, sex or national origin;
   (B)   A private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to
its primary purpose or purposes, provides lodgings which it owns or operates
for other than a commercial purpose, and which limits the rental or occupancy
of such lodgings to its members or gives preference to its members;
   (C)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner; provided that,
such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family
houses at any one time; provided further that, in the case of the sale of any
such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such
house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this division (C) shall
apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; provided
further that, such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest
in, nor is there owned or served on his or her behalf, under any express or
voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds
from the sale or rental of, more than three such single-family houses at any
one time; provided further, the sale or rental of any such single-family house
shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house is
sold or rented:
      (1)   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson,
or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent,
salesperson or person; and
      (2)   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any
advertisement or written notice in violation of the provisions of 42 U.S.C. §
3604(c) or of §
93.03 of this chapter; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
   (D)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his or her residence.
(Ord. 4, Series 1980-1981, passed 8-25-1980)
§ 93.05 PROCEDURE.
   Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this chapter may
file a complaint with the City Clerk within 30 days after the aggrieved person
becomes aware of the alleged unlawful practice and in no event more than 60
days after the alleged unlawful practice occurred. The City Clerk or his or her
duly appointed representative shall investigate each complaint and attempt to
resolve each complaint. Failure to achieve a resolution acceptable to both
parties and compliance with this chapter shall cause the City Clerk to forward
the complaint or her and his findings to appropriate state and federal
officials.
(Ord. 4, Series 1980-1981, passed 8-25-1980)
§ 93.06 OTHER REMEDIES; COMPLAINTS.
   Nothing herein contained shall prevent any person from exercising any right
or seeking any remedy to which he or she might be otherwise entitled or from
filing his or her complaint with any appropriate governmental agency.
(Ord. 4, Series 1980-1981, passed 8-25-1980)
§ 93.07 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided by law.
(Ord. 4, Series 1980-1981, passed 8-25-1980)
§ 93.08 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect on date of its passage.
(Ord. 4, Series 1980-1981, passed 8-25-1980)
CHAPTER 94: LIBRARY
Section
   
94.01   Establishment and maintenance
   
94.02   Annual tax levy
   
94.03   Compliance with state statutes
§ 94.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Council of the city establishes and maintains a public library and
reading room in said city.
(Ord. 3, Series 1956-1957, passed 3-25-1957)
§ 94.02 ANNUAL TAX LEVY.
   The Council of the city shall levy a tax of not to exceed 1.2 mils on the
dollar annually on all the taxable property in the city for library purposes.
(Ord. 3, Series 1956-1957, passed 3-25-1957)
§ 94.03 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE STATUTES.
   The Council of the city shall take all action necessary to comply with the
statutes of the state relative to the establishment and maintenance of a public
library and reading room.
(Ord. 3, Series 1956-1957, passed 3-25-1957)
CHAPTER 95: PUBLIC NUISANCE; MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
95.01   Public nuisance
   
95.02   Exceptions
   
95.03   Seizure and impoundment
   
95.04   Bonding procedure
   
95.05   Vehicle impoundment hearing; notification
   
95.06   Unclaimed vehicles
 
   
95.99    Penalties
§ 95.01 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   A motor vehicle which is used in the commission of or in conjunction
with the commission of any of the offenses described herein shall be declared a
public nuisance and shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to
this chapter:
      (1)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits an
act of prostitution or solicitation for prostitution in violation of the
Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11-14 or 5/11-15.
      (2)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits the
offense of illegal depositing of trash or illegal dumping, in violation of the
city code.
      (3)   The driver of the motor vehicle, while being under the age of 21,
is in possession of or has consumed an alcoholic beverage in violation of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/6-20.
      (4)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/21-1.5, concerning the
transportation of anhydrous ammonia.
      (5)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/24-1.5, entitled "Reckless
Discharge of a Firearm."
      (6)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1, et seq., and
the weight of the substance is three grams or greater.
      (7)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Controlled Substance Act, 720 ILCS 570/100, et seq.
      (8)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits any
act of vandalism in violation of this city code or any similar provision under
state law and only where the vandalism results in injury to a person or damage
to property.
      (9)   The driver or any other person in possession of a motor vehicle
commits a violation of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-611,
entitled "Sound Amplification Systems", or breach of the peace constituting
disorderly conduct under state law.
      (10)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-101, et seq., or 625 ILCS
5/6-201, et seq., by operating the vehicle with a cancelled, suspended or
revoked driver's license.
      (11)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501, by operating the
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating
compound or compounds or any combination thereof and/or commits a violation of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-502(a), and 5/11-502(b).
      (12)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-503, by engaging in
reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving.
      (13)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-506, by engaging in the
offense of street racing or aggravated street racing.
      (14)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-101, by operating a motor
vehicle without a valid license, permit or a restricted driving permit issued
under the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
      (15)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/4-104(a)1-5, by operating a
motor vehicle in violation of its provisions related to title certificates,
registration cards, license plates, registration stickers or temporary
registration permits.
      (16)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-702, by operating a motor
vehicle the registration for which has been cancelled, suspended or revoked.
      (17)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-708, by operating a motor
vehicle the registration for which is suspended pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/7-606 or
5/7-607.
      (18)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-707, operating the vehicle
without insurance.
      (19)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-708, operating a motor
vehicle when the registration has been suspended for non-insurance.
      (20)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-710, displaying false
evidence of insurance.
      (21)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-401, failing to stop
after an accident involving death or personal injuries.
      (22)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-402, failure to stop
after an accident in which a motor vehicle sustains damage.
      (23)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-403, failure to give
information or render assistance after a motor vehicle accident.
      (24)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-404, failure to stop and
notify the owner after a property damage accident.
      (25)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-406, failure to submit a
written report involving a motor vehicle accident.
      (26)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-407, failure to give
notice of an accident where no police officer is present.
      (27)   The driver or other person in control of a motor vehicle commits a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-409, giving false
information regarding a motor vehicle accident.
      (28)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits a
violation of 720 ILCS 5/31-1, resisting a peace office, or 720 ILCS 5/12-2 or
5/12-3.05, aggravated assault or battery to a peace officer.
      (29)   The driver or any passenger of a motor vehicle commits any
violation of 720 ILCS 5/16-25, retail theft, even if the driver of the vehicle
is unaware of the violation.
      (30)   The driver or any other person in control of a motor vehicle
commits any felony for which seizure is authorized under the Illinois Criminal
Code of 1961, 5/36-1 (720 ILCS 5/36-1).
      (31)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits a
violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-204, fleeing or attempting to elude a police
officer.
      (32)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits
any act in violation of 720 ILCS 5/21-3, criminal trespass.
      (33)   The driver or any other person within the motor vehicle commits
any act in violation of § 92.03, storing, parking or leaving dismantled or
other such motor vehicles.
   (B)   The penalties provided in this chapter shall be in addition to any
penalties which may be imposed against the driver or other persons within the
motor vehicle pursuant to any other city ordinance or state law.
   (C)   The term MOTOR VEHICLE as used in this chapter shall have the same
meaning as set forth in this city code, and also Section 1-146 of the Illinois
Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-146). In addition, the term MOTOR VEHICLE as
used in this chapter shall include motorcycles and mopeds, as defined in
Sections 1-147 and 1-148.2 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-147
and 5/1-148.2), and shall include every other vehicle which is self-propelled,
including golf carts and other slow moving vehicles.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2023; Ord., passed 5-6-2024)
§ 95.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply:
   (A)   If the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and
the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours
after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
   (B)   If the motor vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the
violation occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the motor
vehicle.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2023; Ord., passed 5-6-2024)
§ 95.03 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle to a facility
controlled by the city or its agents. Before or at the time the vehicle is
towed, the police officer shall notify any person identifying himself as the
owner of the vehicle, or any person who is found in control of the vehicle at
the time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure and of the
owner's right to request a vehicle impoundment hearing, and of the owner's
right to post a cash bond to recover the vehicle.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2023; Ord., passed 5-6-2024)
§ 95.04 BONDING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the owner of record of a motor vehicle seized and impounded
pursuant to this chapter desires to retrieve the motor vehicle prior to the
evidentiary hearing, they may do so by posting a cash bond at the office of the
City Clerk in the amount indicated herein. Once the bond has been posted and
the towing and storage fees paid, the motor vehicle shall be released to its
owner until the evidentiary hearing is held by the city's Code Hearing
Department. The amount of the bond shall be $300.
   (B)   If a motor vehicle may be subject to forfeiture pursuant to the Drug
Asset Forfeiture Procedure Act, 725 ILCS 150/1, et seq., or any other state or
federal law concerning the forfeiture of property, the vehicle shall not be
released by the posting of the bond described in this section.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2023; Ord., passed 5-6-2024)
§ 95.05 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT HEARING; NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   If the owner of a vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter desires to
appeal the seizure, the owner must make a request for a vehicle impoundment
hearing no later than the next business day after the seizure. The request
shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk's office. If the request is
timely filed, a designated hearing officer of the city shall conduct such
hearing within 72 hours after the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays. The designated hearing officer shall be the Mayor and or his or her
designee. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be
heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the
hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the
hearing officer determines there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the hearing
officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle until the full
evidentiary hearing pursuant to this section, unless the vehicle owner posts
the applicable cash bond, and a notice of such full evidentiary hearing shall
be given to the vehicle owner.
   (B)   Unless the vehicle owner has received a notice after a hearing held
pursuant to division (A) above, or if the owner of record is otherwise
personally serviced with the notice of hearing and acknowledges the receipt of
the notice in writing, within ten days after a motor vehicle is seized and
impounded pursuant to this chapter, the city shall notify or send notice by
certified mail return receipt requested, the owner of record of the date, time
and location of a full evidentiary hearing concerning the seizure and
impoundment. Such hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by
order of the hearing officer, no later than 30 days after the motor vehicle was
seized.
   (C)   If, after the hearing set forth in division (B) above, the hearing
officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the motor vehicle was
used in the commission of or in conjunction with any of the offenses described
in §
95.01(A) and that none of the exceptions set forth in §
95.02 apply, then the hearing officer shall enter an order finding the owner of
record of the motor vehicle civilly liable to the city and impose the penalties
set forth in this chapter. If a cash bond has been previously posted, the bond
shall be applied to the fees owed under §
95.99. If the hearing officer determines that no such violation occurred, the
hearing officer shall order the return of the motor vehicle and/or any cash
bond posted.
   (D)   In the event that the owner of record desires to appeal the decision
of the hearing officer under the provisions of the Illinois Administrative
Review Act, he shall pay the costs of the preparation and transcription of the
record of the hearing.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2023; Ord., passed 5-6-2024)
§ 95.06 UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle which is not reclaimed within 30 days after expiration of
the time during which the owner may seek judicial review of the city's actions
pursuant to this chapter, or the time at which a final judgment is rendered in
favor of the city, or the time a final administrative order is entered against
an owner who is found in default, may be disposed of as an unclaimed motor
vehicle as provided by law.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2023; Ord., passed 5-6-2024)
§ 95.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is used in the commission of or in
conjunction with any of the offenses described in §
95.01(A) hereof, the motor vehicle may be impounded and the owner of record of
the motor vehicle shall be liable for an administrative penalty in the amount
of $300 for the first offense, $500 for the second offense and $750 for all
subsequent offenses, and any applicable towing and storage fees.
   (B)   Costs. In addition to any fine or other penalty imposed pursuant to
this chapter, the owner of record shall be ordered to pay the costs and fees
incurred by the city in prosecuting the violation, which shall include, but not
be limited to, the costs associated with an administrative adjudication
proceeding or court proceeding, and reasonable attorney's fees.
   (C)   If a penalty is imposed pursuant to this chapter, such penalty shall
constitute a debt due and owing to the city. The owner of record's obligation
to pay such debt to the city shall be independent of the city's return of any
impounded motor vehicle. If a bond has been posted, the hearing officer shall
enter an order deducting any fines and fees imposed pursuant to this chapter
from the bond so posted.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impounded motor
vehicle shall be returned to the owner, or other person who is legally entitled
to possess the motor vehicle, upon his or her payment to the city of the
penalty or penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter, including the towing and
storage fees, unless the motor vehicle has been sold or otherwise disposed of
to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever a
person with a lien of record against a motor vehicle impounded under this
chapter has commenced foreclosure or repossession proceedings, possession of
the motor vehicle shall be given to that person, but only upon agreeing, in
writing, to refund to the city the net proceeds of any sale of the motor
vehicle less any amounts necessary to pay all lien holders of record, up to the
total amount of penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter which are
outstanding.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2023; Ord., passed 5-6-2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   TRANSPORTING JUNK, GARBAGE AND THE LIKE
      
111.   PEDDLERS
      
112.   POOL HALLS
      
113.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
114.   VIDEO GAMING
      115.   GAMBLING
CHAPTER 110: TRANSPORTING JUNK, GARBAGE AND THE LIKE
Section
   
110.01   Necessity of license
   
110.02   Issuance; cost; cancellation or revocation
   
110.03   License not transferrable
   
110.04   Number of licenses
   
110.05   Vehicle and hauling standards
   
110.06   Proof of insurance
   
110.07   Effective date
§ 110.01 NECESSITY OF LICENSE.
   No person, firm, corporation or association shall engage in the business of
the transportation of junk, garbage or refuse in the city without first
obtaining a license for said city.
(Ord. 1, Series 2011-2012, passed 7-11-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.02 ISSUANCE; COST; CANCELLATION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The cost of said license pursuant to application made shall be the sum
of $150 and an annual renewal fee in the sum of $150 shall be due and payable
on 11-1-2011, and on the same day of each successive year.
   (B)   Failure to pay such renewal fee shall constitute and automatic
revocation of a license; otherwise, a license shall remain in force until a
cancellation request is presented to the City Council in writing, or until such
license which, in its discretion, is for the best interest of the city.
(Ord. 1, Series 2011-2012, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 110.03 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERRABLE.
   No license shall be transferrable from any licensee to any other person,
firm, corporation or association.
(Ord. 1, Series 2011-2012, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 110.04 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   The maximum number of licenses issued by the city shall be three.
(Ord. 1, Series 2011-2012, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 110.05 VEHICLE AND HAULING STANDARDS.
   The applicant for a refuse collector’s license to operate in the city shall
certify that he or she will carry on his or her operations by using a solid
truck body firmly mounted on a vehicle for making collections; and, when the
vehicle is moving, the body is sufficiently covered so that no refuse can
escape or blow out of the body; however, brush can be hauled without a cover as
long as it is securely lashed to the body. No refuse in liquid form or in part-
liquid form can be hauled, except in a leak-proof body; and that, the applicant
will unload all of the refuse collected at a lawfully licensed refuse disposal
site.
(Ord. 1, Series 2011-2012, passed 7-11-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06 PROOF OF INSURANCE.
   No license shall be issued without proof of certificate of liability
insurance.
(Ord. 1, Series 2011-2012, passed 7-11-2011)
§ 110.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its final passage.
(Ord. 1, Series 2011-2012, passed 7-11-2011)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS
Section
   
111.01   License required
   
111.02   License fee
   
111.03   Application
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, any firm or any corporation to engage
in the business of hawker or peddler in the city without having first obtained
a license therefor as provided herein.
(Ord. 5, Series 1975-1976, passed 10-13-1975) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.02 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The fee for such peddler or hawker using an automobile or any other
vehicle shall be $500 for each vehicle for a yearly license; $200 for a monthly
license; and $100 for a daily license. The fee for each peddler or hawker not
using any vehicle shall be $500 for a yearly license; $200 for a monthly
license; and $100 for a daily license.
   (B)   The hours of operation for license holders under this chapter shall be
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Any violation of the hours of operation shall result in
the revocation of the license. License holders are prohibited from approaching
any residence where a “no solicitation” or “no peddlers” sign, or any similar
sign is posted.
(Ord. 5, Series 1975-1976, passed 10-13-1975; Ord. 2, Series 2018, passed 5-7-
2018)
§ 111.03 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for peddler’s and hawker’s licenses shall be made to the
City Clerk, and shall state thereon the number of vehicles, if any, intended to
be operated; the kind of article or merchandise to be peddled and the permanent
address, Social Security number and driver’s license number of the peddler and
all assistants who will be engaged in peddling.
   (B)   No license shall be issued without the payment of the fee provided in
§
111.02 of this chapter.
(Ord. 5, Series 1975-1976, passed 10-13-1975)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $750, for each
offense; and each day on which a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
   (B)   Any licensed peddler or hawker who shall be guilty of any fraud,
cheating or misrepresentation, whether through himself or herself or through an
employee, while acting as a peddler in the city; or who shall barter, sell or
peddle any goods, wares or merchandise other than those specified in his or her
application for a license shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than
$750, for each offense, and the Mayor may revoke his or her license for such
offense.
(Ord. 5, Series 1975-1976, passed 10-13-1975)
CHAPTER 112: POOL HALLS
Section
   
112.01   License required
   
112.02   Applications
   
112.03   Type of person to whom license issued
   
112.04   Annual fee
   
112.05   License not transferrable
   
112.06   Effective date
§ 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a pool hall in the city without
having first obtained a license therefor, as is hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 4, Series 1960, passed 9-12-1960) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.02 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk and shall
specify the location of the proposed pool hall and the person or persons who
are the owners thereof.
(Ord. 4, Series 1960, passed 9-12-1960)
§ 112.03 TYPE OF PERSON TO WHOM LICENSE ISSUED.
   No such license shall be issued to a person who is not a person of good
moral character, nor to a corporation or organization which is not represented
in the city by a person of good moral character. No license shall be issued
without approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 4, Series 1960, passed 9-12-1960)
§ 112.04 ANNUAL FEE.
   The annual fee for pool halls shall be as follows:
   (A)   Twenty-five dollars for the hall;
   (B)   Ten dollars for one table; and
   (C)   Five dollars for each additional table.
(Ord. 4, Series 1960, passed 9-12-1960)
§ 112.05 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERRABLE.
   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferrable subject
to approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 4, Series 1960, passed 9-12-1960)
§ 112.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect on the first day of the month next following
its passage.
(Ord. 4, Series 1960, passed 9-12-1960)
CHAPTER 113: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Sales without license prohibited
   
113.03   Possession in public
   
113.04   Public consumption
Minors
   
113.10   Sale or delivery to prohibited
   
113.11   Purchase unlawful
   
113.12   Misrepresentation of age
   
113.13   Posted notice required
   
113.14   Parent or guardian responsibility
Operating Regulations
   
113.20   Hours of operation
   
113.21   Sales to intoxicated persons, drunkards and the like
   
113.22   Disturbance of the peace not to be allowed
   
113.23   Nude or obscene activity prohibited
   
113.24   Food handling sanitation standards apply
   
113.25   Premises; view of interior required
Licensing
   
113.30   Retail sale; license required
   
113.31   On-premises consumption; license required
   
113.32   Application; content
   
113.33   Ineligible persons
   
113.34   Ineligible locations
   
113.35   Application fee
   
113.36   License classes; fees
   
113.37   Number of licenses
   
113.38   License period
   
113.39   Prorated license fee
   
113.40   Renewal
   
113.41   Renewal fee installments
   
113.42   Change of location; permission required
   
113.43   License privilege restricted; transfer prohibited
   
113.44   Record of licenses
   
113.45   License revocation and suspension
 
   
113.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Any spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquid containing
more than ½% of alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
   CLUB. A corporation or a fraternal organization organized under the laws of
the state, not for pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common
object other than the sale and consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used,
and maintained by its members through the payment of annual dues, and owning or
hiring or leasing a building or space in a building, of an extent and character
as may be suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and
accommodation of its members and their guests, provided that the club files
with the Mayor at the time of its application for a license under this chapter
two copies of a list of names and residences of its officers, directors,
executive committee, or similar body, and similarly files within ten days of
the election of any new officer, director, or the like, his or her name and
address; and provided that its affairs and management are conducted by a board
of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at
their annual meeting, and that no member nor any officer, agent, or employee of
the club is paid, or directly receives, in the form of salary or other
compensation any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
the club or its members or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount
of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting by the members
or other governing body out of the general revenue of the club.
   MALT BEVERAGES. All beer, lager beer, ale, and port which have an alcoholic
content of not to exceed 20% by weight.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held
out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals actually
are served and regularly served without sleeping accommodations, that space
being provided within adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment
and capacity, and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of
employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; provided,
further, that the business obtains in excess of 60% of its gross revenue from
the sale of food items.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The sale of any alcoholic liquor for use or consumption and
not for resale.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.02 SALES WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic liquor in the city without an
appropriate license.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.03 POSSESSION IN PUBLIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or possess any alcoholic
liquor, other than in the original package with the seal unbroken, on any
public street, parkway, alley, park, public or private school grounds, parking
lot of any commercial establishment or on the premises of any commercial
establishment other than one licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, or any other place that is accessible to the general public.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.04 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor on any
public street, parkway, alley, park, public or private school grounds, parking
lot of any commercial establishment, or on the premises of any commercial
establishment other than one licensed pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, or any other place that is accessible to the general public.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
PROVISIONS REGARDING MINORS
§ 113.10 SALE OR DELIVERY TO PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under
21 years of age, or to knowingly and willfully sell any alcoholic liquor to a
person or persons acting on behalf of a person under the age of 21.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.11 PURCHASE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase or
obtain, or cause to be obtained, alcoholic liquor in any place in the city
where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.12 MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
misrepresent his or her age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor in any place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.13 POSTED NOTICE REQUIRED.
   In any place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be
displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall be
supplied by the City Clerk and which shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING TO MINORS
You are subject to a fine up to $500 under the ordinances of the City of
Chrisman
if you purchase or cause to be purchased alcoholic liquor or misrepresent your
age
for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.14 PARENT OR GUARDIAN RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit any minor child of
which he or she may be parent or guardian to violate any provision of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
OPERATING REGULATIONS
§ 113.20 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be lawful to sell or offer for sale any alcohol or liquor of
any kind at retail in the city on any weekday between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 12:00 midnight. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any alcohol
or liquor of any kind at retail in the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 6:00 a.m. on any weekday, except that it shall be lawful to sell or offer
for sale any alcohol or liquor of any kind at retail in the city on Friday from
6:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer
for sale any alcohol or liquor of any kind at retail in the city on Saturday
between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall be lawful to sell or
offer for sale any alcohol or liquor of any kind at retail in the city on
Saturday from 6:00 a.m. until 3:00 a.m. on Sunday. It shall be unlawful to sell
or offer for sale any alcohol or liquor of any kind at retail in the city on
Sunday between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. It shall be lawful to sell
or offer for sale any alcohol or liquor of any kind at retail in the city on
Sunday from 11:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. and it shall be unlawful to sell or
offer for sale any alcohol or liquor of any kind at retail in the city on
Sunday after 11:00 p.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public
to any premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the
hours within which the sale of alcoholic liquor is prohibited; however, in the
case of clubs, the establishments may be kept open during those hours, but no
alcoholic liquor shall be sold or consumed by the public dining those hours.
   (C)   It is further provided that if the licensee is engaged in other
business on the premises and the sale of alcoholic liquor is secondary to that
business, then the licensee may remain open at any time, but no alcoholic
liquor shall be sold or consumed by the public during the hours when that type
of sale is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 1, Series 2020, passed 2-18-2020)
§ 113.21 SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS, DRUNKARDS, AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's license
issued pursuant to this chapter to sell, deliver, or give any alcoholic liquor
to any intoxicated person or to any person known to him or her to be a habitual
drunkard.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.22 DISTURBANCE OF PEACE NOT TO BE ALLOWED.
   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor license issued
pursuant to this chapter to permit the disturbance of peace by loud,
boisterous, or rowdy behavior, or obscene or vulgar conduct, on the premises
where liquor is sold.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.23 NUDE OR OBSCENE ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Allowing obscene activities. It shall be unlawful for any holder of
any liquor license granted hereunder to allow upon the premises under his or
her control, the exhibiting of any bare or uncovered breast at or below the
areola area or the exhibiting of any breast at or below the areola area of
girls or women covered with a transparent or semi-transparent material which
exposes to public view the breast at or below the areola area, or exhibiting of
bare or uncovered buttocks, genitals, pubic hair, or anus of either girls,
women, boys, or men, or the exhibiting of buttocks, genitals, pubic hair, or
anus covered with a transparent or semi-transparent material which exposes to
public view the buttocks, genitals, pubic hair, or anus.
   (B)   Putting on obscene activities. It shall be unlawful for any holder of
any liquor license granted hereunder to produce or put on any performance or
exhibit that includes the exhibiting of any bare or uncovered breast at or
below the areola area or the exhibiting of any breast at or below the areola
area of girls or women covered with a transparent or semi-transparent material
which exposes to public view the breast at or below the areola area, or
exhibiting of bare or uncovered buttocks, genitals, pubic hair, or anus of
either girls, women, boys, or men, or the exhibiting of buttocks, genitals,
pubic hair, or anus covered with a transparent or semitransparent material
which exposes to public view the buttocks, genitals, pubic hair, or anus.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.24 FOOD HANDLING SANITATION STANDARDS APPLY.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or the storage of
liquor for retail sale shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances and
code provisions regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or
sale of food for human consumption.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.25 PREMISES; VIEW OF INTERIOR REQUIRED.
   (A)   No premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises is licensed pursuant to this chapter, other than as a club,
restaurant, or hotel, shall be permitted to have any screen, blind, curtain,
partition, article, or thing in the windows or upon the doors of the licensed
premises nor inside the premises which shall prevent a clear view into the
interior of the licensed premises from the street, road, or sidewalk at all
times; and no booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction nor any
arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior
of the premises which shall prevent a clear view of the entire interior from
the street, road, or sidewalk.
   (B)   All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall
be continuously lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial
white light so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly
visible. In case the view into any licensed premises required by the foregoing
provisions shall be willfully obscured by the licensee or by him or her
willfully permitted to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then the
licensee shall be subject to revocation of his or her license in the manner
herein provided.
   (C)   In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the Mayor shall
have the right to require the filing with him or her of plans, drawings, and
photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
LICENSING
§ 113.30 RETAIL SALE; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the city any
alcoholic liquor of any kind without having a city retail liquor dealer's
license, or in violation of the terms of the license.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 113.31 ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for a business or club not having a license providing
for consumption on the premises where sold, to offer for sale or sell any
alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises or to permit any alcoholic
liquor to be consumed on the premises.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 113.32 APPLICATION; CONTENT.
   (A)   Applications for licenses shall be submitted in writing signed by the
applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized officer if the applicant
is a corporation, or by a partner if the applicant is a copartnership.
   (B)   All applications shall be verified by oath or affidavit, and shall
contain the following information and statements:
      (1)   (a)   The name, age, and residence address of the applicant if the
person applying is an individual.
         (b)   The names, ages and residence addresses of all partners, if the
applicant is a copartnership.
         (c)   The corporate name, date of incorporation, state in which
incorporated, and, if a foreign corporation, the date when it was authorized to
do business in Illinois as a foreign corporation, and that it is still licensed
as a foreign corporation to do business in Illinois; the stated objective or
purposes of the corporation quoted from its articles of incorporation and any
amendments thereto, or from its corporate charter; the names, ages, and
residence addresses of all of its officers, directors, and stockholders who
own, directly or beneficially, and of all subscribers to shares constituting
more than 5% of its issued and outstanding stock or stock to be issued.
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, if an individual or if a partner
in a copartnership, his or her place and date of birth, and, if a naturalized
citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization.
      (3)    The character of the business of the applicant.
      (4)   The length of time that applicant has been in a business of that
character.
      (5)   The amount of goods, wares and merchandise on hand, if any, at the
time the application is submitted.
      (6)   The location, including street address, and the full legal
description of the premises for which the license is sought. If the premises
are possessed by the applicant under a bona fide, valid, written lease or
memorandum of lease signed by the lessor and all other necessary parties for
the full term of the license being applied for, a certified photocopy of the
lease or memorandum thereof shall be attached to the application.
      (7)   The application shall contain the applicant's statement as to
whether or not he or she or it has made a similar application for a similar
license on premises other than that described in the application, and the
disposition of such application.
      (8)   The application shall contain a statement that the applicant has
never been convicted of a felony, and is not disqualified to receive a license
by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, or in the laws of
the United States or of the State of Illinois, or in the provisions of other
ordinances of the city.
      (9)   The application shall also state whether or not any license issued
to the applicant by any state or subdivision thereof, or by the federal
government, has been revoked, and, if so, the reasons therefor. The application
shall also state whether or not any firm or entity with which the applicant had
been connected previously as principal owner or manager had been issued any
previous license for the sale or handling of alcoholic liquor, which license
had been revoked or suspended by the federal government or by any state or
subdivision thereof, and the reasons or causes for the revocation or
suspension. Any statement shall include information identifying the previous
licensor, as well as its licensee, by names and addresses, including the
address of the licensed premises and name of the licensed establishment, and
the date or dates of the revocation or suspension.
      (10)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the
ordinances of the city or any of the laws of the State of Illinois or of the
United States in the conduct of business at the licensed premises.
      (11)   A confirmed or verified financial statement showing the assets and
liabilities of the person applying as of a date recently prior to the date the
application is filed shall be filed with the application. This financial
statement shall be treated and handled as a confidential matter. The financial
statement may be enclosed in a sealed envelope that is filed with the City
Clerk, and which is to be delivered, unopened, with the duplicate original of
the application to the Local Commissioner. The confidentiality and privacy of
the financial statement shall be respected and maintained by the City
Commission and may be impounded or retained in a locked file so that same shall
not be a public record, and shall be secret information made available only for
the consideration by the City Commission and the Local Commissioner of the
application for an initial license or for renewal of license. Likewise,
confirmed or verified financial statements shall be submitted for all persons
who will share the profits or losses of a copartnership which seeks a license,
as well as for stockholders owning more than 5% of the issued and outstanding
share of a corporation which applies for a license.
      (12)   (a)   The applicant shall also provide a certificate of insurance
verifying proof of insurance of the applicant in the types and minimums stated
below.
         (b)   Workers compensation insurance in full compliance with the
Worker's Compensation Act and Employer's Liability Coverage in the amount not
less than as defined by Illinois State Statutes.
            1.   Commercial general liability insurance in an amount not less
than $1,000,000.
            2.   Dramshop insurance in full compliance with the Illinois
Dramshop Act and in an amount of not less than as defined by Illinois State
Statutes.
   (C)   Said insurance required in this section shall be written by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Illinois. The
certificate of insurance shall also contain substantially the following
cancellation provision:
         The insurance evidenced by this certificate will not be canceled or
material
         reduced except after 30 days written notice to the City of Chrisman,
Illinois.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.33 INELIGIBLE PERSONS.
   No license required by this chapter shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he or she resides;
   (B)   A person who is not a resident of the United States;
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
state;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of a house of ill
fame;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or a crime or misdemeanor
opposed to decency and morality;
   (F)   A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause;
   (G)   A person, who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for that license upon a first
application;
   (H)   A copartnership, unless all of the members of the copartnership shall
be qualified to obtain a license;
   (I)   A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of the corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision;
   (J)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee;
   (K)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any state or federal
law concerning the manufacture, possession, or sale of alcoholic liquor, or who
shall have forfeited his or her bond to appear in court in answer to charges
for such a violation;
   (L)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
issued;
   (M)   Any law enforcing public official, the Mayor, or the Commissioners; no
such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in
the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor; or
   (N)   A person, firm, or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor
dealer's license.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.34 INELIGIBLE LOCATIONS.
   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor
within 100 feet of any church; school, other than an institution of higher
learning; hospital; home for aged, or any aged persons or for veterans, their
spouses or children; or any military or naval station; provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply to hotels or motels offering restaurant service,
regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants, food shops, or other places where
sale of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on; nor to the
renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises
within 100 feet of any church or school where the church or school has been
established within that 100 feet since the issuance of the original license. In
the case of a church, the distance of 100 feet shall be measured to the nearest
part of any building used for worship services or educational programs and not
to property boundaries. In other cases, it shall be measured to the property
boundaries.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.35 APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   All applications for licenses received after adoption of this chapter,
shall be accompanied by a one-time application fee of $500 in addition to the
annual fees set forth hereinafter.
   (B)   All fees for licenses required by this chapter shall be paid to the
Mayor at the time application is made for the license and shall be forthwith
turned over to the City Clerk. In the event the license applied for is denied,
the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted, then the
fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other fund as
shall have been designated by the City Council by proper action.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.36 LICENSE CLASSES; FEES.
   (A)   Licenses required by this chapter shall be divided into eight classes,
and each person seeking to obtain or renew a license pursuant to this chapter
shall pay the fee required for the appropriate class of license.
   (B)   The classes of licenses and fees are as follows.
      (1)   Class A shall entitle the licensee to sell alcoholic liquors in
"original packages" and not for resale of those liquors nor for consumption on
the premises; the fee for this license shall be $500 per year.
      (2)   Class B shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for
consumption, as well as the retail sale of liquors not for consumption on the
premises specified; provided, however, that this license shall not be available
to any club or similar organization; the fee for this license shall be $500 per
year.
      (3)   Class C shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises specified for any restaurant as defined in this
chapter; the fee for this license shall be $500 per year.
      (4)   Class D shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only for
consumption on the premises specified for any restaurant as defined in this
chapter; the fee for this license shall be $500 per year.
      (5)   Class E shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for
consumption, as well as the retail sale of liquors not for consumption on the
premises specified, for any club as defined in this chapter; the fee for this
license shall be $500 per year.
      (6)   Class F shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only for
consumption, as well as the retail sale of beer and wine not for consumption on
the premises specified, for any bar as defined in this chapter; the fee shall
be $500 per year.
      (7)   Class G shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises specified, for special occasions only; the fee for
this license shall be $100 per year, plus a fee of $50 per special occasion.
Each separate special occasion must be specifically authorized by the Liquor
Control Commissioner after authorization is applied for by the license holder.
Each special occasion application shall be filed at least 48 hours before the
event is to be held, and each special occasion license shall specify the hours
during which the license shall be valid. In no event shall any special occasion
license be valid for more than one event in any one 24-hour period, nor shall
any such license be issued for more than 12 hours duration.
      (8)   Class H shall authorize the retail sales or dispensing of alcoholic
beverages, by the drink or pitcher only, for consumption on property owned by
the state, provided that the sale is authorized by state law and provided
further that the licensee is a not-for-profit organization under the laws of
this state. The events where sales shall occur may be open to the public in
general but must be limited to an identifiable membership or group invited to
the event or events. The organization's activities must be subject to
regulations imposed by the state agency in control of the property upon which
the events will be held, those regulations limiting the dispensing of alcoholic
beverages at the scheduled events. The organization must comply with the laws
of the state and of the city with respect to closing hours and the sale and
distribution of alcoholic beverages to minors. This dispensing of alcoholic
beverages must be for not more than 45 days per year and be limited to not more
than three days per week and not more than seven hours in any given day. The
annual fee for this license shall be $5.
      (9)   Class I shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquors for
consumption on the premises specified for any restaurant/sports bar and grill
as defined in this chapter; the fee for this license shall be $1,000 per year.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.37 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   There shall be issued in the city not more than five Class A licenses, and
not more than five Class B licenses. There shall be an unlimited number of
Class C and Class D licenses. There shall be no more than five Class E licenses
in effect at any one time. The number of Class F licenses shall be no more than
two. The number of Class C licenses shall be unlimited, and the number of Class
H licenses shall be limited to one.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.38 LICENSE PERIOD.
   Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the thirtieth
day of the month next following the date of issuance.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.39 PRORATED LICENSE FEE.
   Where there are less than 12 months remaining between the time the
application for a license under this chapter is made and the date on which the
license expires annually, the applicant may reduce the license fee remitted
with his or her application in proportion to the number of full calendar months
which have expired in the license year.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.40 RENEWAL.
   Any licensee under this chapter may renew his or her license at the
expiration thereof, provided that he or she is then qualified to receive a
license and the premises for which the renewal license is sought are suitable
for the purpose; provided further that the renewal privilege herein provided
for shall not be construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent
the City Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its
jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.41 RENEWAL FEE INSTALLMENTS.
   Renewal fees may be paid in two equal semiannual installments.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.42 CHANGE OF LOCATION; PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   A retail liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor
only on the premises described in the application and license. The location may
be changed only upon written permission to make a change issued by the Mayor.
No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a
proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state
and the ordinances of the city.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.43 LICENSE PRIVILEGE RESTRICTED; TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be purely a personal
privilege, good for not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked
as provided in this chapter, and shall not constitute property or be subject to
attachment, garnishment, or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. The license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall
not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, provided that
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when the estate consists in part
of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the sale of alcoholic liquor
under the order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of
the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of that
decedent, or that insolvency or bankruptcy, until the expiration of the
license, but not longer than six months after the death, bankruptcy, or
insolvency of the licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the
license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from
operating under the license in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.44 RECORD OF LICENSES.
   The Mayor shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all licenses
issued by him or her pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.45 LICENSE REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION.
   In addition to any other penalty, the Mayor may revoke or suspend, as
provided by law, any retail liquor dealer's license for any violation of any
provision of this chapter, or for the violation of any state law pertaining to
the sale of alcoholic liquor. Further, the Mayor may levy a fine on the
licensee for such violation, whether or not any suspension is imposed. The fine
imposed shall not exceed $1,000 for each violation; each day on which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. Not more than
$10,000 in fines under this section may be imposed against any licensee during
the period of his license.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which no
other penalty is provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalties as
provided in this Code.
(Ord. passed 6-1-2015)
CHAPTER 114: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
114.01   Video gaming regulations
§ 114.01 VIDEO GAMING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Video gaming is allowed within the city limits pursuant to the
provisions of the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as long as there is
compliance with the Video Gaming Act as enforced by the state.
   (B)   Any person or business operating a licensed establishment must
register with the city by providing documentation of the valid state license
and listing of the number of video gaming terminals.
   (C)   There will be a fee of $25 per video gaming terminal operating within
the city limits. This fee shall be paid per terminal per year and will be
effective from January 1 of the year through December 31 of that year. The
annual operation fee must be paid in advance of the ensuing license year. No
video gaming terminal shall be operated within the city limits unless and until
the annual operation fee has been paid.
   (D)   Any person or business operating a video gaming terminal shall comply
with the state rules and regulations as set forth in the Video Gaming Act and
failure to do so shall result in a prohibition to operate any video gaming
terminal within the city limits.
   (E)   The city, through its officers, agents and employees, shall have the
right to enter any establishment operating any video gaming terminal within the
city limits to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (F)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by
fines and penalties as set forth in the city ordinances.
(Ord. -, Series 2015-2016, passed 4-4-2016)
CHAPTER 115: GAMBLING
Section
Raffles
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Raffle licenses
   
115.03   License required; application
   
115.04   Ineligible persons
   
115.05   Conduct of raffles
   
115.06   Records and reports
Gaming Devices and Gaming Events
   
115.15   Unlawful activities; exceptions
   
115.99   Penalty
RAFFLES
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARITABLE. An organization organized and operated to benefit an indefinite
number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible of benefits must
also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL. An organization or institution organized and operated to
provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common
to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope
and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-supported schools.
   FRATERNAL. An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
   LABOR. An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in that pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
   NET PROCEEDS. The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   NONPROFIT. An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not-
for-profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
   RAFFLE. A form of lottery, as defined in 720 ILCS 5/28-2(b), conducted by an
organization licensed under this subchapter, in which:
      (1)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
      (2)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
   RELIGIOUS. Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for
the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS. An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit.
(Ord. 1, Series 2021, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 115.02 RAFFLE LICENSES.
   (A)   Eligibility for license. Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, or veteran's
organizations that operate without profit to their members.
   (B)   Duration of license. Licenses shall permit the applicant to issue or
sell raffle chances at any time during the effective period of the license. All
licenses authorized under this subchapter shall be effective for a period of
not more than one year.
   (C)   Maximum value of prizes. The maximum aggregate retail value of all
prizes or merchandise awarded by a licensee in a single license period shall
not exceed $1,000,000.
(Ord. 1, Series 2021, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 115.03 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall conduct a raffle without having
first obtained a license therefor.
   (B)   Each application for a license shall be in writing upon forms provided
by the City Clerk, and shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the individual making applications;
      (2)   The name and address of the organization applying for a license;
      (3)   The approximate number of members of the organization that reside
in the city;
      (4)   The name and address of the raffle manager;
      (5)   The location(s) at which raffle chances are to be sold or issued;
      (6)   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
      (7)   The location(s) at which winning chances will be determined;
      (8)   The date(s) and time(s) of determination of winning chances;
      (9)   A sworn statement, signed by the presiding officer, and secretary
if there is one, of the organization, attesting to the not-for-profit character
of the organization, and attesting to the fact the organization is not
otherwise ineligible to receive a license; and
      (10)   Other information as the City Clerk may require.
   (C)   Each application for a license shall be accompanied by a payment of a
fee of $50.
   (D)   Applications for licenses shall be submitted to the City Clerk. The
City Clerk shall act to either issue or deny the license within 30 days.
(Ord. 1, Series 2021, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 115.04 INELIGIBLE PERSONS.
   The following are ineligible for any license under this subchapter:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character;
   (D)   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in division (A), (B)
or (C) of this section has a proprietary, equitable, or credit interest, or in
which such a person is active or employed;
   (E)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (A), (B) or (C)
is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not; or
   (F)   Any organization in which a person defined in division (A), (B) or (C)
is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle.
(Ord. 1, Series 2021, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 115.05 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any remuneration or profit for participating in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   (D)   No person under the age of 18 years may participate in the conducting
of raffles or chances.
(Ord. 1, Series 2021, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 115.06 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall keep records of
its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds for each single gathering or
occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions from gross
receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented with
receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the purchased
item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the recipient. The
distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount and
date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from
other revenues of the organization including bingo gross receipts, if bingo
games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license
therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the state, and placed in a
separate account. Each organization should have separate records for its
raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds
from the operation of raffles should not be the same person who accounts for
other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report annually to
its membership its gross receipts, expenses, and net proceeds from raffles, and
the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required by this section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three years,
and organizations shall make available their records relating to operation of
raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 1, Series 2021, passed 9-7-2021)
GAMING DEVICES & GAMING EVENTS
§ 115.15 UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be involved in gambling which
includes, but is not limited to, keeping, operating for hire, or using in such
manner as to involve any chance in determination of the number or value of any
article or articles purchased or played for, any cigar wheel, slot machine,
dice or any piece of mechanism, the operation of which involves or creates any
chance, other than as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The prohibitions provided for in this section and this chapter or any
other sections of the Code of Ordinances of Chrisman, Illinois, shall not apply
to any gambling device, device or gaming event for which a license or permit
has been issued by the Illinois Gaming Board, pursuant to the Illinois Video
Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) so long as such gambling device, device,
game or gaming event it conducted in compliance with all requirements of the
Act and all the rules and regulations of the Illinois Gaming Board.
(Ord. 1, Series 2021, passed 9-7-2021)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
no other penalty is provided shall be subject to penalties as provided in §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Penalty for violation of this chapter shall be governed by the General
Penalty section of this code, § 10.99.
(Ord. 1, Series 2021, passed 9-7-2021)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   CURFEW
      
131.   POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
      
132.   FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
CHAPTER 130: CURFEW
Section
   
130.01   Children on streets at night
   
130.02   Permitting child to violate curfew
   
130.03   Detaining child
   
130.04   Effective date
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 CHILDREN ON STREETS AT NIGHT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 16 years of age to be or
remain upon any street or alley or other public place in the city after 10:00
p.m.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:
      (1)   Accompanied by a parent or guardian, or other person having custody
of such minor;
      (2)   In the performance of a duty directed by such parent, guardian, or
other person, without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 3, Series 1973-74, passed 6-25-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 PERMITTING CHILD TO VIOLATE CURFEW.
   It shall be unlawful for any person having the legal care and custody of a
child under 16 years of age to allow or permit such child to go or be upon any
public street, alley or other place in the city in the night time, as
restricted in §
130.01 of this chapter, except in cases of emergency.
(Ord. 3, Series 1973-74, passed 6-25-1973) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 DETAINING CHILD.
   Every member of the police force, while on duty, is hereby authorized to
detain any such minor willfully violating the provisions of §
130.01 of this chapter until the parent or guardian of the child shall take him
or her into custody, but such officer shall, immediately upon taking custody of
the child, communicate with the parent or guardian.
(Ord. 3, Series 1973-74, passed 6-25-1973)
§ 130.04 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall take effect immediately upon its final passage.
(Ord. 3, Series 1973-74, passed 6-25-1973)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $1, nor more than $25, for each offense.
(Ord. 3, Series 1973-74, passed 6-25-1973)
CHAPTER 131: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Possession of cannabis
   
131.03   Possession of drug paraphernalia
   
131.04   Exceptions
   
131.05   Seizure and forfeiture
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS. Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in Section 3 of the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act as that definition is set forth from time to time and is
incorporated herein (720 ILCS 550/3(a)).
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other
than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in Section 10 of the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act (720 ILCS 646/10), which
are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating,
growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the
Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550), the Illinois Controlled Substances Act
(720 ILCS 570), or the Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act
(720 ILCS 646), or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug in violation of
the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (410 ILCS 620). It includes, but is
not limited to:
      (1)   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      (2)   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing
the potency of any species of plant that is cannabis or a controlled substance;
      (3)   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home
for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
cannabis or controlled substances;
      (4)   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
      (5)   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, hashish, hashish oil, or a synthetic
drug product or misbranded drug in violation of the Illinois Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act into the human body, including, where applicable, the following
items:
         (a)   Water pipes;
         (b)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (c)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (d)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (e)   Carburetor pipes;
         (f)   Electric pipes;
         (g)   Air-driven pipes;
         (h)   Chillums;
         (i)   Bongs;
         (j)   Ice pipes or chillers.
      (6)   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. -, Series 2017, 4-3-2017)
§ 131.02 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly possess
cannabis in the amount up to 30 grams.
(Ord. -, Series 2017, 4-3-2017) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.03 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly possess
an item of drug paraphernalia with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling
or otherwise introducing cannabis or a controlled substance in the human body,
or in preparing cannabis or a controlled substance for that use.
(Ord. -, Series 2017, 4-3-2017) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   This section shall not apply to:
   (A)   Legal use and possession as authorized in the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program (410 ILCS 130/10) or other state laws;
   (B)   Items marked for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling or other use of cannabis as an incident to lawful research, teaching
or chemical analysis, and not for sale or personal use; or
   (C)   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in connection
with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting or inhaling of tobacco or other lawful substance. Items
exempt include, but are not limited to, garden hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies,
tobacco pipes and cigarette rolling papers.
   (D)   Items described in §
131.01 that are marketed for decorative purposes, where such items have been
rendered completely inoperable or incapable of being used as an item of drug
paraphernalia.
(Ord. -, Series 2017, 4-3-2017)
§ 131.05 SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE.
   All items of drug paraphernalia shall be seized and forfeited as contraband
of the county.
(Ord. -, Series 2017, 4-3-2017)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found to have violated any section of this chapter shall be fined
pursuant to §
10.99, with a minimum fine being $200, and with court costs being in addition
to the fine.
(Ord. -, Series 2017, 4-3-2017)
CHAPTER 132: FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
   
132.01   Fireworks prohibited; exception
   
132.02   Public fireworks display; permit required
   
132.03   Eligible persons
   
132.04   Permit application; transfer prohibited
   
132.05   Responsible person; conduct and location
   
132.06   Storage of TNT or Nitroglycerine
   
132.07   Explosives use; permit required
   
132.08   Explosives storage rules
§ 132.01 FIREWORKS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful to sell, store, discharge, or set off any fireworks in
the city, except to give a pyrotechnic display in connection with public
exhibitions as provided in the chapter.
(Ord. 132, Series 1, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 132.02 PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No public exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall be given unless a
permit therefor is first secured from the Mayor and City Council. All public
displays shall be under the supervision of a competent person and shall be
superintended by the Chief of Police or some other member of the Police
Department assigned this duty by him or her.
(Ord. 132, Series 1, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 132.03 ELIGIBLE PERSONS.
   Permits may be granted pursuant to this chapter to any groups of three or
more adult individuals applying therefor. No permit shall be required, under
the provisions of this chapter, for supervised public displays by state or
county fair associations.
(Ord. 132, Series 1, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 132.04 PERMIT APPLICATION; TRANSFER PROHIBITED.
   Application for a permit shall be made in writing at least 21 days in
advance of the date of the display and action shall be taken on the application
within ten days after the application is made. After this privilege shall have
been granted, sale, possession, use, and distribution of fireworks for the
display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder
shall be transferable.
(Ord. 132, Series 1, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 132.05 RESPONSIBLE PERSON; CONDUCT AND LOCATION.
   Every display of fireworks permitted by the chapter shall be handled by a
competent individual designated by the Mayor and City Council and shall be of
such a character and so located, discharged, or fired, as not to be hazardous
to property or endanger any person or persons.
(Ord. 132, Series 1, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 132.06 STORAGE OF TNT OR NITROGLYCERINE.
   It shall be unlawful to keep or store any nitroglycerine or the explosive
commonly known as TNT in the city in any quantities, except for medicinal
purposes or laboratory purposes; and for these purposes no more than 0.25 ounce
shall be stored in any one building or premises.
(Ord. 132, Series 1, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 132.07 EXPLOSIVES USE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any explosives in
connection with any construction, repair, demolition, or excavation work
without first securing a permit therefor.
   (B)   Applications for permits to use explosives must be secured from the
City Clerk and shall state the nature of the work, the location where the work
is to be done, and the amount of explosives intended to be used in that work.
(Ord. 132, Series 1, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 132.08 EXPLOSIVES STORAGE RULES.
   All explosives must be stored or kept in accordance with the rules of the
State Department of Mines and Minerals.
(Ord. 132, Series 1, passed 6-6-2022)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
      
152.   CONFINED SPACE ENTRY
      
153.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
150.01   Property lines; garages
   
150.02   Metal culverts
   
150.03   Excavations in streets or alleys
   
150.04   Building permit required
 
   
150.99   Penalty
§ 150.01 PROPERTY LINES; GARAGES.
   (A)   Any residence constructed shall be located at least 25 feet from the
front property lines and no residence shall be located less than six feet from
the side property lines. Corner lots shall have 25-foot setback requirements on
the sides of the lot that front on intersecting streets, or shall be in line
with existing residences or structures. Detached outbuildings shall be located
to the rear of the lot, but not less than six feet from the side property
lines. Detached garages may be placed where space is available as long as said
garage is no closer than six feet to any property lines including the alley.
Fences shall be not less than two feet from alleys at the border of a lot.
However, where there are existing residences on a block, the setback for any
new residence constructed in such block shall be in line with existing
residences.
   (B)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage, as provided by law.
(Ord. 1, passed 1-14-2002)
§ 150.02 METAL CULVERTS.
   (A)   From and after this section shall be in full force and effect, it
shall be the property owner’s responsibility of purchasing any metal culvert as
a result of any construction work performed by the city.
   (B)   The city shall be responsible for labor costs of installing said metal
culvert and providing the individual owner with sufficient gravel for the use
of said culvert.
   (C)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
adoption.
(Res. passed 4-13-1981)
§ 150.03 EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   (A)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street or alley in
the city without first obtaining a permit therefor as is herein required.
   (B)   Application for permit. Applications for permits shall be made to the
City Clerk, and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or
tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person, firm or
corporation doing the actual excavating work and the name of the person, firm
or corporation for whom or which the work is being done.
   (C)   Time limit. The application for permit under this section shall state
the length of time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the
work until the restoration of the surface of the street or alley and it shall
be unlawful to extend said time without the approval of the City Council.
   (D)   Fees. A fee of $25 shall be paid for a permit to tunnel under or to
make any excavation in any street in the city and a like amount shall be paid
when a permit to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any alley which has
a paved or brick surface. No fee shall be required for any other permit
required by this section.
   (E)   Manner of excavation. The permittee shall use due care in doing any
tunneling or excavating under the permits provided for in this section and
shall notify city authorities if any utility line owned by the city or
affecting the public welfare of the people of the city is or are to be affected
and any damage to any such line shall be repaired immediately at the cost of
the permittee under the supervision of city authorities and no unnecessary
damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof.
   (F)   Restoring surface. Any person, firm or corporation making any
excavation or tunnel in or under any public street or alley in the city shall
restore the surface thereof to its original condition. Refills shall be
properly tamped down and any required bracing shall be used. If any applicant
under this section shall not comply with the provisions of this division (F),
the city shall give notice at least 12 hours before acting and shall then
replace the street or alley to its former condition and the expense and cost
thereof shall be charged to the applicant.
(Ord. 1, Series 1962, passed 5-14-1962) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.04 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   From and after this section shall be in full force and effect, it
shall be unlawful to erect or construct any building or structure whatever, or
add to, enlarge, improve, alter, convert, extend, repair or demolish any
building or structure or cause the same to be done without first obtaining a
building permit therefor from the City Clerk, which said permit shall be issued
by the said City Clerk only after having been authorized by the City Council.
   (B)   Before proceeding with the erection, enlargement, alteration or repair
of any building within corporate limits of the city, a permit shall first be
obtained by the owner or his agent and. It shall be unlawful to proceed with
the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair or removal of any building or of
any structural part thereof within the city unless such a permit shall have
been obtained. When such application for a permit made by owner or his or her
agent has been filed and a permit ordered issued by the City Council, the City
Clerk will then issue a building permit after payment of a fee when so required
by this chapter.
   (C)   At the time of the filing of an application for a permit there shall
be filed, attached to said application, plans and drawings of the proposed
improvement. Every such application for a permit shall describe the land upon
which the proposed building or work is to be done by some description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work; shall
show the proposed use or occupancy of all parts of the building and such other
information as the City Council may require.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall collect the following fees before any building
permit is granted. For each permit for the erection, construction, alteration
or repairs for any building or structure, as follows:
      (1)   All repairs on buildings and all buildings not exceeding $100, no
fee shall be charged, but a building permit shall nevertheless be required.
      (2)   All repairs on buildings and all buildings costing $100 to $1,000,
both inclusive, a fee of $1 shall be charged, and $1 for each additional $1,000
or fraction thereof that such building or repairs may cost.
   (E)   The Mayor shall have the power to stop the construction of any
building or the making of any alterations or repairs of any buildings within
said city when the same is being done in a reckless or careless manner or in
violation of this chapter, or when said building or repairing is not being done
in accordance with the plans, specifications or drawings filed with the
application for a building permit.
   (F)   If after such permit shall have been granted, the operations covered
by said permit shall not have been begun within six months from the date
thereof, or if such operations are not completed within one year from said
date, then such permit shall expire by the terms thereof, and no operations
thereunder shall be begun or completed until a renewal of said permit shall be
obtained by payment of an additional fee of 10% of the original fee. In no
event shall any fee paid for a permit be refunded.
   (G)   In event an emergency should arise, such as a fire, windstorm or
anything of a similar occasion which shall be construed to be an emergency, the
Mayor or any Council member shall have the right to give to any person or
corporation who as owner, occupant, tenant, contractor, builder or architect a
temporary permit for the making of any necessary repairs caused by such
emergency, and the one to whom said temporary permit shall have been given,
shall in all other respects comply with this section and immediately apply to
the City Clerk for a regular permit according to the terms of this section. The
aforesaid temporary permit shall be given in writing, and should any person or
corporation who, as owner, occupant, tenant, builder or architect, proceed to
erect, construct, add to, enlarge, improve, alter, convert, extend, demolish or
repair any building or structure whatsoever without said temporary permit being
in writing, he, she or they shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
section and subject to the penalties herein contained.
(Ord. 5, Series 1947, passed 10-13-1947) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Violation of the provisions of §
150.03(A) of this chapter shall make any such person, firm or corporation
liable for a penalty of not less than $5, nor more than $50, for each offense.
   (C)   Any person or corporation, who as owner, occupant, tenant, contractor,
builder, architect or any other capacity violates, neglects or refuses to
comply with or who resists or opposes the enforcement of any of the provisions
of §
150.04 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $750,
for each offense and each day shall constitute and be a separate offense, for
every day on which violation, neglect or refusal shall continue.
(Ord. 5, Series 1947, passed 10-13-1947; Ord. 1, Series 1962, passed 5-14-1962)
CHAPTER 151: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Section
   
151.01   Definition
   
151.02   Declaration of nuisance
   
151.03   Existence, occupancy unlawful
   
151.04   Abatement
   
151.05   Buildings to be secured
   
151.06   Rehabilitation or demolition
   
151.07   Notice
   
151.08   Permits and bonds
   
151.09   Capping sewer and water lines
   
151.10   Foundations of demolished buildings
 
   
151.99   Penalty
§ 151.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
      (1)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which may cause or
aid in the spread of disease or injury to the health of the occupants of it or
neighboring structures;
      (2)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which,
because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause,
is especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard;
      (3)   Any building, shed, fence or other human-made structure which, by
reason of faulty construction or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or
damage by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such structure;
and
      (4)   Any building, shed or other human-made structure which, because of
its condition or because of lack of doors or windows, is available to and
frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of
such structure.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 151.02 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   Any dangerous building in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 151.03 EXISTENCE, OCCUPANCY UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the city; and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a
dangerous condition or to occupy such building or permit to be occupied while
it is or remains in a dangerous condition.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.04 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Health Commissioner, the Fire Chief or Police Chief shall
be of the opinion that any building or structure in the city is a dangerous
building, he or she shall file a written statement of this effect with the City
Clerk. The Clerk shall, thereupon, cause written notice to be served upon the
owner thereof, and upon the occupant thereof; it may be registered mail or by
personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared
to be in a dangerous condition and that such dangerous condition must be
removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it;
and that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in the
following terms:
 
To                                                                     (owner-occupant of premises) of the premises known and described as
.
You are hereby notified that                                                                                                              (describe building) on the premises above mentioned has been condemned as a
nuisance and a dangerous building after inspection by                                                                                  .
 
The causes for this decision are                                                                    
(here insert the facts as to the dangerous condition.)
 
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the                                                                    will proceed to do so.
 
 
   (B)   If the person receiving the notice has not complied therewith or taken
an appeal from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a
dangerous building exists, within ten days from the time when this notice is
served upon such person by personal service or registered mail, the city
employee may, upon orders of the Mayor and the City Council, proceed to remedy
the condition or demolish the dangerous building.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 151.05 BUILDINGS TO BE SECURED.
   After any building or structure or portion thereof has been vacated by
Health Commissioner order, pursuant to city ordinances or state statutes, or is
vacant and is in such condition that no residential, commercial or other
authorized use could be made of same, the Commissioner shall require that any
such building, structure or portion thereof, and any and all windows without
glass or with broken glass be boarded up, and all doors or other openings
securely fastened to prevent authorized entrance into said building or
structure, pursuant to state statute.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.06 REHABILITATION OR DEMOLITION.
   The owner, agent or other person responsible shall, within 90 days after
written notice pursuant to §
151.04 of this chapter is served or published, rehabilitate the building or
structure and make it fit for human habitation, or for commercial of other
authorized uses, or in the alternative shall demolish and remove same. Said 90-
day period may be extended for good cause upon written application to the
Building Inspector where the public health, safety and welfare is not
endangered.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 151.07 NOTICE.
   (A)   A written notice shall be served upon the owner, his or her agent, all
other encumbrances holders or record, persons in possession and persons having
a recorded leasehold interest by certified mail, personal service or
publication. If notice is served by publication, notice shall also be posted at
the premises. The notice shall state the date of the vacation order, the date
by which repair or demolition must be commenced or by which an appeal must be
submitted to the Building Inspector and that, if no action is taken, the
Building Inspector shall cause said building to be demolished and removed and
such cost shall be charged against the real estate upon which the building is
located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   (B)   Every person to whom a permit is issued shall notify the city when
actual work of demolishing said building is to commence.
   (C)   Upon the completion of the capping, the Water Department shall be
notified prior to backfilling the excavation.
   (D)   Upon completion of the demolition and backfill and leveling of the
property, the owner shall notify the Health Inspector of the completion, and
the Health Inspector shall issue a certificate of acceptance of the demolition.
All demolition work must be completed within 90 days of the issuance of the
demolition permit.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012)
§ 151.08 PERMITS AND BONDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to demolish any building or structure with the
city having first procured a permit therefor. The fee for said demolition
permit shall be $5.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to commence work on any demolition work in the
city involving machinery, trucks or equipment unless the person doing such work
shall first have secured liability insurance in an amount equal to at least
$100,000. The contractor shall file a certificate of insurance with the City
Clerk prior to the issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.09 CAPPING SEWER AND WATER LINES.
   Prior to razing any portion of any building, the person to whom the permit
is issued shall cause all sanitary sewer and water laterals to be disconnected
and capped by a licensed plumber, said disconnections to be at property line.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 FOUNDATIONS OF DEMOLISHED BUILDINGS.
   Whenever a building or structure has been demolished, the foundation
thereof, if any, shall be leveled to at least 42 inches below grade and filled
in with 95% non-combustible fill material with the top 42 inches of fill
material being of dirt, sand or gravel and no combustible material may be
placed in said foundation which is not from the site. The fill material must be
capable of supporting vegetative growth.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be fined $500 for the first offense and $1,000 for each offense that
occurred or continued thereafter.
(Ord. 13, Series 2011-2012, passed 3-26-2012; Ord., passed 4-7-2025)
CHAPTER 152: CONFINED SPACE ENTRY
Section
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Considered dangerous
   
152.03   Proper procedures
   
152.04   Emergency procedures
   
152.05   Testing equipment
   
152.06   Definitions
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is designed solely for the protection of personnel while
entering, existing and working within confined spaces. All rules and
regulations established in this chapter shall be followed without exception.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.02 CONSIDERED DANGEROUS.
   All confined spaces shall be considered immediately dangerous to life and/or
health unless proven otherwise. Before a person is allowed to enter a confined
space, tests must be carried out to determine the concentration of any known or
expected flammable or toxic containment present and to determine the
concentration of oxygen. If air contaminants in a confined space are found to
be above the established limits and sufficient oxygen is present, the space
must be continuously power ventilated and monitored during the time anyone is
in the confined space.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.03 PROPER PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Identification and evaluation. Survey the area where work is to be
conducted to identify confined spaces. Any time a person is not certain about
an area, he or she shall contact his or her supervisor prior to entry.
   (B)   Before entry.
      (1)   Determine that entry is absolutely necessary to perform his or her
work;
      (2)   (a)   An employee attempting to do the work shall be trained for
confined space work and hazards involved; also in the proper use and selection
of personal protective equipment, and the proper use of air monitoring devices.
         (b)   Any area meeting the above criteria determined to be a confined
space shall be provided with forced air ventilation prior to entry and while
occupied by employee. Some specific types of spaces are sewers, pipes, utility
vaults, life stations, manholes and wet wells.
         (c)   Potential hazards such as energy sources shall be eliminated and
confined space shall be isolated by recognized engineering practices, such as
lock out-tag out, blinding-blanking, double block and bleed and the like.
         (d)   Atmospheric condition of confined spaces shall be tested to be
certain that the oxygen level is at least 19.5%, but not greater than 23.5%.
There is a hydrogen sulfide level of less than ten parts per million. There is
a combustible gas/vapor mixture of less than 10% of the LEL/LFL and that no
other hazardous chemicals are present.
      (3)   No employee shall enter a confined space without an attendant on
standby immediately outside of confined space who shall remain in constant
communication with occupant. The attendant shall not attempt rescue by entering
confined space unless he or she has been properly trained and provided with the
proper personal protective equipment and then only after additional rescue
operations have been contacted.
   (C)   While employee is occupying confined space.
      (1)   Forced-air ventilation shall be provided to confined space.
      (2)   The employee shall monitor air quality in confined space
continuously. If air levels fall outside limits, stated in division (B)(2)
above, the employee shall vacate confined space immediately.
      (3)   An employee occupying confined space shall remain in constant
communication with outside attendant.
      (4)   Hot work shall not be performed within a confined space without
taking proper precautions and approval of the employee’s supervisor.
   (D)   Training requirements.
      (1)   In general, all persons responsible for supervising, planning,
entering or participating in confined space entry and rescue shall be
adequately trained in their functional duties prior to any confined space
entry. All training shall be performed by a qualified person and shall include
the following:
         (a)   An explanation of the general hazards associated with confined
spaces;
         (b)   Discussion of specific hazards associated with the facility,
location or operation;
         (c)   The reason for, proper use and limitations of personal
protective equipment and other safety equipment required for entry into
confined space; how to respond to emergencies;
         (d)   Duties and responsibilities cf individual employees entering
into confined spaces; and
         (e)   A description of how to recognize probable air contaminant
overexposure symptoms to themselves and co-workers, and method(s) for alerting
attendants.
      (2)   Each employee using atmospheric monitoring equipment shall be
trained in the proper use of the equipment including the following:
         (a)   Field calibration of the equipment;
         (b)   Basic to knowledge of the work being performed;
         (c)   The anticipated hazardous contaminants; and
         (d)   Any process which could significantly alter original conditions
inside or outside the confined space.
      (3)   Each employee acting in the role of attendant shall be trained in
the following:
         (a)   Summoning rescue or other emergency services; and
         (b)   The proper use of equipment used for communicating with entry
and emergency/rescue personnel.
      (4)   All employees acting in the role of emergency rescue shall be
trained in the following:
         (a)   The rescue plan and procedures developed for each type of
confined space they are anticipated to encounter;
         (b)   The use of emergency rescue equipment;
         (c)   First aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) techniques;
and
         (d)   Work location and confined space configuration to minimize
response time.
      (5)   The employer shall deep up-to-date accurate records of all training
and shall also do the following:
         (a)   Annually have a qualified person evaluate the confined space
entry program to determine its effectiveness; and
         (b)   Repeat training at least annually to maintain an acceptable
level of personnel conscience.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.04 EMERGENCY PROCEDURES.
   In the event of an emergency, the attendant shall immediately contact the
City Fire Department. The attendant shall give a description of the emergency
and shall accurately describe the location of the confined space in order that
response time will be kept to a minimum. The attendant shall not enter the
confined space unless he or she has been trained in accordance with §
152.03(D)(4) of this chapter and has been provided with the appropriate
personal protective equipment.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.05 TESTING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All equipment used for testing the atmosphere within a confined space
shall be composed of individual testing devices or testing device, which can
simultaneously test for oxygen, hydrogen sulfide and combustible gas/vapors
without manual switching. Testing devices shall be equipped with audible and
visual warning devices, and signals from the monitoring device shall
immediately indicate when the atmospheric conditions within the space fall
outside of the air quality limits established in §
152.02(B)(2) of this chapter for oxygen, hydrogen sulfide and combustible gas/
vapor.
   (B)   Use of the testing device(s) shall be conducted in accordance with the
test equipment’s manufacturer’s instructions and standard industry practice.
   (C)   Calibration of the testing device(s) shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions; the testing device(s) shall be field-tested each
day prior to use.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTENDANT. A person who is assigned as standby to monitor confined space
process or operation and provide support or react as required.
   BLINDING/BLANKING. Inserting a solid barrier across the open end of a pipe
leading into or out of the confined space, and securing the barrier in such a
way to prevent leakage of material into the confined space.
   CONFINED SPACE. An enclosed area that has the following characteristics:
      (1)   Its primary function is something other than the human occupancy;
      (2)   Has restricted entry and exit; and
      (3)   May contain potential or known hazards.
   DOUBLE BLOCK AND BLEED. A method used to isolate a confined space from a
line, duct or pipe by physically dosing two-in-line valves or a piping system,
and opening a vented-to-atmosphere valve between them.
   ENTRY. Ingress by persons into confined space which occurs upon breaking the
plane of the confined space portal with his or her face; and all periods of
time in which the confined space is occupied.
   HAZARD EVALUATION. A process to assess the severity of known, real or
potential hazards or all three, at or in the confined space.
   HAZARDOUS CHEMICAL. As defined by OSHA, a chemical for which there is
statistically significant evidence based on at least one study conducted in
accordance with established scientific principles that acute or chronic health
effects may occur in exposed employees.
   HOT WORK. Work within a confined space that produces arcs, sparks, flames,
heat or other sources of ignition.
   ISOLATION. A process of physically interrupting, or disconnecting, or both,
pipes, lines and energy sources from the confined space.
   LEL/LFL and UEL/UFL. Acronyms for lower explosive limit/lower flammable
limit and upper explosive limit/upper flammable limit.
   LOCKOUT/TAG OUT. The placement of a lock/tag on the energy isolating device
in accordance with an established procedure, indicating that the energy
isolating device shall not be operated until removal of the lock/tag in
accordance with an established procedure.
   OXYGEN DEFICIENT ATMOSPHERE. An atmosphere containing less than 19.5% oxygen
by volume.
   OXYGEN ENRICHED ATMOSPHERE. An atmosphere containing more than 23.5% oxygen
by volume.
   PEL. An acronym for permissible exposure limit which is the allowable air
contaminant level established by the U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational
Safety and Health Administration
   QUALIFIED PERSON. A person who by reason of training, education and
experience is knowledgeable in the operation to be performed and is competent
to judge the hazards involved.
   SHALL. Denotes a mandatory requirement.
   SHOULD. A recommendation that is sound safety and health practice, it does
not denote a mandatory requirement.
   TLV. An acronym for threshold limit value.
   TOXIC ATMOSPHERE. An atmosphere containing a concentration of a substance
above the published or otherwise known safe levels.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Base flood elevation
   
153.04   Responsible official; Mayor’s duties
   
153.05   Development permit
   
153.06   Public health and other standards
   
153.07   Carrying capacity and notification
   
153.08   Variances
   
153.09   Public health standards
   
153.10   Disclaimer of liability
   
153.11   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.12   National Flood Insurance Program membership
Preventing Increased Damages
   
153.25   Generally
   
153.26   Protecting buildings
   
153.27   Subdivision requirements
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted in the city by
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-
8 and 5/11-31-2) in order to accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% probability of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FLOOD. The base
flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
153.03 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180
days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these CRITICAL FACILITIES can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community or can put
special populations at risk. Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood
protection should be required include emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers) and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
         (a)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building or any structural alteration to a building;
         (b)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         (c)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
180 days per year;
         (d)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges,
culverts or similar projects;
         (e)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
         (f)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other alterations of the ground surface; and
         (g)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height or velocity of flood or surface waters.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities, resurfacing roads or gardening, plowing and similar
practices that do not involve filing, grading or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OF SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
street and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP. A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN and SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). These two terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city,
that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The FLOODPLAINS of the city
are generally identified on the “Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City of
Chrisman”, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated 2-22-
2010. FLOODPLAIN also includes those areas of known flooding as identified by
the community. The FLOODPLAINS of those parts of the unincorporated county that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed
into the city are generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map
prepared for the county by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated 1-
19-2011.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural or non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry flood proofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood, plus one
foot of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODWAY. The portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The FLOODWAYS for each of the floodplains of the city shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the state’s Historic Preservation Agency; and/or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the state’s Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of §
153.26 of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, that
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more lots for rent or sale.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   NFIP. National Flood Insurance Program.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less in size; and
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SFHA. See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a
site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by the structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes “repetitive
loss” buildings (see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements:
         (a)   Equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   Increases the flood area by more than 20%.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
      (3)   The term does not include:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of the structure listed on the National Register
of Historic Places or the state’s Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as
the documentation is provided.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.03 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is the base flood. The best
available base flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the
best available data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study
needed to replace the existing data with better data.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as “A Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the city shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state or sources. Shall no
other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to
determine base flood elevations.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of the
unincorporated county that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
city, or that may be annexed into the city, shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the county prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated 1-19-2011.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.04 RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL; MAYOR’S DUTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be responsible for the general administration of this
chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains under
the jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Specifically, the Mayor shall:
      (1)   Process development permits in accordance with §
153.05 of this chapter;
      (2)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of §
153.25 of this chapter;
      (3)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to § 153.2 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the “as-
built” elevation of the lowest flood (including basement) or flood-proof
certificate;
      (4)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements
of §
153.27 of this chapter;
      (5)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal system meet the public
health standards of §
153.06 of this chapter;
      (6)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of §
153.08 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
      (7)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty
actions outlined in§
153.99 as a necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
      (8)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, state and federal permits;
      (9)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
      (10)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
      (11)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
      (12)   Maintain for public inspection base blood data, floodplain maps,
copies of state and federal permits and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
      (13)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter
and make substantial damage determinations for structures within the
floodplain; and
      (14)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/
OWR and/or submitting information to FEMA within six months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.05 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by law
shall commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the Mayor. The Mayor shall not issue a development
permit if the proposed development does not meet the requirement of this
chapter.
   (B)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      (2)   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      (3)   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      (4)   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
153.26 of this chapter; and
      (5)   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (C)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the Mayor
shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any
development located on land that can be shown by survey data to be higher than
the current base flood elevation and which has not been filled after the date
of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map is not in the floodplain and
therefore not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any
development located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and
hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map,
is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The Mayor shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
   (E)   The Mayor shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant copies
of all other federal, state and local permits, approvals or permit-not-required
letters that may be required for this type of activity. The Mayor shall not
issue a permit unless all other federal, state and local permits have been
obtained.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.06 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
153.25 and
153.26 of this chapter, the following standards apply.
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a flood-proofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or flood-proofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
153.26 of this chapter.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be water-tight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest flood (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
flood-proofed and the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Flood-proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into flood waters. Access
routes elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be
provided to all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.07 CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
   (B)   In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30
days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the
watercourse.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.08 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Mayor for a
variance. The Mayor shall review the applicant’s request for a variance and
shall submit its recommendation to the city. The city may attach such
conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
intent of this chapter.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing or repairs to roads, utilities or other
public facilities;
      (6)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
      (7)   All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.09 PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS.
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of §§
153.25 and
153.26, below, the following standards apply:
      (1)   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of §
153.26.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      (5)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest flood (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed and the 500-year-flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year-flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.10 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on that part of
the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results
from proper reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.11 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city to
fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program including none
current. However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or
ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter
repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance easements, covenants or
deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.12 NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM MEMBERSHIP.
   The City Council is a member of the National Flood Insurance Program as set
out by resolution which is adopted by reference and made a part hereof as if
appearing in total.
(Res. passed 6-28-2010)
PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES
§ 153.25 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Within any floodway identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) below, no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development
will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public
health and safety. The following specific development activities shall be
considered as meeting this requirement:
      (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
following conditions of the State Department of Natural Resources, Office of
Water Resources Statewide Permit Number 2:
         (a)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one foot;
         (b)   The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface
profile elevation in excess of one-half feet at a point 1,000 feet upstream of
the proposed structure;
         (c)   There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in
water surface profile;
         (d)   The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve
straightening, enlarging or relocating the existing channel;
         (e)   The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer
in the state and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/OWR permit;
and
         (f)   The design must be certified by a second licensed professional
engineer.
      (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 3: the permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier
cells or other similar anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers;
      (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit Number 4:
         (a)   The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year
flood elevation or attached to an existing bridge;
         (b)   A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be
constructed above the low cord elevation of the bridge;
         (c)   No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake
or stream;
         (d)   Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be
designed and located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by
trapping debris;
         (e)   All disturbed areas shall be returned to pre-construction grades
and re-vegetated; and
         (f)   All State Commerce Commission, National Electrical Safety Code
and federal requirements must be met.
      (4)   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 5:
         (a)   The boat dock must not extend more than 50 feet into a waterway
and no more than one-quarter of the width of the waterway and shall not extend
beyond the navigational limited established by the IDNR and Corps of Engineers;
         (b)   The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet;
         (c)   For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion
parallel to the shoreline must not exceed 50% of the landowner’s shoreline
frontage, nor 50 feet;
         (d)   Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of
property lines into the waterway or come within ten feet of the projected
property line;
         (e)   Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices;
         (f)   The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment
during times of high wind or water;
         (g)   Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units
unless they are filled with floatation foam. Containers which previously stored
pesticides, herbicides or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible;
         (h)   This permit does not authorize any other related construction
activity such as shore protection or fill;
         (i)   Non-floating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which
will minimize obstruction to flow; and
         (j)   At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary
modifications to the dock as determined by the IDNR or Corp of Engineers.
      (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting the following conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 6: the following activities (not involving
fill or positive change in grade) are covered by this permit:
         (a)   The construction of underground utility lines, wells or septic
tanks not crossing a lake or stream;
         (b)   The construction of light poles, sign posts and similar
structures;
         (c)   The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields
(excluding fences), patios and similar structures;
         (d)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions and carports;
         (e)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding 70
square feet in size, nor ten square feet in any dimension. Only one such
building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit; and
         (f)   The raising of existing buildings; provided, no changes are made
to the outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not
involved.
      (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/ OWR Statewide Permit Number 7:
         (a)   Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end-section,
shall not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank
slope or adjacent bank protection;
         (b)   The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour
velocity of the channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the
use of riprap or other design measures;
         (c)   Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream
until the ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream
sedimentation; and
         (d)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 8:
         (a)   In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of
the river, lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or
entrenched in bedrock, a minimum of three feet of cover shall be provided. The
river, lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition;
         (b)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction;
         (c)   Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution, as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5), shall
be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed; and
         (d)   If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the
crossing, the permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten days prior to
the blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
      (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit Number 9:
         (a)   Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas:
stone and concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric-formed
concrete, gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags,
geotechnical fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. URBAN
AREAS are defined as areas of the state where residential, commercial or
industrial development currently exists or, based on land use plans or
controls, is expected to occur within ten years; (The Department should be
consulted if there is a question of whether or not an area is considered
urban.)
         (b)   In addition to the materials listed in division (B)(8)(a) above,
other materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided
all other conditions of this permit are met;
         (c)   The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto
bodies, garbage of debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials,
asphalt or other bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protections Act (415 ILCS 5);
         (d)   The affected length of shoreline, stream bank or channel to be
protected shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, 1,000 feet;
         (e)   All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to
resist anticipated forces of current and wave action;
         (f)   Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion
or the accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the
project;
         (g)   Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of
the bank;
         (h)   Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full-width
and cross-sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more
restrictive than that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the
site. For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe
of the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than 10%, nor the volume of
material placed exceeds two cubic yards per lineal foot of the stream bank or
shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and to lessen the
quantity of material required;
         (i)   If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as
reinforcing rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and
removed from the construction area;
         (j)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction;
         (k)   In the case of seawalls and gabion structures on lakes, the
structure shall be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined
by the normal pool elevation, unless:
            1.   It is constructed in alignment with an existing seawall(s) or
gabion structure(s); and
            2.   The volume of material placed, including the structure, would
not exceed two cubic yards per lineal foot.
         (l)   Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or
shoreline protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state and
federal laws and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
      (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 10:
         (a)   The accessory structure or building addition must comply with
the requirements of the local floodplain ordinance;
         (b)   The principle structure to which the project is being added must
have been in existence on the effective date of this permit (7-25-1988);
         (c)   The accessory structure or addition must not exceed 500 square
feet in size and must not deflect flood waters onto another property;
         (d)   Must not involve the placement of any fill material;
         (e)   No construction shall be undertaken in, or within, 50 feet of
the bank of the stream channel;
         (f)   The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to
prevent its movement during flood conditions;
         (g)   Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing
structure shall be authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition
must be submitted to IDNR/OWR for review; and
         (h)   Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas
shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 11:
         (a)   The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed 1,000 feet;
         (b)   The project shall not include the construction of any new
channel; all work must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing
flows in the natural stream channel;
         (c)   The cross-sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to
that of the natural channel upstream and down stream of the site;
         (d)   Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland
and shall be either:
            1.   Removed from the floodway;
            2.   Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would
be placed higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross-sectional
area of the natural channel would not be reduced by more than 10%, nor the
volume of material placed exceeds two cubic yards per lineal foot of
streambank;
            3.   Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area
such that the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
            4.   Used to stabilize and existing levee provided the height of
the levee would not be increased nor its alignment changed;
            5.   Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the
Department in accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
            6.   Used for beach nourishment; provided, the material meets all
applicable water quality standards.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise
stabilized upon completion of construction.
      (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit Number 12:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document
that the existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood
damage. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
            1.   No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater
induced by the existing structure; and
            2.   There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated
with the existing structure.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new
structure will provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the
existing structure. For bridge widening projects, the existing piers and the
proposed pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching
flow upstream of the bridge;
         (c)   The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the
approach roads; (This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches
exist at an elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood
headwater elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or
approved by IDNR/OWR.)
         (d)   The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or
relocation of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted
by the Department’s Statewide Permit Number 9 (Minor Shoreline, Channel and
Streambank Protection Activities) or Statewide Permit Number 11 (Minor
Maintenance Dredging Activities);
         (e)   Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction; and
         (f)   Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution
as defined by the Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5).
      (13)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
   (C)   Other development activities not listed in division (B) above may be
permitted only if:
      (1)   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required); or
      (2)   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA, when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.26 PROTECTING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In addition to the damage prevention requirements of §
153.25 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet;
      (2)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively
subsequent to this chapter. If substantially improved, the existing structure
and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of this section;
      (3)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section;
      (4)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site; (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      (5)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than 180 days per year; and
      (6)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
153.02 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      (1)   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest flood (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation;
         (b)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are water-proofed;
         (c)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space; or
         (d)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      (2)   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation; provided that, the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade;
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade;
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
at any point;
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove flood
waters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of
time after a flood event;
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry flood-proofed (in
lieu of elevation); provided, a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      (1)   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are water-tight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood;
      (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate
of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy and the
impact from debris and ice;
      (3)   Flood-proofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity; and
      (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
flood-proofing for the purpose of this division (C).
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with division (B) above; and
      (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the State Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act, 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq., issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code
§ 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than 180
days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of division (D) above
unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light
duty truck;
      (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times;
      (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches;
      (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling;
      (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
400 square feet;
      (6)   The vehicle’s wheels must remain on axles and inflated;
      (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement out of the floodplain;
      (8)   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation;
      (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle
or park model; and
      (10)   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks; or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by used of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The garage of shed must be non-habitable;
      (2)   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use;
      (3)   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate state and/or federal permits;
      (4)   The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory
to an existing principle structure on the same lot;
      (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage;
      (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation;
      (7)   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot above grade with one square inch of opening for
every one square foot of floor area;
      (8)   The garage or shed must be less than $10,000 in market value or
replacement cost whichever is greater or less than 500 square feet;
      (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist floatation and
overturning;
      (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers and the like) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation;
and
      (11)   The lowest flood elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.27 SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   The city shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are known,
in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of §§
153.25 and
153.26 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      (1)   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      (2)   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      (3)   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (B)   Streets, blocks lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Law Office of Fruin &
Kash may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter
exists. The Law Office of Fruin & Kash shall notify the owner in writing of
such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten-days’ notice to correct the violation:
      (1)   The city shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with the chapter.
      (2)   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than $50 or more than $750 for each offense.
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      (4)   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
   (B)   (1)   The Law Office of Fruin & Kash shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.
      (2)   The Law Office of Fruin & Kash is authorized to issue an order
requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall
be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work
order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (3)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the City Council. Written notice of such
hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
         (a)   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or
revocation, and
         (b)   The time and place of the hearing.
      (4)   At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City
Council shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 1, Series 2010-2011, passed 6-28-2010)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Definitions
   
154.02   Establishment of control
   
154.03   Plat certificates and deeds
   
154.04   Images and examples
   
154.05   Variances
Plat Procedures
   
154.20   Filing of plats and applications for exceptions; supporting data
   
154.21   Preliminary plat
   
154.22   Final plat
   
154.23   Filing of orders and resolutions
Design Principles and Standards
   
154.35   General
   
154.36   Streets
   
154.37   Blocks
   
154.38   Lots
   
154.39   Public land, open space dedications
   
154.40   Easements
Improvements and Installations
   
154.55   General requirements
   
154.56   Engineering drawings required
   
154.57   Required physical improvements
   
154.58   Utility easements
   
154.59   Required setbacks
   
154.60   Street trees, screen planting
   
154.61   Guarantee of performance
   
154.62   Inspection of improvements
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A permanent service way providing a secondary means of access to
abutting lands.
   BLOCK. Property abutting on one side of a street, and lying between the two
nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or between the nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway or
other definite barrier.
   BOULEVARD. A street, other than a freeway or an expressway, developed with
two-land, one-way pavements separated by a landscaped island, median or
barrier.
   CITY. The City of Chrisman, Illinois.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Chrisman, Illinois.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Chrisman, Illinois.
   CITY ROAD COMMISSIONER. An official employed by the City Council, under the
Illinois Revised Statutes.
   COUNTY HIGHWAY. Roads and streets maintained by the county.
   CUL-DE-SAC, COURT or DEAD END STREET. A short street or highway having one
end open to traffic and being permanently terminated by a vehicle turn-around.
   DEVELOPER. Any person engaged in developing or improving a lot or group of
lots or structures thereon for use or occupancy.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land by the
public, a corporation or persons for specified purposes.
   ENGINEER. A professional engineer registered as such and licensed to
practice in the state or qualified to practice as provided in the Illinois
Revised Statutes.
   IMPROVEMENT. Street pavements (with or without curb and gutter), public
walkways, monuments, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, street signs,
culverts and appurtenances to the foregoing items and for use by the public.
   JURISDICTIONAL AREA. The City of Chrisman, Illinois.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit
for development or transfer of ownership.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or any
other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.
   PLACE. An open, unoccupied, officially-designated space other than a public
street or alley, permanently reserved for use as the principal means of access
to abutting property, having a turning circle of not less than 100 feet in
diameter and not more than 100 feet in length measured from the edge of the
intersecting road surface to the back of the turning circle.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A preliminary map, and supporting data, indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate
basis for the review by the County Plat Committee, meeting the requirements of
these regulations.
   ROAD DISTRICT ROAD. A road or street maintained by the township.
   SETBACK LINE. A line marking the setback distance from the street line,
which establishes a minimum distance between buildings and the street line.
   STREET. A right-of-way, other than an alley, dedicated or otherwise legally
established to the public use, usually affording the principal means of access
to abutting property. A STREET may be designated as a highway, thoroughfare,
parkway, boulevard, road, avenue, land, drive or other appropriate name.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street designated for large volumes of traffic movement.
Certain ARTERIAL STREETS may be classed as limited access highways to which
entrances and exits are provided only at controlled intersections and access is
denied to abutting properties.
   STREET, FEEDER. A street planned to facilitate the collection of traffic
from local streets, and to provide circulation within neighborhood areas and
convenient ways for traffic to reach arterial streets.
   STREET, LOCAL.
      (1)   A street designated primarily to provide access to abutting
properties; and
      (2)   Marginal access streets are LOCAL STREETS designed and constructed
parallel to arterial streets, which provide access to abutting property and
ways for traffic to reach access points on arterial streets.
   STRUCTURES. Anything human-made (i.e., signs, fences and the like).
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person engaged in developing or improving a tract of land
which complies with the definition of a “subdivision”, as defined in these
regulations.
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit, as part of a
unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding transfer of ownership
thereof, into two or more parcels, sites or lots, any one of which is less than
five acres in area, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer
of ownership; provided, however, that, the division or partition of land into
parcels of more than five acres not involving any new streets or easements of
access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where
such sale or exchange does not create additional building sites, shall not be
considered a SUBDIVISION; or
      (2)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
subdivision and allocation of land as streets or other open spaces for common
use by owners, occupants or lease holders or as easements for the extension and
maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public utilities
and facilities.
   SYSTEMS, WATER AND SEWER. Mains, lines and operational units.
   “U” STREET. A short boulevard having one end permanently terminated by a
vehicular turnaround.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF CONTROL.
   (A)   No plat or replat of a subdivision of land located within the
jurisdictional area shall be recorded until it shall have been approved by the
City Council, and a certified copy of the order of approval shall have been
attached to the plat by the City Clerk.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation proposing to make or having made a
subdivision within the city shall enter into any contract for sale of, or shall
offer to sell, said subdivision or any part thereof until he or she has
obtained the approval of the final subdivision plat for the proposed
subdivision and has filed same.
   (C)   No person, firm or corporation proposing to make or having made a
subdivision within the unincorporated portion of the city shall proceed with
any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, until he
or she has obtained the conditional approval of the preliminary plat of the
proposed subdivision.
   (D)   No plat of any subdivision shall be “entitled to record” in the County
Recorder’s office, or have any validity, until it has been approved in the
manner prescribed by law.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.03 PLAT CERTIFICATES AND DEEDS.
   (A)   Acceptance of streets.
 
CITY OF CHRISMAN
EDGAR COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS
 
The Commissioner of Roads of the City of Chrisman hereby agrees to accept the streets in                                Subdivision in the                               of Section               , Township
              , Range                of the                 P.M., said Subdivision consisting of                         + miles of Streets.
 
The City of Chrisman will maintain the streets, including snow removal, surface drainage of the streets as it exists at the time of acceptance, existing culverts, and surfacing of the streets as
constructed.
 
All additional entrance culverts required shall be furnished by others, subject to the approval of the City of Chrisman Road Commissioner as to type and size.
 
Dated this                   day of                                 , 20      .
 
                                                                                                       
City of Chrisman Road Commissioner
 
Filed this                   day of                                 , 20      .
 
                                                                                                       
City Clerk
 
CC: Subdivider
City Road Commissioner
County Superintendent of Highways
City Clerk
Plat Committee of City Council
Illinois Department of Transportation
 
   (B)   Preliminary plat certificate.
 
The preliminary plat of subdivision as shown herein is approved and the City Plat Committee now is ready to receive the final plat of said subdivision for consideration. This is NOT an approval of
the final plat.
 
Date:                                                       , 20            
 
City of Chrisman Plat Committee BY:                                                      , Chairman
 
                                                                                                , Secretary
Dated:                                                       , 20            
 
City Council
 
BY:                                                                                                   , Mayor
 
   (C)   City Council certificate for final plat. To be made a part of the
original drawing on the final plat, and used whenever a subdivision is located
wholly or in part outside of an incorporated municipality.
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   :
: SS.
COUNTY OF EDGAR   :
 
Under authority of the Illinois Revised Statutes, this plat was given approval by the City Council of the City of Chrisman at a meeting on the                        day of                        , 20              .
 
City Council, City of Chrisman
 
ATTEST:                                                                                                                         
      City Clerk            Mayor
 
   (D)   Surveyor’s certificate. To be made a part of the original drawing on
the final plat.
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   :
: SS.
COUNTY OF EDGAR   :
 
I,                                                                                        , hereby certify that I am a registered land surveyor, licensed in compliance with the laws of the State of
Illinois, that this plat correctly represents a survey completed by me on                                                             , that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, that the
location, size, type and material of said monuments are accurately shown, no part (or a part) of the property covered by this plat or subdivision is situated within 500 feet of any surface drain or
watercourse serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more.
 
                                                                                                      
 
(SEAL)
 
   (E)   Deed of dedication. Each final plat submitted to the City Council for
approval shall carry a deed of dedication in substantially the following form:
 
We, the undersigned                                                                                    owners of the real estate shown and described herein, do hereby certify that we have laid off, platted
and subdivided, and do hereby lay off, plat and subdivide, said real estate in accordance with the attached plat.
 
This subdivision shall be known and designated as                                                                                . All streets and alleys shown and not heretofore dedicated, are hereby
dedicated to the public.
 
Front and side yard building setback lines are hereby established as shown on this plat, between which lines and the property lines of the street, there shall be erected or maintained no building or
structure.
 
There are strips of ground                       feet in width as shown on this plat and marked “Easement”, reserved for the use of public utilities for the installation of water and sewer mains, surface
drainage, poles, ducts, lines and wires, subject
at all times to the proper authorities and to the easements herein reserved. No permanent or other structures are to be erected or maintained upon said strips of land, but owners of lots in this subdivision
shall take their titles subject to the right of the public utilities.
 
(Additional dedications and protective covenants, or private restrictions, would be inserted here upon the subdivided initiative or upon the recommendation of the City Council. Important provisions are
those specifying the use to be made of the property and, in the case of residential use, the minimum habitable floor area.
 
The foregoing covenants, (or restrictions) are to run with the land and shall be binding on all parties and all persons claiming under them until January 1, 20               (a 25-year period is suggested),
at which time said covenants, (or restrictions), shall be automatically extended for successive periods of ten years unless changed by a vote of a majority of the then owners of the building sites covered
by these covenants, or restrictions, in whole or in part. Invalidation of any one of the foregoing covenants or restrictions, by judgment or court order shall in no way affect any of the other covenants or
restrictions, which shall remain in full force and effect.
 
The right to enforce these provisions by injunction, together with the right to cause the removal, by due process of law, of any structure or part thereof erected, or maintained in violation hereto, is
hereby dedicated to the public, and reserved to the several owners of the several lots in this subdivision and to theirs heirs and assigns.
 
WITNESS our hands and seals this                              day of                                          , 20            .
 
 
                                                                                                       
 
 
                                                                                                       
 
STATE OF ILLINOIS   :
: SS.
COUNTY OF EDGAR   :
 
 
 
Before me, the undersigned notary public, in and for the above stated county and state, personally appeared
                                                                      and each separately and severally acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument as his or her voluntary act and deed, for the
purposes therein expressed.
 
Witness my hand and notarial seal this                day of                                   , 20                 .
 
 
                                                                                                       
Notary Public
 
 
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.04 IMAGES AND EXAMPLES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/80b83199f00a317f5647944ae35ba4faa252112b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-78.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/80b83199f00a317f5647944ae35ba4faa252112b/
IMAGES/0-0-0-80.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.05 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally. Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these
regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and where,
in the opinion of the City Council, because of topographical or other
conditions peculiar to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the
intent of such provision, the City Council may authorize a variance.
   (B)   Application and determination. In the event that the City Council
finds that extraordinary hardship or injustice will result from strict
compliance with these regulations, it may vary the terms thereof to the extent
necessary to grant relief provided:
      (1)   The special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar
to the tract or tracts to be subdivided;
      (2)   The literal interpretation of the provisions of these regulations
would deprive the subdivider of rights commonly enjoyed by other subdividers
under the terms of these regulations;
      (3)   The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the
actions of the subdivider;
      (4)   Granting the variance requested will not confer on the subdivider
any special privilege that is denied by these regulations to other subdividers;
and
      (5)   The City Council determines that the variance requested is:
         (a)   The least deviation from these regulations which will mitigate
the hardship;
         (b)   Not detrimental to the public interest, and is in keeping with
the general intent and purpose of these regulations; and
         (c)   Not applicable to other subdivisions, nor subdividers.
   (C)   Decision. The granting of any variance by the City Council shall be in
the form of a motion which has been presented, adopted, approved and recorded
in the same manner as other motions acted upon by the City Council.
(Ord. passed - -)
PLAT PROCEDURES
§ 154.20 FILING OF PLATS AND APPLICATIONS FOR EXCEPTIONS; SUPPORTING DATA.
   (A)   Any person requesting approval either of a preliminary or final plat
of subdivision or resubdivision shall file four copies of a plat thereof with
the City Clerk, and shall furnish therewith four copies of all data necessary
to show compliance with all applicable regulations of the city and shall make
application for preliminary or final approval of the proposed plat, all in
accordance with the requirements set forth in these regulations.
   (B)   (1)   All applications for the preliminary approval of plats shall be
referred by the City Clerk to the Plat Committee for review and action thereon.
      (2)   All applications for final approval of plats shall be referred by
the City Clerk to the City Council for review and action thereon.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.21 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Maps, data and inspection fees.
      (1)   The applicant shall provide a preliminary plan of the subdivision,
as follows, which shall show the manner in which the proposed subdivision is
coordinated with thoroughfares, school and recreation sites, shopping centers,
community facilities, sanitation, water supply and drainage, and other
developments, existing and proposed, in the vicinity; provided, however, that,
no land shall be subdivided for use unless adequate access to the land over
improved streets or thoroughfares exists or will be provided by the subdivider,
or if such land is considered by the City Council to be unsuitable for such use
by reason of flooding or improper drainage, objectionable earth and rock
formation, topography or any other feature harmful to the health and safety of
possible residents in the subdivision and to the community as a whole.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide four copies of each of the following:
         (a)   A location map (which may be prepared by indicating the required
data by notation on available maps) showing:
            1.   Subdivision name and location;
            2.   Any thoroughfares related to the subdivision;
            3.   Existing public schools, parks and playgrounds serving the
area proposed to be subdivided, and other community facilities;
            4.   Any storm and flood water run-off channels and basins related
to the subdivision; and
            5.   Title, scale, north point and date.
         (b)   A preliminary plat showing:
            1.   Proposed name of the subdivision;
            2.   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider and the land
planning consultant, engineer or surveyor, who prepared the plan;
            3.   Streets and right-of-way, on an adjoining the site of the
proposed subdivision, showing the names (which shall not duplicate names of
other streets in the jurisdictional area, except as designated by the City
Council) and including roadway widths, approximate gradients, types and widths
of pavement, curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks, tree-planting and other pertinent
data;
            4.   Easements: location, widths and purposes (i.e., public
utilities, storm water runoff channels and the like);
            5.   Statement concerning the location, type and approximate size
or capacity of utilities to be installed by the subdivider;
            6.   Layout of lots, showing dimensions and numbers;
            7.   Parcels of land proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds or other public, semi-public or community purposes;
            8.   Contours at vertical intervals of two feet if the general
slope of the site is less than 10% and at vertical intervals of five feet if
the general slope is greater than 10%;
            9.   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings or angles,
and references to section, township and range lines or corners;
            10.   Building set back lines;
            11.   Legend and notes;
            12.   Other features or conditions which would affect the
subdivision favorably or adversely; and
            13.   Scale*, north point and date. (*The preliminary plat of the
subdivision shall be drawn to a scale of 50 feet to one inch, or 100 feet to
one inch; provided, however, that, if the resulting drawing would be over 36
inches in shortest dimension, a scale as recommended by the Plat Committee may
be used.)
      (3)   The application shall be accompanied by a certified check or money
order in the amount of $1 for each lot in the proposed subdivision with a
minimum total charge of $10 to cover the cost of checking and verifying the
proposed plat, and such amount shall be deposited in the General Corporate Fund
of the city.
   (B)   Preliminary plat approval. Within 60 days from the date of application
for approval of a preliminary plat of a subdivision, or the filing by the
applicant of the last item of required supporting date, whichever is later, the
Plat Committee shall review the preliminary plat and give its approval or
return the plat to the applicant with a written statement setting forth the
reason for disapproval and specifying the particular aspects in which the plat
fails to conform to the city ordinances. After a preliminary plat has been
approved by the Plat Committee, the City Council shall accept or reject the
plat within 30 days after its next stated regular meeting following the action
of the Plat Committee.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.22 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Time limitation on filing, specifications and surety.
      (1)   Application for final approval of a plat shall be made within one
year from the date of preliminary approval of the plat by the Plat Committee.
The applicant may elect to have final approval of all or a geographic part of
parts of the plat, and may delay application for approval of other parts of the
plat until a later date or dates beyond one year with the approval of the City
Council. Only that part of the plat receiving final approval shall be recorded.
      (2)   The final plat shall meet the following specifications.
         (a)   The original drawing of the final plat of the subdivision shall
be prepared in ink on tracing cloth or suitable equivalent material to a scale
of 50 to one inch; provided that, if the resulting drawing would be over 36
inches in shortest dimension, a scale of 100 feet to one inch may be used.
Three black or blue line prints shall be submitted with the original final
plat, or, in order to conform to modern drafting and reproduction methods,
three black line prints and a reproducible print shall be submitted.
         (b)   The following basic information shall be shown:
            1.   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and angles, which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error or not more than one foot
in 10,000 feet;
            2.   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established
street corners or official monuments. Reference comers shall be accurately
described on the plat;
            3.   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract and within 300 feet of the tract;
            4.   Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary;
            5.   Source of title of the applicant to the land as shown by the
last entry in the books of the County Recorder;
            6.   Street names;
            7.   Complete curve notes for all curves included in the plan;
            8.   Street lines with accurate dimensions in feet and decimal
parts of feet, with angles to street, alley and lot lines;
            9.   Lot numbers and dimensions;
            10.   Accurate locations of easements for utilities and any
limitations on each easement;
            11.   Accurate dimensions for any property to be dedicated or
reserved for public, semi-public or community use;
            12.   Building setback lines and dimensions;
            13.   Locations, type, material and size of all monuments and lot
markers;
            14.   Plans and specifications for the improvements required in
these regulations;
            15.   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and
become covenants in the deeds for lots must appear on the plat or be referenced
on the plat;
            16.   Name of the subdivision;
            17.   Name and address of the owner and the subdivider;
            18.   North point, scale and date;
            19.   Certification of all engineering work by a registered
professional engineer and certification of the plat by a registered land
surveyor;
            20.   Certification of dedication of streets and other public
property; and
            21.   Certificates for approval by the City Council, as required.
   (B)   Final plat approval. Within 60 days from the date of filing of the
application for approval of a final plat of a subdivision, or the filing of the
last document or other paper, whichever is later, the City Council shall
approve or disapprove the plat. Such 60-day period may be extended by mutual
agreement between the applicant and the City Council.
   (C)   Surety for installations and improvements.
      (1)   (a)   As a condition of the final approval of a plat of a
subdivision, the applicant shall post a good and sufficient bond with the City
Clerk in a penal sum sufficient to cover the estimated cost of the expenditures
necessary for the completion of improvement and installations in compliance
with these regulations including reasonable inspection fees to be borne by this
applicant, the bond shall:
            1.   Run to the City Council;
            2.   Be with surety satisfactory to the City Council; and
            3.   Specify the time for completion of the installations and
improvements.
         (b)   Within 60 days after the conditional final approval by the City
Council of a plat of a subdivision, the applicant shall file an estimate
prepared by a registered engineer of the expenditures necessary for the
completion of improvements and installations in compliance with these
regulations including reasonable inspection fees to be borne by this applicant.
If the applicant fails to file said estimate within the prescribed time, the
City Council may appoint a registered engineer to prepare an estimate of the
expenditures necessary for the completion of improvements and installations in
compliance with these regulations including reasonable inspection fees to be
borne by the applicant and the applicant shall reimburse the city for the
expense of the engineer’s estimate. The amount of the surety bond posted by the
applicant shall equal the amount of the engineer’s estimate.
      (2)   In lieu of the surety bond required above, the City Council may
permit the depositing of cash or other security acceptable to the Council to
complete the installations and improvements.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.23 FILING OF ORDERS AND RESOLUTIONS.
   If the preliminary or final plat is approved, the City Clerk shall attach a
certified copy of the order or resolution of approval to a copy of the plat. If
the proposed plat is disapproved, the order or resolution shall state the
reasons for disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspects in which the
proposed plat fails to conform to the ordinances of the city. A copy of the
order or resolution shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.
(Ord. passed - -)
DESIGN PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS
§ 154.35 GENERAL.
   (A)   The final plat of the subdivision shall conform to the following
principles and standards of design.
   (B)   The subdivision plan shall conform to the principles and standards
which are generally exhibited herein.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.36 STREETS.
   (A)   The street and alley layout shall provide access to all lots and
parcels of land within the subdivision and, where streets cross other streets,
jogs shall not be created.
   (B)   Proposed streets shall be adjusted to the contour of the land so as to
produce useable lots and streets of reasonable gradient.
   (C)   Certain proposed streets, where appropriate, shall be extended to the
boundary line of the tract to be subdivided so as to provide for normal
circulation of traffic within the vicinity.
   (D)   Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted portion of a street or
alley adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the remainder of the street or
alley to the prescribed width shall be platted within the proposed subdivision.
   (E)   Alleys will not be approved in those parts of the plat proposed for
single- and two-family residential use. Alleys may be provided for all lots or
parcels intended for business, commercial, industrial and multiple-family
residential use areas. The minimum width of an alley shall be 20 feet. No dead-
end alleys shall be permitted.
   (F)   (1)   Half-streets, except where it is absolutely essential to the
reasonable development of the tract and in conformity to the principles herein
stated, are prohibited. Whenever a half-street has previously been platted,
abutting the tract boundary line, the remaining half shall be platted and
improved within the tract.
      (2)   In cases where the platting of a half-street is approved, it shall
not be constructed or used for access to any lot until such time as the
adjoining half-street is platted and approved and the entire street is
constructed.
   (G)   The following are the minimum acceptable widths of rights-of-way for
the various classes of streets and highways:
County highways                                                            80 feet
Road District township road                                                60 feet
Special traffic ways
   Boulevard street                                                     100 feet
                                                                           60 feet,
                                                                           terminating
                                                                           in a turning
                                                                           circle, 20
                                                                           feet in
                                                                           diameter;
                                                                           maximum
                                                                           length of
                                                                           any cul-de-
                                                                           sac shall be
                                                                           600 feet
                                                                           measured
                                                                           from the
                                                                           centerline
                                                                           of the
                                                                           intersecting
   Cul-de-sac streets                                                   street to
                                                                           the center
                                                                           of the
                                                                           turning
                                                                           circle,
                                                                           except in
                                                                           the judgment
                                                                           of the Plat
                                                                           Committee
                                                                           the physical
                                                                           situation of
                                                                           the land
                                                                           being
                                                                           subdivided,
                                                                           requires a
                                                                           longer cul-
                                                                           de-sac
                                                                           40 feet when
                                                                           abutting a
                                                                           freeway,
   Marginal access street (where permitted or required by the City Plat expressway,
Committee)                                                                 area
                                                                           service,
                                                                           collector or
                                                                           land access
                                                                           highway
                                                                           100 feet,
                                                                           terminating
                                                                           in a turning
   “U” street (where permitted by the City Plat Committee)          circle
                                                                           having a
                                                                           diameter of
                                                                           100 feet
Subdivision street                                                         60 feet
 
   (H)   In those instances in which the owner or owners of a new subdivision
own land on only one side of an existing street, the right-of-way of which is
narrower than that required by these regulations, the subdivider shall dedicate
additional right-of-way of sufficient width to make that portion of the right-
of-way lying between the centerline of the existing right-of-way and the
outside edge of the additional right-of-way at least equal to one-half of the
required right-of-way width.
   (I)   All streets shall be named, and the names of streets in proposed plats
shall be chosen as to avoid confusion or duplication with existing street names
and shall be approved by the City Plat Committee.
   (J)   The centerlines of streets should intersect as nearly at right angles
as possible.
   (K)   If the smaller angle of intersection of two streets is less than 75
degrees, the radius of the arc at the intersection of property lines shall be
30 feet or longer.
   (L)   Intersections or more than two streets at one point shall be avoided.
   (M)   Where parkways or special types of streets are involved, the City Road
Commissioner may apply special standards to be followed in their design.
   (N)   Whenever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a
railroad right-of-way or a highway designated as a “limited access highway” by
the appropriate highway authorities, provision shall be made for a marginal
access street or a parallel street at a distance acceptable for the appropriate
use of the land between the highway or railroad and such streets.
   (O)   Horizontal visibility on curved streets and vertical visibility on all
streets shall be maintained along the centerline as follows:
 
Arterial streets            500 feet
Feeder streets and parkways 300 feet
Local streets               150 feet
 
   (P)   Curvature measured along the centerline shall have a minimum radius as
follows:
 
Arterial streets    500 feet
Feeder and parkways 300 feet
Local streets       200 feet
 
   (Q)   Between reversed curves on arterial streets there shall be a tangent
of not less than 100 feet and on feeder such tangent shall be not less than 40
feet.
   (R)   Maximum grades for streets shall be as follows:
 
Arterial streets                    Not greater than 6%
Feeder and local streets and alleys Not greater than 8%
 
   (S)   The minimum grade of any street gutter or drainage scale should not be
less than 0.3% where possible.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.37 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Blocks should not exceed 1,320 feet in length.
   (B)   Blocks shall be of sufficient width to permit two tiers of lots of
appropriate depth, except where an interior street parallels a limited access
highway, an arterial street, a railroad right-of-way or other definite barrier.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.38 LOTS.
   (A)   All lots shall abut on a street or a place.
   (B)   Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to street lines,
except when, in the opinion of the City Plat Committee, other treatment is
justified.
   (C)   Double frontage lots should not be platted, except that, where desired
along arterial streets, lots may face on an interior street and back on such
thoroughfares. In that event, a planting strip for a screen, at least ten feet
in width shall be provided along the back of each lot.
   (D)   Wherever possible, unit shopping centers, based upon sound development
standards, should be designed in contrast to the platting of lots for
individual commercial use.
   (E)   Corner residential lots shall be wider than normal in order to permit
appropriate setbacks from abutting streets.
   (F)   Any lot that is served by a public or private water system; and/or any
lot that is served by a public or private sewer utility system, the following
shall prevail:
 
Lot area  Minimum of 7,000 square feet
Lot width Minimum of 70 feet
 
   (G)   Any lot that is served by a septic tank and well, the following shall
prevail:
 
Lot area  Minimum of 30,000 feet
Lot width Minimum of 100 feet
 
   (H)   The depth-to-width ratio of the area shall not exceed three to one.
   (I)   Required setback lines shall be measured from the street centerline,
and shall conform to the minimum setback requirements as provided in these
regulations.
   (J)   The total land area within the boundary of a plat shall be an official
part of the plat and accounted for as either lots, tracts, easements, dedicated
public areas or dedicated right-of-way.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.39 PUBLIC LAND, OPEN SPACE DEDICATIONS.
   In the event the subdivider dedicates land to the public for public use (as
for example: a school, park, forest preserve or recreation area), the
subdivider must have obtained from the appropriate public agency, a resolution
of acceptance or a letter of intent to accept the dedication.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.40 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   The width and location of easements shall conform to the requirements
as provided in §
154.58 of this chapter.
   (B)   Easements of a public or private nature shall contain no structures
and/or accessory building in or on the land, except essential public utility
structures.
(Ord. passed - -)
IMPROVEMENTS AND INSTALLATIONS
§ 154.55 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The subdivider shall provide and install all public improvements, as
required by these regulations. Improvements shall be provided and installed in
accordance with the standards and engineering requirements established by these
regulations as well as any and all standards and requirements adopted by other
local, state and federal authorities which may have jurisdiction of the area
being subdivided.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.56 ENGINEERING DRAWINGS REQUIRED.
   The subdivider shall prepare and file at least four copies of the
engineering drawings for the subdivision, as shall be required by the City Plat
Committee.
   (A)   Additional exhibits. In addition to the required engineering drawings,
the subdivider may submit to the City Plat Committee, additional exhibits
illustrating the type and location of additional physical improvements.
   (B)   Source of drawings. The engineering drawings as required by these
regulations shall be prepared by an engineer qualified to practice in the
state, and bearing his or her name, address, seal, registration number and
signature.
   (C)   Modification of physical improvements during construction. If the
subdivider wishes to modify the size, type, quality, quantity and/or location
of any or all of the required physical improvements during construction of the
subdivision, he or she shall first obtain approval of the modifications from
the Plat Committee before proceeding with the installation of the modified
improvements.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.57 REQUIRED PHYSICAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Installation required. The subdivider shall be responsible for the
adequate installation of all the physical improvements as required by these
regulations. Public improvements to be installed by the county or any corporate
municipality or governmental body shall be withheld until the final plat has
been approved and recorded, as required by these regulations.
   (B)   Monuments. All lot corners shall be monumented by at least a one-half
inch diameter round or one-half inch iron pipe at least 30 inches long set on
the corner. All lot corners that may have been disturbed or lost during
construction of streets and sewers shall be replaced at the expense of the
subdivider. The beginning and ending of all curves and a minimum of two corners
of each block and a minimum of two corners at each street intersection shall be
monumented with a permanent monument set in a concrete pose, the concrete
having a minimum length of 36 inches and a minimum cross-section of a four-inch
diameter circle. This monument shall be set sufficiently below the surface of
the ground to make its disturbance unlikely.
   (C)   Streets.
      (1)   Grades. Streets (and alleys where provided) shall be completed to
the grades shown on plans, profiles and cross-sections, provided by the
subdivider and prepared by a registered professional engineer and approved by
the City Council.
      (2)   Grades, surfaces and improvements. The streets shall be graded,
surfaced and improved to the dimensions required by such plans, profiles and
cross-sections and the work shall be performed in the manner prescribed in
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction adopted by the
Department of Transportation of the state.
      (3)   Large lot subdivisions. In subdivisions having an average lot area
of 15,000 square feet or more, the road surface shall be a minimum width of 20
feet edge to edge on a 22-foot base with a shoulder width of at least five on
each side of the road surface.
      (4)   Small lot subdivisions. In subdivisions having a lot area of less
than 15,000 square feet, the road travel surface shall be a minimum width of 26
feet, edge to edge with additional two-foot portland cement concrete gutter, or
P.C.C. curb and gutter, on each side of the road surface. See Plate 1 for
standard design.
      (5)   Permanent turnarounds. The outside diameter of the surfaced area of
permanent turnarounds shall not be less than 80 feet.
      (6)   Construction. Pavement construction for streets, highways and
alleys shall conform to the following:
Design Characteristics for Street and Alley Pavements
                                  Minimum Thickness - by Street Classification
Pavement Type and Materials Used* Feeder Local** Alley Arterial
Design Characteristics for Street and Alley Pavements
                         Minimum Thickness - by Street Classification
Pavement Type and        Feeder         Local** Alley Arterial
Materials Used*
Bituminous material      2"             2"      2"
surface
Bituminous surface       Subclass A3 or
treatment                equivalent                   To conform to State
Flexible base (gravel of 7"             7"      7"    Department of
crushed stone)                                        Transportation Standards
Portland cement concrete 7"             6"      6"
(uniform thickness)
Soil-cement base         7"             6"      6"
NOTES TO TABLE:
*   All paving materials shall conform to the State Department of
Transportation Specifications.
**   When a local street serves industrial or commercial development use
feeder street design characteristics.
 
   (D)   Curbs and gutters. Gutters and combination curbs and gutters, shall be
Portland cement concrete, not less than 24 inches in overall width and not less
than six inches thick, as shown on Plate 1.
      (1)   Wherever a proposed subdivision lies adjacent to or between other
subdivisions which have been provided with curb and gutter, the subdivider
shall install curb and gutter on each side of the street surface.
      (2)   The curb and gutter shall be one of the construction types shown in
the current applicable standard specifications of the State Department of
Transportation or as shown on Plate 1 and shall be constructed according to the
following specifications.
         (a)   The base for the curb and gutter shall be well-compacted on the
existing base or grade.
         (b)   The minimum specifications shall be as shown for the types of
cross-sections in the standard specifications.
         (c)   All concrete used in the curb and gutter shall meet the
specifications of the State Department of Transportation.
      (3)   Integral or monolithic curb of the same dimensions as shown in the
standard specifications or on Plate 1 may be built on concrete pavement,
provided the pavement widths as set out elsewhere in these regulations are
maintained.
   (E)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   Wherever a proposed subdivision lies adjacent to or between other
subdivisions which have been provided with sidewalks, or whenever the proposed
subdivision will average more than three and one-half lots per gross acre
included in the subdivision, the subdivider shall install sidewalks on each
side of the street.
      (2)   When sidewalks are required, they shall be constructed of portland
cement concrete, at least four inches thick, and four feet wide and placed
immediately inside the street property line. (See Plate 2.)
      (3)   All concrete used in the sidewalks shall meet the specifications of
the State Department of Transportation.
   (F)   Drainage facilities. Surface and/or subsurface drainage shall be
designed so as to adequately drain all portions of the subdivision including
streets. When a drainage system is installed, the agency that will have
maintenance responsibility of the street system must be consulted as to
acceptance of the drainage system.
   (G)   Culverts, bridges, intersections and private entrances.
      (1)   Entrance culverts where required shall be constructed of the type
and size specified by the agency having maintenance jurisdiction, and laid to
the flow line grade of the existing ditch and at no time shall such culvert
pipe be less than 12 inches in diameter or less than 24 in length.
      (2)   Entrance driveways shall be constructed of the same surfacing
material as the street back to the property line, not less than an equivalent
of CA-6 or CA-10, six inches in depth, and shall be laid so that the finished
surface of the driveway shall slope away from the traveled surface of the road
at a slope equal to the existing shoulder lines at the location of the
driveway.
   (H)   Water.
      (1)   The subdivider shall make available to the subdivision a complete
approved water main supply system, which shall be connected to an existing
approved municipal or community water supply; except that, when such municipal
or community water supply is not available, the subdivider shall make available
one of the following:
         (a)   A complete community water supply system in accordance with the
minimum requirements and recommendations of the appropriate state agency; or
         (b)   An individual water supply on each lot in the subdivision in
accordance with the minimum requirements and recommendations of the appropriate
state agency.
      (2)   The plans for the installation of the water main supply system
shall be provided by the subdivider and approved by the appropriate state
agency. Upon completion of the water supply installation, the plans for such
system as built shall be filed with the City Road Commissioner accompanied by a
registered professional engineer’s certificate which states that the system has
been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications as set forth
herein.
   (I)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   No plats of any new subdivision shall be approved by the Plat
Committee unless the same provides for and assures the construction by the
subdivider of a sanitary sewer system adequate to serve the needs of the entire
subdivision when the same is fully developed. The location and design of the
system shall be approved by the Plat Committee, the appropriate state agency
and the corporate authorities of any sanitary district of community in which
such subdivision or any part thereof may be located. Such approval will also be
required when the sewer system connects directly to an interceptor constructed
and maintained by such sanitary district or community. Upon completion of the
sanitary sewer installation, the plans for such system as built shall be filed
with the City Road Commissioner, accompanied by a registered professional
engineer’s certificate which states that the system has been constructed in
accordance with the plans and specifications as set forth herein.
      (2)   These requirements shall not be applicable to any new subdivision
which is not within the boundaries of a sanitary district or cannot be provided
with sanitary sewer service by a sanitary district, public utility or the city.
If the subdivision cannot be served by sanitary sewers and treatment, then each
developed lot shall be of adequate size to accommodate individual sanitary
sewage disposal. Such disposal shall be in accordance with the State Department
of Public Health Circular No. 4.002 and all revisions and amendments thereto.
Under no circumstances shall the effluent from any septic system be discharged
into a tile or open ditch. Results of an location of percolation test shall be
shown on the preliminary plat or plans. The covenant for the subdivision shall
require the owner to comply with the previously mentioned regulations.
   (J)   Alleys. The minimum widths of improved paved areas of alleys shall be
as follows:
 
Alleys to serve business, commercial and industrial use areas 20 feet
Alleys to serve multiple-family residential use areas         16 feet
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.58 UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Easements shall be provided for any overhead or underground utility
service including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, gas,
telephone and electric. Such easements shall have a minimum width of 12 feet.
      (2)   Where it is intended that both overhead and underground utilities
shall share the same easement, additional width sufficient to avoid conflict
shall be provided. To the extent possible, easements shall be established along
rear lot lines to provide continuity of alignment throughout the subdivision to
be served. A letter of “approval of location” from all utility companies
involved shall accompany the final plat.
   (B)   Drainage easements. When a subdivision is bordered or traversed by an
established stream, established drainage way or channel, there shall be
provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way confirming
substantially with the lines of same, and such easement shall include an
additional area of sufficient width to permit maintenance and any improvement
or reconstruction of the stream, drainage way or channel in the foreseeable
future.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.59 REQUIRED SETBACKS.
   The following are minimum setback distances for the various classes of
streets and highways, measured from the street centerline, which shall be shown
on the preliminary and final plats of the subdivision:
 
Any street within the subdivision other than a state, county or Road 55 feet
District highway
County highway                                                       85 feet
Road District highway                                                70 feet
State highway                                                        100 feet
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.60 STREET TREES, SCREEN PLANTING.
   Any trees or shrubs proposed to be installed in the street by the subdivider
or developer and any screen planting required pursuant to these regulations
shall be approved by the City Council as to types and placement.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.61 GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE.
   (A)   Surety bond required. A surety bond payable to the city, as required
by §
154.22 of this chapter, shall be conditioned upon the construction of the
improvements in full conformity with the engineering plans and specifications
12 months from the date thereof. The Plat Committee, for good cause shown, may
extend the time of performance for not more than 24 months.
   (B)   Form. The surety bond shall provide, among other things, that the
owner of the land shall be one of the principals under said bond and that the
surety shall be responsible for the completion of the work within reasonable
time after being notified that default has been made.
   (C)   Release. Any surety bond so given to guarantee the construction of any
such improvement may be released by the City Clerk only after receiving a
written statement from the City Road Commissioner that the improvement has been
constructed and that the certificates, as required in these regulations have
been submitted by a registered professional engineer.
   (D)   Certificate of completion. Upon the completion of the street and alley
improvements, one copy of the plans and profiles, cross-sections and special
provisions shall be filed with the City Road Commissioner accompanied by a
registered professional engineers certificate which states that the
improvements have been constructed in accordance with the plans and
specifications as set forth herein.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.62 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Inspection required. All required improvements shall be inspected at
the subdivider’s expense. The engineer shall provide an inspector for the job
at all times during the process of construction who shall inspect the
installation and constructing of all improvements required herein. When the
work has been completed, the engineer shall certify that the improvements
comply in all respects with the approved plans and specifications and with the
requirements of these regulations. All work shall also be at all times subject
to inspection by the City Road Commissioner and other affected agencies.
   (B)   Notification and timing of city inspections. Before starting the
construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall ascertain from the City
Road Commissioner, what inspections are required and the amount of notification
desired in each case, and shall comply with all rules, regulations and
instructions pertaining to such required inspections.
   (C)   Subdivider responsible for inspection and compliance. Regardless of
contracts, agreements or inspections performed, responsibility for the
inspection of the construction and installation of all improvements, in
accordance with these regulations shall also rest with the subdivider.
   (D)   Approval of improvements. When street and drainage improvements and
all appurtenances thereto, based on approved engineering drawings have been
constructed or installed and have passed all inspections, the streets shall
then be tendered by the subdivider to the City Road Commissioner for
acceptance.
   (E)   Acceptance of streets. Upon completion of construction of the required
physical improvements, and the filing with the City Road Commissioner the
certified plans and specifications, the Commissioner of Highways of the Road
District having jurisdiction of the subdivision shall furnish the subdivider a
copy of the completed form of acceptance of streets, as set out in §
154.03(A) of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   It shall be illegal to sell or offer to sell any lot, tract or property,
which does not conform to the requirements and regulations of this chapter.
Every such sale or attempt to sell shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$25 for each lot or tract as provided by state statutes.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING
Section
   
155.01   Title and purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Applicability
   
155.04   Unlawful residences; requirements
   
155.05   Certificates of occupancy for land
   
155.06   Power of City Council
   
155.07   Effective date
 
   
155.99   Penalty
§ 155.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “The City of Chrisman Zoning
Ordinance”, establishing an ordinance to prohibit uses, buildings or structures
incompatible with the character of the city and to conserve the taxable value
of land and buildings throughout the city.
(Ord. 3, Series 1990-91, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDINGS. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons, animals, chattels or
property of any kind.
   DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof which is designed for or used for
residential purposes, excluding house trailers, as hereinafter defined.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three
or more families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by
one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY OR DUPLEX. A building designed for or occupied
exclusively by two families.
   FAMILY. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, occupying
a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit and doing their own cooking
on the premises, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding hose,
lodging house or hotel, as herein defined.
   JUNKYARD. A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the
collecting, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
materials; or for the collection, dismantling, storage and salvaging of
machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts
thereof. A JUNKYARD includes auto-wrecking yards.
   TRAILER, HOUSE. A vehicle designed or intended for use for, or used for,
living or sleeping purposes and having no foundation other than wheels, blocks,
skids, jacks, horses or skirtings. When a HOUSE TRAILER is attached to the
ground by a permanent foundation, it shall be deemed to be a trailer building;
said building shall not qualify as a dwelling, as hereinbefore defined.
(Ord. 3, Series 1990-91, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 155.03 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter applies to the entire geographic expanse of the city
limits of the city, except as hereinafter set forth. Any exceptions to this
chapter must be made by a two-thirds majority approval of the Council members
at a regular or special meeting held by the City Council.
   (B)   All territory which may hereafter annexed to the city shall be
automatically included as being affected by this chapter.
(Ord. 3, Series 1990-91, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 155.04 UNLAWFUL RESIDENCES; REQUIREMENTS.
   From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be lawful for
any person, firm or corporation to park a trailer and to establish it as a
residence, as herein defined, within the city; provided, however, such trailer
shall comply with the following and such additional requirements as may be
deemed necessary for proper development and the protection of the surrounding
area.
   (A)   Before a trailer is placed upon an approved area, a certificate of
occupancy shall be obtained from the office of the City Clerk upon the filing
of plans for the land use and the water and sanitary facilities, and the
approval thereafter of the proper authorities that it is a suitable location.
   (B)   Every occupant of such trailer (house) shall keep that trailer, the
yard and accessory buildings which he or she occupies or over which he or she
has exclusive possession and right of control in a safe and sanitary condition,
clear and free from accumulation of dirt, filth, rubbish, garbage and similar
matter, and from materials or conditions of maintenance which tend to encourage
vermin or rodent infestation.
   (C)   Whenever a trailer is established as a home, there shall be provided
on the same lot or parcel of ground as is occupied by the trailer, one parking
space.
   (D)   Any trailer which is proposed to be moved into the city for the first
time and for which, a certificate of occupancy is applied for shall have been
manufactured within five years immediately preceding the date of application.
(Ord. 3, Series 1990-91, passed 7-23-1990; Ord. 8, Series 1999-2000, passed 1-
24-2000; Ord. 2, Series 2001-2002, passed 7-9-2001) Penalty, see §
155.99
§ 155.05 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY FOR LAND.
   (A)   Certificates for the occupancy of vacant land or the change in the
character of the use of land, as herein provided, shall be applied for before
any such land shall be occupied or used, and a certificate of occupancy shall
be issued within three days following the next regularly scheduled City Council
meeting after the application has been made; provided, such use is in
conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
   (B)   A certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or proposed
use of a building or land complies with all the building and health laws and
ordinances and with the provisions of these regulations. A record of all
certificates shall be kept on file in the city office and copies shall be
furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in
the building affected.
(Ord. 3, Series 1990-91, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 155.06 POWER OF CITY COUNCIL.
   The Council may, from time to time, on its own motion or on petition, amend,
supplement or change by ordinance the regulations herein or subsequently
established.
(Ord. 3, Series 1990-91, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 155.07 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 3, Series 1990-91, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 155.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the designated Council member to enforce this
chapter. Said designated Council member shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the Council. The City Council may appoint a Building Official
with the approval of the Council in the same manner as other city employees are
appointed and subject to any general provisions affecting such employees.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $25, nor more than $750, or imprisoned for not to exceed
one month, or both, for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the city, in addition
to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, maintenance or use to restrain, correct or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or
land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such
premises.
(Ord. 3, Series 1990-91, passed 7-23-1990)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   BONDS
      
III.   FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
      
IV.   VACATIONS
      
V.   ENCROACHMENTS
      
VI.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord./Res. No.       Date Passed Description
                                Annexing part of the southwest quarter of the
                                southwest quarter of Section 25, a part of the
                                southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
4, Series 1972-1973 7-24-1972   Section 26, and a part of the northwest quarter
                                of the northwest quarter of Section 36, all in
                                Township 16 North, Range 12 West, of the 2nd
                                P.M.
                                Authorizing the adoption and annexation of the
Res. -              1-9-1985    Chrisman Historical Society into the corporate
                                umbrella of the city government
                                Annexing the east 30 acres of the south 70
1, Series 1995-96   5-8-1995    acres of the southwest quarter of Section 26,
                                Township 16 North, Range 12 West, of the 2nd
                                P.M., except the area previously annexed
-, Series 2017      9-18-2017   Annexing the subdivision created within the
                                southern portion of Illinois Street.
                               
 
TABLE II: BONDS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Approving the issuance of Series 1991 first mortgage
5             4-8-1991    revenue bonds (Pleasant Meadows Christian Village
                          project)
                          Approving the issuance of Sewerage System Revenue
7             9-4-2018    Bonds (for the acquisition, construction, and
                          installation of wastewater system improvements)
                          Approving the issuance of Sewerage System Revenue
9             11-5-2018   Bond (for the acquisition, construction and
                          installation of wastewater system improvements)
                         
 
TABLE III: FRANCHISES AND AGREEMENTS
Ord./Res. No.       Date Passed Description
4, Series 1974-1975 1-27-1975   Granting a telephone franchise to General
                                Telephone Company of Illinois
Ord./Res. No.            Date Passed Description
4, Series 1974-1975      1-27-1975   Granting a telephone franchise to General
                                     Telephone Company of Illinois
Res. -                   8-11-1980   Establishing a housing rehabilitation
                                     program with federal funds
Res. -, Series 1980-81   9-22-1980   Amending Res. -, passed 8-11-1980
Res. -, Series 1980-1981 3-23-1981   Amending Res. -, passed 8-11-1980
Res. -                   8-24-1981   Encouraging the MFC Corporation to locate
                                     and construction Section 8 housing
6, Series 1983-1984      10-12-1983  Authorizing the entrance into a mutual aid
                                     pact between the city and the county
Res. -                   1-22-1986   Approving the participation in the
                                     Northern Edgar County Ambulance Service
-                        4-9-1990    Authorizing an agreement between the city
                                     and Illinois Cereal Mills, Inc.
                                     Approving the application for an agreement
Res. -                   3-25-1991   between the city and Christian Homes, Inc.
                                     concerning the issuance of industrial
                                     development revenue obligations
6                        12-23-1991  Granting an electric utility system
                                     franchise to Illinois Power Company
-                        12-13-1995  Authorizing the agreement between the City
                                     Police Department and the County 911 Board
                                     Entering into a governmental mutual aid
-                        7-22-1996   agreement between the city and the City of
                                     Georgetown
-                        4-30-1997   Authorizing an agreement between the city
                                     and the Chrisman Unit School District #6
-                        9-20-1999   Authorizing an agreement between the city
                                     and the Chrisman Unit School District #6
                                     Appropriating money for the agreement
Res. -                   1-22-2001   between the city and the state for the
                                     construction of certain portions of SR 1
Res. -                   11-13-2001  Authorizing the participation in the
                                     federal surplus property program
                                     Providing a law enforcement mutual aid
-                        9-8-2003    agreement between the city and the Village
                                     of Hume
                                     Authorizing the entrance into a
                                     contractual agreement for U.S. EPA special
Res. 3                   11-28-2006  appropriations project grant applications
                                     and coordination of services with the
                                     Coles County Regional Planning and
                                     Development Commission
-                        8-10-2009   Authorizing the cable television franchise
                                     for Comcast of Illinois/Indiana/Ohio, LLC
                                     Authorizing the intergovernmental
-                        8-9-2010    cooperative agreement between the city and
                                     the county
                                     Authorizing the city and county to
6, Series 2010-2011      3-14-2011   mutually assist each other in law
                                     enforcement
                                     Authorizing the city and county to
Res. -                   4-13-2011   mutually assist each other in law
                                     enforcement
-                        8-27-2012   Authorizing the agreement between the city
                                     and the Chrisman Public Library
7                        2-11-2013   Extending the authorization for a gas
                                     utility system to Ameren Illinois Company
                                     Authorizing the execution of a service
                                     agreement with the lowest responsible
Res. 3                   4-22-2013   bidder for the supply of electricity for
                                     residential and small commercial retail
                                     customers who do not opt out of such a
                                     program
                                     Approving the agreement for aggregator
-                        5-30-2013   municipal aggregation supply pricing
                                     confirmation
1                        4-2-2018    Extending the authorization for a gas
                                     utility system to Ameren Illinois Company
                                     Renewing the cable television franchise
6                        8-20-2018   agreement with Comcast of Illinois/
                                     Indiana/Ohio, LLC
                                     Authorizing an intergovernmental agreement
Res. -                   6-17-2019   with the Northern Edgar County Ambulance
                                     Service (NECAS) for the provision of
                                     ambulance service
                                     Authorizing the loan agreement between the
8, Series 2019           10-7-2019   city and the Public Water Supply Loan
                                     Program
                                    
 
TABLE IV: VACATIONS
 
Ord./Res. No.       Date Passed Description
4, Series 1959      1-26-1959   Vacating 8th Street running north and south
                                between Jackson and Monroe Streets
                                Vacating a portion of a street beginning at the
5, Series 1980-1981 8-25-1980   southwest corner of Lot No. 2, Block No. 6, of
                                the original town
                                Vacating an alley 16 feet and extending from
4, Series 1985-86   10-9-1985   the west property line of Alabama Street
                                eastward to the end of the alley abutting the
                                property line of Lot No. 1
3, Series 2012      12-10-2012  Vacating a portion of the Wood Ridge
                                Subdivision
                               
 
TABLE V: ENCROACHMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No.       Date Passed Description
5                   10-12-1983  Regulating the encroachment of an alley and
                                Monroe Avenue, both to Jackson Avenue
7, Series 2000-2001 1-7-2001    Amending Ord. 5, regulating the encroachment on
                                public right-of-way
 
TABLE VI: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
 
Ord./Res. No.       Date Passed Description
1, Series 1963-1964 5-27-1963   Authorizing the acceptance of a deed to certain
                                property for street purposes
                                Authorizing the sale of municipally owned real
4, Series 2009-2010 10-26-2009  property, generally located at 144-148 North
                                Illinois
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cites Code Section
ILCS Cites                 Code Section
5 ILCS 120/1.01 et seq.    30.02
20 ILCS 3855/1-1 et seq.   50.01
50 ILS 45/1 et seq.        33.03
65 ILCS 5                  10.05
65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.    54.44
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1            153.01
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12         153.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2          153.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8          153.01
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2          153.01
65 ILCS 5/11-125-4         52.01
210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.     153.26
225 ILCS 225/1 et seq.     54.02
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.      114.01,
                           115.15
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.     72.01
235 ILCS 5/6-60            95.01
410 ILCS 130/10            131.04
410 ILCS 305/7(c)          32.22
410 ILCS 620               131.01
415 ILCS 5                 153.20
415 ILCS 5/1               52.02
415 ILCS 5/14.2            52.01
415 ILCS 5/14.2(b)         52.04
415 ILCS 5/14.2(c)         52.04
415 ILCS 5/14.2(d)         52.04
415 ILCS 5/14.3            52.01
415 ILCS 55/1              52.02
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.   72.03,
                           72.23
625 ILCS 5/1-146           95.01
625 ILCS 5/1-147           95.01
625 ILCS 5/1-148.2         95.01
625 ILCS 5/3-702           95.01
625 ILCS 5/3-707           95.01
625 ILCS 5/3-708           95.01
625 ILCS 5/3-710           95.01
625 ILCS 5/4-104(a)1-5     95.01
625 ILCS 5/6-101           95.01
625 ILCS 5/6-101 et seq.   95.01
625 ILCS 5/6-201 et seq.   95.01
625 ILCS 5/7-606           95.01
625 ILCS 5/7-607           95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-204          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-401          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-402          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-403          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-404          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-406          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-407          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-409          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-501          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-502(a)       95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-502(b)       95.01
25 ILCS 5/11-503           95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-506          95.01
625 ILCS 5/11-1428         74.01,
                           74.03
625 ILCS 5/12-611          95.01
625 ILCS 6/11-500—6/11-5074.03
625 ILCS 40/1-1 et seq.    72.01
625 ILCS 40/6-1            72.27
720 ILCS 5/11-14           95.01
720 ILCS 5/11-15           95.01
720 ILCS 5/12-2            95.01
720 ILCS 5/12-3.05         95.01
720 ILCS 5/16-25           95.01
720 ILCS 5/21-1.5          95.01
720 ILCS 5/21-3            95.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5          95.01
720 ILCS 5/28-2(b)         115.01
720 ILCS 5/31-1            95.01
720 ILCS 5/36-1            95.01
720 ILCS 550               131.01
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.     72.01,
                           95.01 
720 ILCS 550/3(a)          131.01
720 ILCS 570               131.01
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.   72.01,
                           95.01 
720 ILCS 646               131.01
720 ILCS 646/10            131.01
725 ILCS 150/1 et seq.     95.04
765 ILCS 205/2             153.22
                           
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.            Date Passed Description
-                   4-9-1979    51.03
-                   8-11-1980   TSO Table III
-, Series 1980-81   9-22-1980   TSO Table III
-, Series 1980-1981 3-23-1981   TSO Table III
-                   4-13-1981   150.02
-                   8-24-1981   TSO Table III
-                   1-25-1982   31.01
-                   6-22-1983   Ch. 73 Schd. I
-                   12-14-1983  31.01
-                   1-9-1985    TSO Table I
-                   1-22-1986   TSO Table III
-                   3-25-1991   TSO Table III
-                   1-12-1998   31.01
3                   12-27-1999  33.30—
                                33.46
-                   1-22-2001   TSO Table III
-                   11-13-2001  TSO Table III
-                   10-11-2005  32.01
3                   11-28-2006  TSO Table III
-                   6-28-2010   153.12
-                   4-13-2011   TSO Table III
-                   4-22-2013   31.01
2                   4-22-2013   50.01
3                   4-22-2013   TSO Table III
1                   8-4-2014    32.03
-                   8-15-2016   30.03
-                   6-17-2019   TSO Table III
                               
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.             Date Passed Description
-                    - -         32.02
-                    - -         152.01—
                                 152.06
                                 154.01—
                                 154.05,
                                 154.20—
                                 154.23,
-                    - -         154.35—
                                 154.40,
                                 154.55—
                                 154.62,
                                 154.99
5, Series 1947       10-13-1947  150.04,
                                 150.99
3, Series 1956-1957  3-25-1957   94.01—
                                 94.03
4, Series 1959       1-26-1959   TSO Table IV
4, Series 1960       9-12-1960   112.01—
                                 112.06
1, Series 1962       5-14-1962   150.03,
                                 150.99
1, Series 1963-1964  5-27-1963   TSO Table VI
6, Series 1968-1969  1-13-1969   70.01,
                                 70.99
7, Series 1969-70    10-13-1969  54.09
4, Series 1972-1973  7-24-1972   TSO Table I
                                 130.01—
3, Series 1973-74    6-25-1973   130.04,
                                 130.99
4, Series 1974-1975  1-27-1975   TSO Table III
                                 111.01—
5, Series 1975-1976  10-13-1975  111.03,
                                 111.99
                                 72.01—
                                 72.04,
4, Series 1978-1979  1-22-1979   72.15—
                                 72.32,
                                 72.99
4, Series 1980-1981  8-25-1980   93.01—
                                 93.08
5, Series 1980-1981  8-25-1980   TSO Table IV
                                 54.01—
                                 54.08,
                                 54.20—
5, Series 1981-1982  8-24-1981   54.24,
                                 54.40—
                                 54.47,
                                 54.99
5                    10-12-1983  TSO Table V
6, Series 1983-1984  10-12-1983  TSO Table III
4, Series 1985-86    10-9-1985   TSO Table IV
4, Series 1989-90    3-14-1990   53.01—
                                 53.07
-                    4-9-1990    TSO Table III
                                 155.01—
3, Series 1990-91    7-23-1990   155.07,
                                 155.99
5                    4-8-1991    TSO Table II
2, Series 1991-1992  6-24-1991   50.03
6                    12-23-1991  TSO Table III
                                 71.01—
4, Series 1992-1993  10-13-1992  71.05,
                                 71.99
5                    1-23-1995   52.01—
                                 52.07
1, Series 1995-96    5-8-1995    TSO Table I
-                    12-13-1995  TSO Table III
-                    7-22-1996   TSO Table III
-                    4-30-1997   TSO Table III
                                 92.01—
4, Series 1997-98    8-11-1997   92.10,
                                 92.14,
                                 92.99
                                 91.20—
5(5), Series 1997-98 9-8-1997    91.24,
                                 91.99
1, Series 1999-2000  6-14-1999   31.01
-                    9-20-1999   TSO Table III
8, Series 1999-2000  1-24-2000   155.04
5, Series 2000-2001  1-22-2001   Ch. 73 Schd. I
9, Series 2000-2001  1-22-2001   33.01—
                                 33.19
1, Series 2001-2002  6-25-2001   31.01
2, Series 2001-2002  7-9-2001    155.04
1                    1-14-2002   150.01
-                    9-8-2003    TSO Table III
2, Series 2004-2005  9-27-2004   31.01
-                    3-16-2009   32.15—
                                 32.25
-                    8-10-2009   TSO Table III
4, Series 2009-2010  10-26-2009  TSO Table VI
9, Series 2009-2010  3-22-2010   54.25
10, Series 2009-2010 3-22-2010   50.02
                                 153.01—
                                 153.11,
1, Series 2010-2011  6-28-2010   153.25—
                                 153.27,
                                 153.99
-                    8-9-2010    TSO Table III
5, Series 2010-2011  2-14-2011   50.02
6, Series 2010-2011  3-14-2011   TSO Table III
1, Series 2011-2012  7-11-2011   110.01—
                                 110.07
3, Series 2011-2012  7-25-2011   31.01
6, Series 2011-2012  9-12-2011   51.02
7, Series 2011-2012  9-12-2011   54.22
11, Series 2011-2012 3-12-2012   30.02
                                 90.01—
11, Series 2011-2012 3-26-2012   90.09,
                                 90.99
                                 151.01—
13, Series 2011-2012 3-26-2012   151.10,
                                 151.99
                                 91.01—
12, Series 2011-2012 4-9-2012    91.07,
                                 91.99
-                    8-27-2012   TSO Table III
-                    8-27-2012   31.01
3, Series 2012       12-10-2012  TSO Table IV
7                    2-11-2013   TSO Table III
9, Series 2013       3-25-2013   54.26
9, Series 2013       5-1-2013    51.01
-                    5-30-2013   TSO Table III
3, Series 2013-2014  12-9-2013   30.01
                                 74.01—
6, Series 2013-2014  2-3-2014    74.06,
                                 74.99
1, Series 2015-2016  5-18-2015   30.01
                                 113.01—
                                 113.04,
                                 113.10—
                                 113.14,
-                    6-1-2015    113.20—
                                 113.25,
                                 113.30—
                                 113.45,
                                 113.99
-                    8-17-2015   50.02
-, Series 2015-2016  4-4-2016    114.01
                                 50.02,
-, Series 2017-2018  3-20-2017   50.03,
                                 53.05
                                 131.01—
-, Series 2017       4-3-2017    131.05,
                                 131.99
-, Series 2017-2018  5-15-2017   54.26
-, Series 2017       9-18-2017   TSO Table I
6, Series 2017       12-18-2017  32.04
1                    4-2-2018    TSO Table III
2, Series 2018       5-7-2018    111.02
3, Series 2018       5-7-2018    50.02
5                    8-20-2018   31.02
6                    8-20-2018   TSO Table III
7                    9-4-2018    TSO Table II
9                    11-5-2018   TSO Table II
1, Series 2019       2-4-2019    90.11
2, Series 2019       2-4-2019    90.10
3, Series 2019       3-4-2019    10.99
8, Series 2019       10-7-2019   TSO Table III
7, Series 2019       10-7-2019   92.03
10, Series 2019      12-16-2019  51.02
11, Series 2019      12-16-2019  54.09
1, Series 2020       2-18-2020   113.20
3, Series 2020       7-6-2020    90.12
50, Series .02       2-1-2021    50.02
                                 115.01—
1, Series 2021       9-7-2021    115.06,
                                 115.15,
                                 115.99
51, Series 2         11-1-2021   51.02
54, Series 3         11-1-2021   54.03,
                                 54.22
132, Series          6-6-2022    132.01—
                                 132.08
-                    7-11-2022   50.02
                                 71.01—
-                    7-6-2023    71.05,
                                 71.99
-                    7-6-2023    92.01—
                                 92.10
                                 95.01—
-                    7-6-2023    95.06,
                                 95.99
                                 54.09,
                                 54.22,
-                    - -         54.25,
                                 54.40,
                                 54.41
                                 95.01—
-                    5-6-2024    95.06,
                                 95.99
-                    9-3-2024    30.01
-                    1-6-2025    51.02
-                    4-7-2025    51.01
-                    4-7-2025    151.99
-                    5-5-2025    50.02
-                    5-19-2025   90.11
-                    5-19-2025   90.12
                                
 
