CITY CODE
of
COLONA
ILLINOIS
1997
Code current through:
Ord. O-25-08, passed 7-28-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the City of Colona, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including ordinance O-25-08, passed 7-28-2025.
         Ordinances up to and including Ordinance 96-04, passed by the City of
Green Rock on March 25, 1996, and Ordinance 2-1-96, passed by the Borough of
Colona on February 1, 1996, created the newly consolidated City Code of Colona.
Ordinances subsequent to the above noted ordinances supersede the provisions of
this City Code to the extend that they are in conflict or inconsistent
therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 97-07
   AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING
   THE CITY CODE OF COLONA, ILLINOIS
   Be it ordained by the Mayor and the City Council of the City of Colona,
Illinois, an Illinois Municipal Corporation:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the City
Code of the City of Colona, Illinois prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the City, shall be accepted in all Courts without question as the Official
Code and Law of the City as enacted by the Mayor and the City Council.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature
amending, altering, adding, or deleting provisions of the Official City Code is
identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each
of the official copies, three (3) copies of which shall be maintained in the
office of the City Clerk, certified as to correctness and available for
inspection at any and all times that said office is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this official City
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the governing
body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official City Code. All ordinances of a special
nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances, franchises, traffic
ordinances, vacating ordinances, and annexation ordinances shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the City Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the Official
Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or
to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Mayor and the City
Council.
   Approved by the Colona City Council this 27th day of October, 1997.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the Official City Code of the City of Colona. This
City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the COLONA CITY CODE, and
it is hereby published by authority of the Council and shall be kept up to date
as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause,
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this City Code by title in any legal documents 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4.
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the
excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-6.
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified. (1997 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
City Council. The City Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are properly
inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the Clerk. Any
person having in his custody an official copy of the City Code shall make every
effort to maintain said Code in an up to date and efficient manner. He shall
see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are
delivered to him or made available to him through the office of the City Clerk.
Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested
persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to
the office of the Clerk when directed so to do by order of the City Council.
(1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City
Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are
by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving
clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following
ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation
ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise
ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
City; and all special ordinances. (1997 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinances relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public
ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities
shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of
the preceding section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this City Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1997 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
A. No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding. So far as practicable, if
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to
any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
B. This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
C. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action
now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein
repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this City Code. (1997 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: Definitions, General
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number
is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any
single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or
person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number
only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties or persons and females
as well as males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided,
that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this
City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or
where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed
in the content of this City Code, to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or
"subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification
purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend
passage and effective dates of such original ordinances. (1997 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
ALLEY: A public right of way, other than a street, affording secondary means of
access to abutting property.
CITY: The City of Colona, County of Henry, State of Illinois.
CODE: The City Code of the City of Colona.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Colona".
FISCAL YEAR: The "fiscal year" of the City shall commence on May 1 of each year
and end on April 30 of the following year. 1
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed, and/or fine up
to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the City; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard
to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or to the
community.
OCCUPANT; TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or
with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer by title
only, it shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of
Colona".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
PROPERTY OWNER: A person owning private property in the City as shown by the
County Auditor's plats of the City.
PUBLIC PLACE: Shall include in its meaning, but is not restricted to, any City-
owned open place such as parks and squares.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Any and all property owned by the City or held in the name of
the City by any of the departments, commissions or agencies within the City
government.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street between the edge of the travelled way,
surfacing, or curb line and the adjacent property.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in
the proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(5).
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: General Penalty
1-4-2: Application Of Provisions
1-4-3: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Violation; Minimum Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this Code shall be fined in a sum not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) except for the violation of any of the following sections, and as to
any violation of the following sections, the minimum fine shall be the amount
set forth below, as the case may be:
Section Offense Fine
Section   Offense                                                    Fine
3-1-2C    Failure to register                                        $  50.00
4-1-1     Nuisances; public health                                   50.00
4-2-1     Weeds and grass height                                     50.00
5-2-1-6   Theft                                                      250.00
5-2-1-9   Intoxication                                               150.00
5-2-2-1   Disorderly conduct                                         200.00
5-2-3-1   Indecent conduct                                           200.00
5-2-3-2   Profanity                                                  75.00
5-2-4-1   Damage or injury to property                               150.00
5-2-4-2   Obstruction of sidewalk                                    50.00
5-2-4-3   Snow removal on sidewalk                                   50.00
5-2-4-5   Burning restrictions                                       75.00
5-2-4-6   Keeping junk restricted                                    75.00
5-2-4-11  Abandoned refrigerators                                    75.00
5-2-4-13  Prohibited activities in street                            50.00
5-2-5-2   Businesses; prohibited activities                          50.00
5-2-5-3   Parking of campers, ownership                              50.00
5-2-5-4   Hitchhiking                                                50.00
5-2-5-5   Weapons offenses (minor)                                   200.00
5-2-5-6   Loudspeakers; attached to vehicles                         50.00
5-2-5-7   Injury to birds                                            50.00
5-2-6-2   Possession of drug paraphernalia                           250.00
5-2-7A1   Possession of 0-10 grams of cannabis, less than 500 mg THC 250.00
          infused product, or less than 5 grams of cannabis*
5-2-7A2   Possession of 10-30 grams of cannabis*                     500.00
5-2-7A3   Possession of more than 30 grams of cannabis*              750.00
5-2-7A4   Possession of more than 500mg of THC infused products*     500.00
5-2-7A5   Possession of more than 5 grams cannabis concentrate*      500.00
5-2-7A6   Unlawful use of cannabis                                   250.00
5-3-1     Curfew                                                     75.00
5-3-2     Cigarette or tobacco possession/sale                       75.00
5-4B-1    Animals; dangerous; running at large                       75.00
5-4B-2    Animals, all; disturbing the peace                         50.00
5-4B-3    Animal yards                                               50.00
5-4B-5    Biting animal                                              75.00
5-4B-7    Cruelty to animals                                         150.00
5-4B-10   Trapping in City limits                                    75.00
5-4B-13   Animal waste                                               50.00
5-4B-14   Burial of animals                                          50.00
5-4C-1    Dog or cat; running at large                               50.00
5-4C-2    License required; dog or cat                               50.00
5-4C-5    Limitation; dogs or cats                                   50.00
5-4C-6    Inoculation required                                       50.00
5-4C-12-2 Violation; dangerous dog                                   75.00
6-1-11B   Snowmobiles                                                50.00
6-2-3     Parking penalty                                            50.00
6-5-7     Vehicle equipment                                          75.00
6-6-1A    Operation of bicycle without a light                       50.00
6-7-13    Derelict/abandoned vehicle                                 50.00
7-1-12    Burning leaves and rubbish                                 50.00
9-3-1     Uniform plan house numbering                               50.00
 
* All possession limits cut in half for all out of state residents.
   B.   Violation; Maximum Penalty: Any person convicted of a violation of any
section of this Code shall be fined a sum not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). No imprisonment for failure to pay such fine, penalty or
cost shall exceed six (6) months for each offense.
(Ord. 0-18-05, 2-12-2018; amd. Ord. O-20-06, 1-27-2020)
1-4-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this Code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section
unless otherwise indicated. Any person convicted of a violation of any section
of this Code where a duty is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any
action which is of a continuing nature is forbidden or is declared to be
unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or
such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code.
B. In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
C. Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this Code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply. (1997 Code)
1-4-3: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this Code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intent of
the City Council to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1997
Code)
ARTICLE A.  MUNICIPAL CODE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-4A-1: Hearing Department Overview
1-4A-2: Code Hearing Department Created
1-4A-1: HEARING DEPARTMENT OVERVIEW:
   DIVISION 2.2. CODE HEARING DEPARTMENTS
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-1)
   Section 1. Applicability. This Division 2.2 applies only to municipalities
that are non-home rule units. Nothing in this Division 2.2 allows a non-home
rule municipality to pursue any remedies not otherwise authorized by statute.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-5)
   Section 5. Definitions. As used in this Division, unless the context
requires otherwise:
   "Code" means any municipal ordinance except for (i) building code violations
that must be adjudicated pursuant to Division 31.1 of Article 11 of this Act
and (ii) any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that
is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any
reportable offense under Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
   "Hearing officer" means a municipal employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
   (1) preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not
a code violation exists;
   (2) hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant
to the existence of a code violation;
   (3) preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
   (4) issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a
code violation exists.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-10)
   Section 10. Code hearing department. The corporate authorities of any
municipality may adopt this Division and establish a code hearing department
within an existing code enforcement agency or as a separate and independent
agency in the municipal government. The function of the hearing department is
to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set
forth in this Division.
   The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a municipal
ordinance except for (i) building code violations that must be adjudicated
pursuant to Division 31.1 of Article 11 of this Act and (ii) any offense under
the Illinois Vehicle Code or similar offense that is a traffic regulation
governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under
Section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-15)
   Section 15. Hearing procedures not exclusive. In any municipality where this
Division is adopted, this Division does not preclude the municipality from
using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-20)
   Section 20. Instituting code hearing proceedings. When a police officer or
other individual authorized to issue a code violation finds a code violation to
exist, he or she shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice
and report form that indicates (i) the name and address of the defendant, (ii)
the type and nature of the violation, (iii) the date and time the violation was
observed, and (iv) the names of witnesses to the violation.
   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department
where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a
hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on
the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more than 40 days
after the violation is reported. However, if the code violation involves a
municipal ordinance regulating truants, the hearing date shall not be less than
7 nor more than 40 days after the violation is reported.
   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of
the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one
copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the
municipality in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy
of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along
with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing. In
municipalities with a population under 3,000,000, if the violation report form
requires the respondent to answer within a certain amount of time, the
municipality must reply to the answer within the same amount of time afforded
to the respondent.
(Source: P.A. 94-616, eff. 1-1-06; 95-1016, eff. 6-1-09.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-25)
   Section 25. Subpoenas; defaults. At any time prior to the hearing date, the
hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of either party,
direct witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If on the date
set for hearing the defendant or his or her attorney fails to appear, the
hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-30)
   Section 30. Continuances; representation at code hearings. No continuances
shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this Division
except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the
rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
Division shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the municipality may be
presented by an attorney designated by the municipality or by any other
municipal employee, except that the case for the municipality shall not be
presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The case for the
defendant may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other
agent or representative of the defendant.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-35)
   Section 35. Hearing; evidence. At the hearing a hearing officer shall
preside, shall hear testimony, and shall accept any evidence relevant to the
existence or non-existence of a code violation. The strict rules of evidence
applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to hearings authorized by
this Division.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-40)
   Section 40. Qualifications of hearing officers. Prior to conducting
proceedings under this Division, hearing officers shall successfully complete a
formal training program that includes the following:
   (1) instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
   (2) orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will
administer;
   (3) observation of administrative hearings; and
   (4) participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
   In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice
law in the State of Illinois for at least 3 years.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-45)
   Section 45. Findings, decision, and order. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing as to whether or not a code violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings,
decision, and order. The findings, decision, and order shall include (i) the
hearing officer's findings of fact; (ii) a decision of whether or not a code
violation exists based upon the findings of fact; and (iii) an order that
states the sanction or dismisses the case if a violation is not proved. A
monetary sanction for a violation under this Division shall not exceed the
amount provided for in Section
1-2-1 of this Act. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be served
on the defendant within 5 days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same
manner that the report form and summons are served under Section 1-2.2-20 of
this Division. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money
shall be in the same manner as set forth in the code, unless the corporate
authorities adopting this Division provide otherwise.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-50)
   Section 50. Review under Administrative Review Law. The findings, decision,
and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit
court of the county in which the municipality is located. The provisions of the
Administrative Review Law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision,
and order of a hearing officer under this Division.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55)
   Section 55. Judgment on findings, decision, and order.
   (a) Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (b) After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of
the county in which the municipality is located for purpose of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and
orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action,
the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in
accordance with this Division and the applicable municipal ordinance. Service
of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided for by
Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions,
and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not exceed $2,500.
If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision, and order was entered in
accordance with the requirements of this Division and the applicable municipal
ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this
Division and for judicial review as provided in this Division:
     (1) The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and
against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced
in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
     (2) The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation.
   (c) In place of a proceeding under subsection (b) of this Section, after
expiration of the period in which judicial review under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a code
violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the findings,
decision, and order of the hearing officer may be enforced in the same manner
as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   In any case in which a defendant has failed to comply with a judgment
ordering a defendant to correct a code violation or imposing any fine or other
sanction as a result of a code violation, any expenses incurred by a
municipality to enforce the judgment, including, but not limited to, attorney's
fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure,
after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed by a hearing
officer pursuant to this subsection (c), the municipality shall provide notice
to the defendant that states that the defendant shall appear at a hearing
before the administrative hearing officer to determine whether the defendant
has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such
a hearing, which shall not be less than 7 days from the date that notice is
served. If notice is served by mail, the 7-day period shall begin to run on the
date that the notice was deposited in the mail.
   Upon being recorded in the manner required by Article XII of the Code of
Civil Procedure or by the Uniform Commercial Code, a lien shall be imposed on
the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the defendant in the amount of
any debt due and owing the municipality under this Section. The lien may be
enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   A hearing officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and set a
new hearing date, upon a petition filed within 21 days after the issuance of
the order of default, if the hearing officer determines that the petitioner's
failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time if the
petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide proper service of
process. If any judgment is set aside pursuant to this subsection (c), the
hearing officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien
which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the municipality as a result
of the vacated default judgment.
(Source: P.A. 99-293, eff. 8-6-15.)
(65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-60)
   Section 60. Adoption of Division by municipality. This Division may be
adopted by a non-home rule municipality by incorporating the provisions of this
Division in an ordinance and by passing and publishing the ordinance in the
manner provided in Division 2 of Article 1 of this Act.
(Source: P.A. 90-777, eff. 1-1-99.)
(Ord. 0-18-02, 1-22-2018)
1-4A-2: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT CREATED:
The Corporate Authorities of the City of Colona do hereby establish a Code
Hearing Department as a separate and independent agency within the City of
Colona. The function of the Hearing Department is to expedite the prosecution
and correction of Code violations and to collect fines, costs and attorneys
fees imposed, in the manner set forth in this article. The Code Hearing
Department shall be known as the City of Colona Ordinance Enforcement
Department, hereinafter, "COCOED". The COCOED shall consist of a Hearing
Officer and such support personnel as shall be necessary to effect the purposes
of this article. The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor, provided,
however, that the Hearing Officer shall at all times comply with the
qualification requirements set forth in section
1-4A-1, section 40 of division 2.2, of this article. (Ord. 0-18-02, 1-22-2018)
ARTICLE B.  MUNICIPAL BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
1-4B-1: Building Code Violations Overview
1-4B-2: Hearing Department Created
1-4B-1: BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS OVERVIEW:
   DIVISION 31.1. BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-1)
   Section 1. Definitions. As used in this Division, unless the context
requires otherwise:
   (a) "Code" means any municipal ordinance, law, housing or building code or
zoning ordinance that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical,
fire prevention, sanitation or other health and safety standards that are
applicable to structures in a municipality or any municipal ordinance that
requires, after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and
debris, the removal of inoperable motor vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances
from private property;
   (b) "Building inspector" means a full time state, county or municipal
employee whose duties include the inspection or examination of structures or
property in a municipality to determine if zoning or other code violations
exist;
   (c) "Property owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a structure;
(d) "Hearing officer" means a municipal employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality, other than a building inspector or law enforcement officer, whose
duty it is to:
     (1) preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a code violation exists;
     (2) hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, the
building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code
violation;
     (3) preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
     (4) issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a
code violation exists.
(Source: P.A. 91-162, eff. 7-16-99.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-2) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-2)
   Section 2. Code hearing department. The corporate authorities of any
municipality may adopt this Division and establish a Code Hearing Department
within an existing code enforcement agency or as a separate and independent
agency in the municipal government. The function of the hearing department is
to expedite the prosecution and correction of code violations in the manner set
forth in this Division.
(Source: P.A. 88-37.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-3) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-3)
   Section 3. Hearing procedures not exclusive. In any municipality where this
Division is adopted, this Division does not preclude the municipality from
using other methods to enforce the provisions of its code.
(Source: P.A. 86-1039.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-4) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-4)
   Section 4. Instituting code hearing proceedings. When a building inspector
finds a code violation while inspecting a structure, he shall note the
violation on a multiple copy violation notice and report form, indicating the
name and address of the structure owner, a citation to the specific code
provision or provisions alleged to have been violated, a description of the
circumstances present that constitute the alleged violation, the date and time
the violation was observed, the names of witnesses to the violation, and the
address of the structure where the violation is observed.
   The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building inspector to
the Code Hearing Department where a Docket number shall be stamped on all
copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank spaces provided for
that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 nor more
than 40 days after the violation is reported by the building inspector.
   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of
the Code Hearing Department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one
copy of the report form shall be returned to the building inspector so that he
may prepare evidence of the code violation for presentation at the hearing on
the date indicated, and one copy of the report form shall be served by first
class mail on the owner of the structure, along with a summons commanding the
owner to appear at the hearing. If the municipality in which the structure is
situated has an ordinance requiring property owners to register with the
municipality, service may be made on the owner by mailing the report and
summons to the owner's address registered with the municipality. If the name of
the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner
cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing
a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the structure where
the violation is found, not less than 20 days before the hearing is scheduled.
(Source: P.A. 97-1088, eff. 8-24-12.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-5) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-5)
   Section 5. Subpoenas; Defaults. At any time prior to the hearing date the
hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of the building
inspector or the attorney for the municipality, or the owner or his attorney,
issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the
hearing. If on the date set for hearing the owner or his attorney fails to
appear, the hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed
with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code
violation.
(Source: P.A. 86-1039.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-6) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-6)
   Section 6. Continuances - Representation at code hearings. No continuances
shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this Division
except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the
rights of the owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
Division shall not exceed 25 days. The case for the municipality may be
presented by the building inspector, by any other municipal employee or by an
attorney designated by the municipality. However, in no event shall the case
for the municipality be presented by an employee of the Code Hearing
Department. The case for the dwelling owner may be presented by the owner, his
attorney, or any other agent or representative.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1905.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-7) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-7)
   Section 7. Hearing; Evidence. At the hearing, a hearing officer shall
preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the
existence or non-existence of a code violation in the structure indicated. The
strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to
hearings authorized by this Division.
(Source: P.A. 86-1039.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-8) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-8)
   Section 8. Eviction - Rights of the occupants. No action for eviction,
abatement of a nuisance, or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or
instituted against an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant
agrees to testify or testifies at a code violation hearing.
(Source: P.A. 100-173, eff. 1-1-18.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-9) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-9)
   Section 9. Defenses to code violations. It shall be a defense to a code
violation charged under this Division if the owner, his attorney, or any other
agent or representative proves to the hearing officer's satisfaction that:
   (a) The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at
the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
   (b) The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants and
that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling free
of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the violations;
   (c) An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the
code violation.
(Source: P.A. 89-372, eff. 1-1-96.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-10) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-10)
   Section 10. Findings, decision, order. At the conclusion of the hearing the
hearing officer shall make a determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing whether or not a code violation exists. The
determination shall be in writing and shall be designated as findings, decision
and order. The findings, decision and order shall include the hearing officer's
findings of fact, a decision whether or not a code violation exists based upon
the findings of fact, and an order, ordering the owner to correct the violation
or dismissing the case, in the event a violation is not proved. If a code
violation is proved, the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided
in the code for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision, and
order shall be served on the owner within 5 days after they are issued; service
shall be in the same manner as the report form and summons are served pursuant
to Section 11-31.1-4. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of
fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in the code, unless the
corporate authorities adopting this Division provide otherwise.
(Source: P.A. 86-1039.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-11)
   Section 11. Administrative review. The findings, decision and order of the
hearing officer shall be subject to review in the circuit court of the county
where the municipality is located, and the provisions of the Administrative
Review Law, and all amendments and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted
pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern every action for the
judicial review of the final findings, decision and order of a hearing officer
under this Division.
(Source: P.A. 82-783.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11.1) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-11.1)
   Section 11.1. Judgment on findings, decision, order.
   (a) Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review
Law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (b) After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the municipality may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of
the county where the municipality is located for purposes of obtaining a
judgment on the findings, decision and order. Nothing in this Section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions and
orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action,
the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was issued in
accordance with this Division and the applicable municipal ordinance. Service
of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided by
Section 2-203 of the Code of Civil Procedure or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and
costs imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed $2500. If the
court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order were entered in
accordance with the requirements of this Division and the applicable municipal
ordinance, and that the property owner had an opportunity for a hearing under
this Division and for judicial review as provided in this Division: (1) the
court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and against the
property owner for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order,
plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and (2) the court may
also issue such other orders and injunctions as are requested by the
municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct a code
violation.
(Source: P.A. 89-372, eff. 1-1-96.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-12) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-12)
   Section 12. Sanctions applicable to owner - Property. The order to correct a
code violation and the sanctions imposed by a municipality as the result of a
finding of a code violation under this Division shall attach to the property as
well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a code violation
against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring the property
to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject
to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under this Division.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1905.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-12.1) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-12.1)
   Section 12.1. (a) The owner of a building located in a municipality in a
county having a population in excess of 100,000 inhabitants who, directly or
indirectly, has collected, or caused to be collected, rentals from an occupant
of that building during a period in which the number of apartments or family
units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that building by an
ordinance of the municipality in which the building is located, is liable to
any such occupant in an amount equal to not more than 3 times the amount of any
rentals paid by any such occupant, or in his behalf, after January 1, 1970,
together with court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. If the occupant is a
recipient of public aid under Article III, IV, or VI of "the Illinois Public
Aid Code", approved April 11, 1967, as amended, in whose behalf vendor payment
of the rental was made by the Illinois Department of Public Aid, the Department
of Human Services (acting as successor to the Department of Public Aid under
the Department of Human Services Act), or a local governmental unit, as the
case may be, the liability as herein provided is to the Illinois Department of
Public Aid, the Department of Human Services (acting as successor to the
Department of Public Aid under the Department of Human Services Act), or the
local governmental unit making the vendor payment of the rental.
   (b) For the purposes of this Section:
     (1) "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a building.
     (2) "Family unit" means a room or group of rooms used or intended to be
used as a housekeeping unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The fact
that any such family unit is used or intended to be used with cooking or eating
accommodations in common with another family unit in any such building does not
affect liability hereunder.
   (c) No liability accrues under this Section until 30 days after the owner of
record of a building has been notified in writing that such owner is in
violation of any such municipal ordinance. Such notice shall be personally
served upon such owner of record or sent by registered mail to the last known
address of such owner.
(Source: P.A. 89-507, eff. 7-1-97.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-12.2) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-12.2)
   Section 12.2. (a) A person who contracts with the federal government or any
of its agencies, including without limitation the Department of Housing and
Urban Development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be
responsible for maintaining the property to prevent and correct municipal
health and safety code violations.
   (b) A person who intentionally violates this Section is guilty of a business
offense and shall be fined not less than $501 and not more than $1,000.
(Source: P.A. 86-315.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-13) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-13)
   Section 13. Adoption of Division by municipality. This Division may be
adopted by a municipality by incorporating the provisions of this Division in
an ordinance and passing and publishing the ordinance in the manner provided in
Division 2 of Article 1 of this Act.
(Source: Laws 1967, p. 1905.)
(65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-14) (from Ch. 24, par. 11-31.1-14)
   Section 14. Application for grants. Any municipality adopting this Division
may make application to the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity for
grants to help defray the cost of establishing and maintaining a code hearing
department as provided in this Division. The application for grants shall be in
the manner and form prescribed by the Department of Commerce and Economic
Opportunity.
(Source: P.A. 94-793, eff. 5-19-06.)
(Ord. 0-18-03, 1-22-2018)
1-4B-2: HEARING DEPARTMENT CREATED:
The Corporate Authorities of the City of Colona do hereby establish a Building
Code Violation Hearing Department as a separate and independent agency within
the City of Colona. The function of the Building Code Violation Hearing
Department is to expedite the prosecution and correction of Building Code
violations and to collect fines, costs and attorneys fees imposed, in the
manner set forth in this article. The Building Code Hearing Department shall be
known as the Colona Building Code Enforcement Department, hereinafter, "CBCED".
The CBCED shall consist of a Hearing Officer and such support personnel as
shall be necessary to effect the purposes of this article. The Hearing Officer
shall be appointed by the Mayor, provided, however, that the Hearing Officer
shall be an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for at
least three (3) years. (Ord. 0-18-03, 1-22-2018)
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR
SECTION:
1-5-1: Election
1-5-2: Powers And Duties
1-5-3: Mayor Pro Tem
1-5-4: Acting Mayor
1-5-5: Formal Occasions
1-5-1: ELECTION:
The mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term, and shall serve until his
successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute 1
. The term of office for mayor shall begin one minute after twelve o'clock (12:
01) midnight May 1 and shall end at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight April 30.
(1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5.
1-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Generally: The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and
shall preside over the meetings of the city council and shall perform such
duties as may be required of him by statute and ordinance. The mayor shall have
supervision over all of the executive officers and employees of the city, and
shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records pertaining
to city affairs and kept by any officer and employee of the city at any
reasonable time.
B. Appointment Of Officers: The mayor shall appoint, by and with the advice and
consent of the council, all officers of the city whose election and appointment
is not otherwise provided for. Any vacancies occurring in an appointive office
shall be filled in the same manner.
C. Designation Of Officer's Duties: Whenever there is a dispute as to the
respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the city, this dispute
shall be settled by the mayor after consultation with all city officers
involved and the council; and the mayor shall have the power to delegate to any
appointed officer any duty which is to be performed when no specific officer
has been directed to perform that duty. (1997 Code)
D. Tax Increment Finance Administrator: The tax increment finance administrator
duties may be a part of the mayoral duties as stated within this code with
compensation to be set at two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each month and an
additional twenty dollars ($20.00) for each development meeting attended in
addition to his/her regular monthly salary beginning May 1, 2005. The salary
may be determined by city council from time to time and shall be paid from the
appropriate tax increment financing fund as the act allows. (Ord. 19-04, 10-25-
2004)
1-5-3: MAYOR PRO TEM:
During a temporary absence or disability of the mayor, the city council shall
elect one of its members to act as mayor pro tem who, during such absence or
disability, shall possess the powers of mayor as is provided by statute 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35.
1-5-4: ACTING MAYOR:
In the event of a vacancy in the office of mayor, the council may appoint one
of its members as acting mayor to serve until the vacancy is filled at a
regular or special election as is provided by law 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50.
1-5-5: FORMAL OCCASIONS:
The mayor shall act for and on behalf of the city on formal occasions and
receptions but in the mayor's absence or inability to attend to any such
function, the city council may select any other city officer to so act. (1997
Code)
CHAPTER 6
ALDERMANIC COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-6-1: Election
1-6-2: Meetings
1-6-2-1: Electronic Attendance At Meetings Rules
1-6-3: Quorum
1-6-4: Committees
1-6-5: Rules Of Order
1-6-6: Public Recordings Of Meetings
1-6-1: ELECTION 1
:
There shall be two (2) aldermen to serve each ward, elected by the voters of
the wards in which the aldermen reside, and such elected aldermen shall serve
for four (4) year terms. The term of office for aldermen shall begin one minute
after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. May 1 and shall end at twelve o'clock (12:00)
midnight April 30. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5, 5/6-3-4.
1-6-2: MEETINGS 1
:
   A.   Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council will meet on
the second and fourth Monday of the month at six o’clock (6:00) P.M. If the
second or fourth Monday falls on a holiday, the meetings will be convened on
Tuesday.
   B.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the council may be called by the
mayor or three (3) aldermen; provided, that a written notice of such meeting
shall be given to each member of the council at least forty eight (48) hours
before the time set for the meeting. Provided further, that in case all of the
elective members of the council are present at any special meeting, then the
requirement of notice shall be unnecessary and shall be deemed waived.
   C.   Presiding Officer: The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the
council at all regular or special meetings.
   D.   Records: As is customary and traditional throughout the history of city
clerks, the city clerk, or the deputy clerk in the clerk's absence, will attend
the city council meetings and prepare the minutes for open and closed sessions
as prescribed by the open meetings act. The minutes must contain the date,
time, and place of the meeting; the members of the public body recorded as
either present (and noted if physical or by electronic means) or absent; a
synopsis of discussions on all matters proposed, deliberated, or decided, and a
record of any and all votes taken. The minutes should be a record of what took
place and nothing else. The preservation of minutes and the journal of
ordinances and resolutions are customary duties of the city clerk or the deputy
clerk in the clerk's absence. Any recording of the meeting will be the
responsibility of the clerk, or the deputy clerk in the clerk's absence.
   E.   Disturbing Meetings: It shall be unlawful to disturb any meeting of the
council or of any committee thereof, or to behave in a disorderly manner at any
such meeting.
(1997 Code; Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016; Ord. O-21-06, 5-24-2021; Ord. O-23-08, 8-
14-2023)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25.
1-6-2-1: ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS RULES:
   A. Rules Statement: It is the decision of the city of Colona council that
any member of the council may attend any open or closed meeting of the city of
Colona via electronic means (such as by telephone, video or internet
connection) provided that such attendance is in compliance with these rules and
any applicable laws.
   B. Prerequisites: A member of the city council may attend a meeting
electronically if the member meets the following conditions:
      1. The member should notify the clerk at least twenty four (24) hours
before the meeting, unless impractical, so that necessary communications
equipment can be arranged. Inability to make the necessary technical
arrangements will result in denial of a request for remote attendance.
      2. The member must assert one of the following three (3) reasons why he
or she is unable to physically attend the meeting:
         a. The member cannot attend because of personal illness or disability;
or
         b. The member cannot attend because of employment purposes or the
business of the City of Colona; or
         c. The member cannot attend because of a family or other emergency.
   C. Authorization To Participate:
      1. The Clerk, after receiving the electronic attendance request, shall
inform the Corporate Authority of the request for electronic attendance.
      2. After establishing that there is a quorum physically present at a
meeting where a member of the City of Colona Council desires to attend
electronically, the presiding officer shall state that: a) a notice was
received by a member of the City of Colona in accordance with these rules, and
b) the member will be deemed authorized to attend the meeting electronically
unless a motion objecting to the member's electronic attendance is made,
seconded, and approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City of Colona
Council physically present at the meeting. If no such motion is made and
seconded or if any such motion fails to achieve the required vote by the
members of the City Council physically present at the meeting, then the request
by the member to attend the meeting electronically shall be deemed approved by
the City of Colona Council and the presiding officer shall declare the
requesting member present. After such declaration by the presiding officer, the
question of a member's electronic attendance may not be reconsidered.
   D. Adequate Equipment Required: The member participating electronically and
other members of the City of Colona must be able to communicate effectively,
and members of the audience must be able to hear all communications at the
meeting site. Before allowing electronic attendance at any meeting, the City of
Colona shall provide equipment adequate to accomplish this objective at the
meeting site.
   E. Minutes: Any member attending electronically shall be considered an off
site attendee and counted as present electronically for that meeting if the
member is allowed to attend. The meeting minutes shall also reflect and state
specifically whether each member is physically present or present by electronic
means.
   F. Rights Of Remote Member: A member permitted to attend electronically will
be able to express his or her comments during the meeting and participate in
the same capacity as those members physically present, subject to all general
meeting guidelines and procedures previously adopted and adhered to. The member
attending electronically shall be heard, considered, and counted as to any vote
taken. Accordingly, the name of any member attending electronically shall be
called during any vote taken, and his or her vote counted and recorded by the
Clerk and placed in the minutes for the corresponding meeting. A member
attending electronically may leave a meeting and return as in the case of any
member, provided the member attending electronically shall announce his or her
leaving and returning.
   G. Committees, Boards And Commissions: These rules shall apply to all
committees, boards and commissions established by authority of the City of
Colona. (Ord. 0-05-13, 11-11-2013, eff. 11-11-2013)
1-6-3: QUORUM:
A majority of the elected members of the Council shall constitute a quorum
thereof, but no ordinance or measure for the expenditure of money shall be
passed except on the favorable vote of a majority of the elected members as
provided by statute 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-20, 5/3.1-40-25, 5/1-1-2; 5 ILCS 120 OMA.
1-6-4: COMMITTEES:
   A.   Standing Committees: The following committees have been created and
shall serve as the City Council's Standing Committees:
      1.   Finance/Administration: Responsible for discussing and making
recommendations to the Mayor and/or the City Council on issues pertaining to
the City's finances, budget, and administrative concerns.
      2.   Public Works: Responsible for discussing and making recommendations
to the Mayor and/or the City Council on issues pertaining to the City's
streets, parks, water and sewer departments.
      3.   Public Safety: Responsible for discussing and making recommendations
to the Mayor and/or the City Council on issues regarding the overall safety of
the community, residents, and visitors to the City.
      4.   Economic Development: Responsible for discussing and making
recommendations to the Mayor and/or City Council on opportunities for economic
development within the City in accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan.
   B.   Special Committees: Special committees shall be created from time to
time, as deemed necessary or directed by the Mayor and/or City Council.
   C.   Membership:
      1.   Appointment/Chairman: The Mayor shall appoint the members of all
standing and special committees, with consent and approval of the City Council.
The Mayor shall designate the Chairman of each committee. Each Alderman shall
be appointed to a minimum of one committee.
      2.   Composition: Every committee of the City Council shall consist of at
least three (3) members, including the Chairman, unless the Council shall
provide otherwise. City staff members shall assist committees as needed.
   D.   Meetings: Meetings for each of the four standing committees will take
place once a month at Colona City Hall, 100 E 9th Ave. Public notice of such
meetings shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Meetings Act. (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq).
(Ord. 0-17-7, 5-8-2017; Ord. O-21-06, 5-24-2021; Ord. O-23-08, 8-14-2023)
1-6-5: RULES OF ORDER:
A. Order Of Business: The agenda shall be adopted at the first meeting of each
fiscal year.
B. Rescinded Action: No vote or action of the Council shall be rescinded at any
special meeting unless there be present at such special meeting as many members
of the Council as were present at the meeting when such vote on such was taken,
as provided by statute 1
.
C. Resolutions: Any resolution submitted to the City Council shall be reduced
to writing before voted upon when such request is made by any two (2) members
of the Council. (1997 Code)
D. Addressing Meetings: Only the Mayor, the City Clerk, the City Attorney, or
members of the Council, or other elected officials of the City of Colona, or
employees shall address the body at any regular meeting or special meeting of
the Council that is in progress, except as allowed during public comment, or
that person is recognized by the Mayor to speak. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016)
E. Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order, other than those prescribed by
statute, may be suspended at any time by consent of the majority of the members
present at any meeting.
F. Robert's Rules Of Order Revised: Except when in conflict with the provisions
set forth in this section, "Robert's Rules of Order Revised" shall govern the
deliberations of the Council. (1997 Code)
G. Public Comment:
1. A public comment period not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes with any speaker
being limited to three (3) minutes to address the body of the Council to be
held during each regularly scheduled or special City Council meetings, and at
any Municipal committee meeting. This right to speak does not apply to closed
sessions.
2. Anyone desiring to address the city council/committee must complete and
submit a public comment card available at the meeting location up to fifteen
(15) minutes prior to the start of the meeting. The person must state his/her
name. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016)
3. There shall be a maximum of five (5) speakers in any public comment period.
In the event more than five (5) public comment cards are submitted, the mayor/
committee chair shall randomly select five (5) speakers. Comments are limited
to three (3) minutes per speaker. A speaker cannot give his or her allotted
minutes to another speaker to increase that person's allotted time. (Ord. 0-03-
11, 11-14-2011)
4. Speakers will be acknowledged by the mayor/chairman and shall address the
city council/committee in a respectful manner from the designated area. Minutes
are not transferable to another speaker. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016)
5. Statements are to be directed to the city council/committee as a whole and
not to individual council/committee members or individual city staff. Public
comment is not intended to require council/committee members or city staff to
provide any answer to the speaker. Discussions between speakers and members of
the audience will not be allowed.
6. After the speaker has made his or her statement, he or she shall be seated
with no further debate, dialogue or comment. (Ord. 0-03-11, 11-14-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-50.
1-6-6: PUBLIC RECORDINGS OF MEETINGS:
A. Right To Record: The public has the right to record open meetings conducted
by the city or its committees whether by audio or video equipment as pursuant
to the open meetings act.
B. Right To Set Rules: The city reserves the right to set rules to govern the
recording of open meetings by the city council or committees as long as they
are in accordance with the open meetings act.
C. Acknowledgment Of Recording: Any person who is recording must inform the
council/committee that a recording will be taking place, so the placement of
equipment, if needed, can be adjusted, so it does not interfere with the
conducting of business, or the audience's ability to hear and see the meeting,
and to ensure only the open sessions are recorded. This includes elected
officials or city staff. Just placing a recording device within view of a
fellow official or city staff does not constitute informing the council/
committee of the intent to record. Notice will be given by the mayor to all in
attendance that recordings are taking place.
D. Placement Of Equipment: The placement of the equipment must not interfere
with anyone's view, hearing, or impede traffic flow or jeopardize safety of
others.
E. Time Allowed To Record: Recordings of any open meeting may only commence
from the call to order until adjournment. Recording must cease as soon as the
meeting is adjourned. This includes recordings done by elected officials and or
city staff that are done on their own behalf.
F. Closed Sessions: No recordings may be made of a closed session by the public
or by an elected official, and/or city staff on their own behalf as pursuant to
the open meetings act.
G. Sharing Of Recordings: Elected officials, and/or city staff, who make
recordings on their own behalf, agree to give a copy to the city if something
happens to the city recording. The city will accept the cost of making a copy
if there is any cost involved. (Ord. 0-16-3, 4-25-2016)
CHAPTER 7
CITY OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1: Bonds
1-7-2: Salaries
1-7-3: Reimbursement Rates
1-7-4: Background Checks
1-7-5: Electronic Or Digital Communication
1-7-6: Travel, Meal And Lodging Expenses
1-7-1: BONDS 1
:
   A.   Bonds Required: Before entering upon the duties of their respective
offices, the mayor, clerk, treasurer and aldermen shall execute a bond2 with
surety, to be approved by the corporate authorities.
   B.   Faithful Performance: These bonds shall be payable to the city in the
penal sum as directed herein, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
duties of the officers and the payment of all monies received by such officers,
according to law and also the ordinances of the city.
   C.   Payment: The premiums for all bonds provided for herein shall be paid
for by the city and shall be considered as a regular expense against the
general corporate fund.
   D.   Filing: All bonds, with surety thereon, as provided herein, shall be
filed with the city clerk excepting the bond of the clerk which shall be filed
with the city treasurer.
   E.   Bond Amounts:
      1.   Mayor: The mayor’s bond, with surety thereon, shall be in the sum of
three thousand dollars ($3,000,00).
      2.   Finance Director/Treasurer: The rate of pay for the Finance
Director/Treasurer shall be set by the Finance/Administrative/Personnel
Committee with the approval of the city council. The current rate of pay is set
at twenty seven dollars and seventeen cents ($27.17) per hour to be paid by
current payroll procedure. The position is to be considered full time at (one
thousand five hundred and sixty hours (1,560) hours) per fiscal year with full
benefits offered by the City of Colona's employee handbook. All increases in
compensation shall be set by the yearly fiscal Administrative Budget by
approval of the Colona City Council.
      3.   Clerk: The clerk’s bond, with surety thereon, shall be in the sum of
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      4.   Police Officers: All police officers, including the police matron,
shall have bond, with surety thereon, in the sum of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
(1997 Code; amd. Ord. O-23-1, 2-27-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30.
1-7-2: SALARIES:
   A.   Elected Officials:
      1.   Mayor: The salary of the mayor shall be in the amount of six
thousand dollars ($6,000.00) per year payable in twelve (12) monthly payments
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for duties as mayor and liquor control
commissioner.
      2.   Aldermen: The salary of the alderman of the city shall be in the
amount of two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) per year payable in
twelve (12) monthly payments of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for duties as
aldermen.
      3.   Clerk: The salary of the city clerk shall be in the amount of four
thousand eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00) per year payable in twelve (12)
monthly payments of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for duties as city clerk.
(1997 Code)
   B.   Appointed Officers And Employees:
      1.   Treasurer: The salary of the city treasurer shall be in the amount
of three thousand five hundred seventy seven dollars ($3,577.00) per year
payable in twelve (12) monthly payments of two hundred ninety eight dollars
eight cents ($298.08) for duties as city treasurer.
      2.   Attorney: The retainer of the city attorney shall be fixed by the
city council as per annual budget, per year, for the ordinary and customary
services of said city attorney. Service rendered to the city in addition to the
ordinary and customary service shall be paid as the city attorney and city
council agree.
      3.   Collector: The salary of the city collector shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of the city council.
      4.   Animal Control Officer: The salary of the animal control officer
shall be set by the city council as per the annual budget.
      5.   Officers And Employees: All appointed officers’ and employees’ pay
shall be set by the city council as per the annual budget.
      6.   Initiation Of Removal: Either the Mayor or any member of the City
Council may initiate the removal of any appointed officer or employee under
this section with just cause.
      7.   Removal: Once either the Mayor or any member of the City Council
initiates removal of an appointed officer or employee for just cause at a
regular meeting the appointed officer or employee shall be subject to removal
only by a favorable vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of
the City Council.
(1997 Code; amd. Ord. O-18-11, 6-25-2018; Ord. O-20-10, 9-14-2020; Ord. O-23-1,
2-27-2023)
1-7-3: REIMBURSEMENT RATES:
   A.   Mileage: All city officials and employees shall be reimbursed at
current rate set by the Standard IRS Mileage Travel Rate which is changed from
time to time by the IRS.
   B.   Lost Time: Appointed officers and employees shall be reimbursed at a
maximum rate of ten dollars fifty cents ($10.50) per hour or their regular rate
of pay, whichever is less, for lost time from their employment. This rate may
be changed from time to time by the city council.
(1997 Code; amd. Ord. O-23-1, 2-27-2023)
1-7-4: BACKGROUND CHECKS:
   A. Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to protect the public by
requiring police background checks of all employees and certain independent
contractors, together called applicants, having contact with the public to
ensure that the employees and independent contractors do not have criminal
backgrounds, that, because of their position or association with the city,
could endanger the public.
   B. Condition Of Employment: Prior to the hiring of any employee, and as a
condition of employment, employees shall submit to a police background check
pursuant to this section to ensure that they have no felony convictions or
crimes involving truth or veracity. The conviction will not be deemed a
disqualification from the position if the sentence, including probation time,
has been completed ten (10) years prior to the start of the employment.
   C. Sex Related Or Crimes Involving Children: Any independent contractor and/
or the contractor's employees who will have any contact with youth, shall also
submit to a police background check, pursuant to this section, to ensure that
they are free from convictions of any sex related crimes or crimes involving
children.
   D. Conduct Of Checks; Report: The background checks shall be conducted by
the chief of police and his/her designee and the report shall be made by the
chief of police to the mayor. If the position is for the chief of police, the
mayor shall designate an officer to conduct the investigation and the report
shall be made to the mayor. The mayor shall then notify the employee or
independent contractor if the background check was or was not satisfactory.
   E. Appeal:
      1. Appeal To Council: Any potential employee or independent contractor
who would otherwise not qualify for employment or work pursuant to this section
shall have the right to appeal to the city council for a final determination.
      2. Request For Appeal: The request for appeal must be made within seven
(7) days of being notified by the mayor that the background check disclosed
unsatisfactory information.
      3. Hearing: The council shall take evidence and consider any mitigating
factors and the position and job duties for which the individual is being
considered. The council shall be the final judge of whether the applicant meets
the criteria of this section.
      4. Vote Of Council: The decision shall be by majority vote with the mayor
breaking any ties. If the applicant is found not qualified under this section,
the council may still vote to accept the applicant but only by a two-thirds (2/
3) vote. (1997 Code)
1-7-5: ELECTRONIC OR DIGITAL COMMUNICATION:
   A.   Definitions:
       ELECTED OFFICIALS: Include those elected or appointed to an elected
position such as, but not limited to:
      1.   Corporate authorities.
      2.   Mayor.
      3.   City clerk.
      4.   Aldermen/alderwomen.
      ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS: Any means of communication that takes place
using any type of electronic or digital communication such as, but not limited
to:
      1.   E-mails.
      2.   Text messages.
      3.   Instant messaging services.
      4.   Social media communication.
   B.   Electronic Communication Policy: All electronic communication for
elected officials will be governed by the same set of rules set forth in the
employee handbook. Employees are expected to have city e-mail accounts to
conduct business and are warned not to forward city confidential information.
Elected officials will conduct business in the same manner.
   All electronic communications that need to be examined due to a freedom of
information act request or open meetings act review will be governed by
Illinois state statutes or approved policies of the attorney general's office
of Illinois. An elected official will be allowed to be present while his/her
personal electronic communication is examined by a FOIA/OMA certified city
official or staff member.
(Ord. 0-16-2, 3-28-2016)
1-7-6: TRAVEL, MEAL AND LODGING EXPENSES:
   A.   The Illinois General Assembly has recently enacted Public Act 99-0604,
known as the “Local Government Travel Expense Control Act,” which Act becomes
effective on January 1, 2017; and
   B.   Pursuant to the Act, non-home rule units of local government are
required to establish regulations with respect to allowable travel, meal and
lodging expenses;
   C.   Definitions:
      ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements,
theaters, circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
      TRAVEL: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by employees
and officers of the City or by wards or charges of the City involving
reimbursement to travelers or direct payment to private agencies providing
transportation or related services.
   D.   The City shall only reimburse the following types of travel, meal, and
lodging expenses incurred by its employees and officers up to the following
maximum allowable:
      Travel: Reimbursed at the current Standard IRS Travel Rate which is
changed from time to time by the IRS.
      Meals: Reimbursed at the current U.S. General Services Administration for
(M&IE) per diem rates for travel within Illinois, not to exceed sixty dollars
($60.00) per day (no alcohol purchases allowed).
      Lodging: Reimbursed at the current U.S. General Services Administration
for (Lodging by Month) Per Diem Rates for Illinois unless the best applicable
standard room rate is greater that the allowed GSA rate, not to exceed two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) per night, not to include taxes and fees.
      All the reimbursable per diem rates change from time to time by the above
governed agencies. A copy of the current rates will be held by the Finance
Director. It will be the responsibility of any city official or employee to
request the current per diem rates for (M&IE) and (Lodging) from the Finance
Director prior to any travel.
   E.   No reimbursement of travel, meal or lodging expenses incurred by a City
employee or officer shall be authorized unless the "Travel, Meal, and Lodging
Expense Reimbursement Request Form", attached hereto and made a part hereof,
has been submitted and approved . All documents and information submitted with
the form shall be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act (5
ILCS 140/1 et seq.).
   F.   Expenses for travel, meals and lodging of:
      1.   Any officer or employee that exceeds the maximum reimbursement
allowed under the regulations adopted under subsection D. of the chapter; or
      2.   Any member of the corporate authorities of the City may only be
approved by roll call vote at an open meeting of the corporate authorities of
the City. However, in the event of an emergency, or other extraordinary
circumstances, the corporate authorities may approve more than the maximum
allowable expenses set forth above.
   G.   The City shall not reimburse any elected official, employee, or officer
for any activities which would be considered entertainment. Activities which
would otherwise be considered entertainment, but which are excluded from the
prohibition on reimbursement due to being ancillary to the purpose of the
program or event, may be reimbursed in accordance with the provisions of the
chapter.
(Ord. O-23-02, 2-27-2023)
ARTICLE A. CITY CLERK
SECTION:
1-7A-1: Term
1-7A-2: Duties
1-7A-3: Deputy Clerk
1-7A-1: TERM:
The clerk shall be elected for a four (4) year term, and shall serve until his/
her successor is elected and qualified as is provided by statute 1
. The term of office for city clerk shall begin at one minute after twelve
o'clock (12:01) midnight May 1 and shall end at twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight
April 30. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5.
1-7A-2: DUTIES:
The duties of the city clerk shall be as follows 1
:
A. Office: The clerk shall keep his/her office at the city hall and his/her
office hours shall be as set from time to time by the council.
B. Revenues; Annual Report:
1. Supervision: The clerk shall exercise a general supervision over all the
officers of the city charged in any manner with the receipt, collection, or
disbursement of corporation revenue, and the collection and return of all such
revenues to the treasurer.
2. Custody And Control Of Records: The clerk shall have the charge, custody and
control of all deeds, leases, warrants, vouchers, books and papers of any kind,
the custody and control of which is not by this code given to any other
officers.
3. Annual Report:
a. Estimate Of Expenses: The clerk shall, on or before May 1 in each year, and
before the annual appropriations are to be made by the council, submit to the
council a report of his/her estimates, as nearly as may be, of the monies
necessary to defray the expenses of the corporation during the current fiscal
year 2
. The clerk shall, in said report, class the different objects and branches of
expenditures, giving, as nearly as may be, the amount required for each. (1997
Code)
b. Authority To Require Statements: For the purpose of making such report, the
clerk is authorized to require of all officers their statement of the condition
and expense of their respective offices or departments, with any proposed
improvements and probable expense thereof, all contracts made and unfinished,
and the amount of any and all unexpended funds shown in the preceding year
budget. (Ord. 0-15-017, 9-14-2015)
c. Aggregate Income: The clerk shall, in such report, show the aggregate income
of the preceding fiscal year from all sources, the amount of liabilities
outstanding upon which interest is to be paid, the bonds and debts payable
during the year, when due and when payable.
d. Additional Information: In such report, the clerk shall give such other
information to the council as he/she may deem necessary to the end that the
council may fully understand the money exigencies and demands upon the
corporation for the current year.
C. Attendance At Council Meetings: The clerk shall attend all meetings of the
council and shall keep a full and correct record of all of its proceedings and
shall perform all duties which may be required of him/her by law, and all other
duties which, by usage and custom, devolve upon clerks of incorporated bodies.
D. Administration Of Oaths: The clerk shall also be authorized to administer
oaths.
E. Seal And Attest Corporate Documents: The clerk shall seal and attest all
contracts of the city, and all licenses, permits and other documents which
require this formality.
F. Accounts: The clerk shall keep accounts showing all money received by him/
her, and the source and disposition thereof; and such other accounts as may be
required by statute or the applicable provisions of this code.
G. Deposit Of Funds: The clerk, upon receipt by him/her of any money in payment
for licenses or permits of any kind or nature whatsoever, shall deposit the
money in the treasury in the proper account thereof.
H. Records:
1. Licenses And Permits: In addition to the record of ordinances and other
records which the clerk is required by statute to keep, the clerk shall keep a
register of all licenses and permits issued, and a record of the payment
thereon.
2. Officers And Employees: The clerk shall keep a record showing all of the
officers and regular employees of the city, and such other records as may be
required by the council.
3. Index Of Documents: The clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all
documents and records kept by the clerk so that ready access thereto and use
thereof may be had.
4. Council Proceedings: The clerk shall keep all records, papers, ordinances,
notes and proceedings of the council, and of the city during the recess of the
council, and of all elections of the city officers.
5. Ordinances: The clerk shall record and index in a book to be kept for that
purpose, all ordinances passed by the council, and at the foot of the record of
each ordinance so recorded shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage
and of the publication of the ordinance, which record and memorandum, or a
certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the passage and legal
publication of such ordinances for all purposes whatsoever. The clerk shall
have all ordinances published immediately after their passage when required by
law so to do.
I. Removal Of Records: The clerk shall not suffer any records, papers or other
writings belonging to the city to be taken out of his/her office.
J. Custodian Of Corporate Seal: The clerk shall be the custodian of the city
seal and shall affix its impression on documents whenever required. The
corporate seal of the city shall be the seal heretofore established.
K. Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the clerk
shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by statute or
the provisions of this code. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-90.
2 1. "Fiscal year" defined in section
  1-3-2 of this title.
1-7A-3: DEPUTY CLERK:
A. Office Established: There shall be established in the city the appointed
office of deputy clerk, appointed by the city clerk with the advice and consent
of the city council 1
.
B. Duties; Compensation: The deputy clerk shall perform those duties and
functions as provided by law 2
or such duties and functions as prescribed by the city clerk or by ordinance
adopted by the city council; and shall receive such compensation as the council
may provide for in the annual budget. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-10.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-95.
ARTICLE B. CITY TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7B-1: Appointment
1-7B-1: APPOINTMENT:
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-20-5, the position of City
Treasurer shall be an appointed position. Such appointment shall be made by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. (1997 Code)
ARTICLE C. CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-7C-1: Office Created
1-7C-2: Powers And Duties
1-7C-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of city attorney, an executive office of the
city. The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor with the approval of
the council 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5.
1-7C-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
A. Suits And Actions: The city attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all
suits or actions at law or equity to which the city may be a party, or in which
it may be interested, or which may be brought against, or by any officer of the
city on behalf of the city, or in the capacity of such person as an officer of
the city.
B. Legal Advisor: The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of the city, and
shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the city, whenever
requested to do so by any city official. Upon request by the mayor or council,
the city attorney shall reduce such opinion to writing.
C. Drafting Ordinances And Contracts: It shall be the duty of the city attorney
to draft or supervise the phraseology of any contracts, leases or other
documents or instruments, to which the city may be a party; and to draft
ordinances and resolutions covering any subjects within the powers of the city.
(1997 Code)
ARTICLE D. CITY COLLECTOR 1
SECTION:
1-7D-1: Creation Of Office
1-7D-2: Term Of Office
1-7D-3: Disposition Of Monies Collected
1-7D-4: Reports
1-7D-5: General Duties Of The City Collector
1-7D-5-1: Secretarial
1-7D-5-2: Accounting
1-7D-5-3: Collection
1-7D-6: Office Hours Of Collector
1-7D-7: Compensation/Salary
 
Notes
1    65 ILCS 5/3. 1-35-120, 5/3.1-35-125, 5/3.1-35-130 and 5/3.1-35-135
1-7D-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
   There shall be established in the City the appointed office of City
Collector. The office of City Collector shall be separate and distinct from the
office of City Clerk. The Collector shall work under the direction of the Mayor
and shall not exercise any supervisory authority. The office of City Collector
shall be an appointed office and the appointment shall be made by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. If the City Clerk is appointed
said collector, said appointee may hold the earlier office and the office of
the City Collector simultaneously and with a separate salary for both offices.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
   The City Collector shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor and
concurrent with Mayor's term of office. However, subject to reappointment. A
six (6)-month probational period is required for permanent appointment.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-3: DISPOSITION OF MONIES COLLECTED:
   All monies collected by the City Collector shall be turned over to the City
Treasurer within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt thereof, and the City
Collector shall take a receipt for such money in duplicate. The City Collector
shall make a report showing every item collected.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-4: REPORTS:
   The City Collector shall make a report showing every item collected upon
turning over money to the Treasurer.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-5: GENERAL DUTIES OF THE CITY COLLECTOR:
   In the daily performance of the duties of the City Collector, the individual
appointed to this position is expected to perform tasks in three general areas:
secretarial, accounting, and collection. The minimal duties and
responsibilities in each of these areas are listed as follows.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-5-1: SECRETARIAL:
   A.   Answer phones in a professional manner identifying the office and
individual speaking;
   B.   Take messages for all officials and department heads, referring calls
to the proper individual;
   C.   Maintain a daily log of incoming calls;
   D.   Receive and distribute mail and document as required;
   E.   Schedule appointments for Mayor;
   F.   Maintain a current card file of businesses and individuals involved
with City operations;
   G.   Type purchase orders, work orders, and requisitions as requested by
department heads as well as those needed for the operation of the Collector's
Office, place phone orders if instructed, sign receipt of said articles and log
such transactions;
   H.   Distribute and receive applications for all City permits and services;
   I.   General secretarial work for the Mayor, City Clerk, and Treasurer as
requested as time allows;
   J.   Maintain office area in a clean and orderly manner;
   K.   Other general secretarial duties as prescribed by the Mayor.
   L.   The City Collector shall perform and other duties and functions as
provided for by law or statue.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-5-2: ACCOUNTING:
   A.   Perform all tasks necessary, except the actual reading of the meters,
to allow proper and timely water billing receipts thereof. Make all necessary
record documentation; and
   B.   Perform all duties necessary for the proper notification and collection
of all bills receivable, record same in necessary ledgers, budget reports and
written reports to the Mayor and Treasurer.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-5-3: COLLECTION:
   A.   Collect and receipt of all monies per ordinance and state statute;
   B.   Act as selling agent for City and maintain appropriate records; and
   C.   Prepare all monies in a prescribed manner for deposit by the City
Treasurer.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-6: OFFICE HOURS OF COLLECTOR:
   The City Collector shall maintain office hours, open to the public which
shall be the same hours during which City Hall is open.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
1-7D-7: COMPENSATION/SALARY:
   The salary of the City Collector shall be hourly based on an expected forty
(40)-hour workweek, and shall include all benefits as provided by the City to
all other City Administrative Employees. The salary/compensation of the City
Collector shall be set by the City Council in the annual budget.
(Ord. O-24-07, 11-25-2024)
ARTICLE E. BUDGET OFFICER
SECTION:
1-7E-1: Office Created
1-7E-2: Compensation
1-7E-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There shall be established the appointed office of Budget Officer, which
position shall be filled by designation of the Mayor with approval of the City
Council 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10.
1-7E-2: COMPENSATION:
The Budget Officer shall receive compensation in such sum as the Council shall
from time to time provide. (1997 Code)
ARTICLE F. CITY ADMINISTRATOR
(Rep. by Ord. 0-23-14, 2-23-2015)
ARTICLE G. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR-TAX INCREMENT FINANCE COORDINATOR
(Rep. by Ord. 0-21-14, 2-23-2015)
ARTICLE H. FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-7H-1: Office Created
1-7H-2: Appointment And Term
1-7H-3: Duties
1-7H-1: OFFICE CREATED:
There is hereby established the office of information officer for the city of
Colona. (Ord. 0-15-010, 7-13-2015)
1-7H-2: APPOINTMENT AND TERM:
There shall be a minimum of two (2) freedom of information officers appointed.
A minimum of one shall be appointed from the Colona police department, and a
minimum of one shall be appointed from the city of Colona clerk's office. Each
FOIA officer may appoint deputy FOIA officers to assist in the preparation of
FOIA responses.
The terms of the office for the FOIA officers shall be consistent with the term
of the mayor who appoints them. The term of the office shall terminate either
at the pleasure of the mayor or at the end of the term of office when the
sitting mayor shall end. (Ord. 0-15-010, 7-13-2015)
1-7H-3: DUTIES:
The FOIA officer's responsibilities shall be as follows:
   A.   The FOIA officer's responsibilities are to receive FOIA requests from
the public and to send responses in compliance with FOIA. All FOIA requests
should be submitted to a designated FOIA officer. FOIA requires that each
public body appoint one or more FOIA officers who must complete an electronic
training developed by the attorney general's PAC.
   B.   The FOIA officer will note the date of receipt of a request, compute
the deadline for a response and note that date on the request, maintain a copy
of the request, maintain files of communication with requestors and copies of
requests and attend required training. Each FOIA officer for a public body must
develop and make available upon request a list of documents maintained by the
public body.
(Ord. 0-15-010, 7-13-2015)
CHAPTER 8
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1: Elections
1-8-2: Contest Of Election
1-8-3: Election Wards
1-8-4: Election Ward Map
1-8-1: ELECTIONS:
Elections for Municipal officers shall be held as provided by statute, and at
the time prescribed by statute 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
1-8-2: CONTEST OF ELECTION:
A. Alderman, Contest Of Election: The election of any Alderman may be contested
by any elector of the City, and the proceedings shall be in accordance with the
general laws of the State regulating the mode of contesting elections of County
officials, so far as the same may be applicable. The Mayor and Council shall be
the tribunal before which such contest shall be heard and their decision shall
be final.
B. Statement Of Contest; Filing: Whenever any person shall desire to contest
the right of another to hold the office of Alderman, he/she shall, within
thirty (30) days after the person whose election is to be contested is declared
elected, file with the Clerk a statement in writing, briefly stating the points
on which he/she will contest the election, which statement shall be verified by
affidavit.
C. Notice To Respondent: Upon filing such statement, such contestant shall also
serve a copy thereof upon the person whose election he/she intends to contest,
and in case such person is absent from the City, or cannot be found, then by
leaving a copy of the statement at such person's usual place of abode, with
some member of the family of the age of ten (10) years or upwards, and
informing such person of the contest thereof.
D. Taking Of Testimony: When said statement shall have been filed and served as
aforesaid, it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Council, upon the request of
either party, to meet and affix the time and place for taking the depositions
of witnesses when either party may proceed to take the testimony of any
witness, in the manner provided by law for taking depositions in courts of
records, before any judge, magistrate, or notary public, at the time and place
so fixed and continue the same from day to day thereafter, until the testimony
shall have been taken.
E. Proofs Taken And Filed: In all cases of such contested elections, the proofs
shall be taken and filed with the Clerk within sixty (60) days from the day
fixed by the Council for taking the same; provided, the Council may, from time
to time upon sufficient cause shown, extend the time for taking and filing such
proofs. No testimony shall be taken or proof received or produced on the
hearing before the Mayor and Council, except upon the points set forth in the
statement required to be filed with the Clerk and served upon the respondent.
F. Procedure Of Board: When all the evidence shall have been taken, as
aforesaid, the same shall be forthwith filed in the office of the Clerk, who
shall at once lay the same before the Mayor and Council, and the latter shall,
without delay, refer the same to some appropriate committee to examine and
report thereon. Upon such report being made, the Mayor and Council shall hear
the case, and may require all the testimony and proofs taken to be read in open
meeting, and shall, by a majority vote, upon the call of the "yeas" and "nays",
declare as elected the person who shall appear by the evidence to have been
elected; and the Clerk shall enter such decision and declaration upon the
official minutes of the Council.
G. Respondent Not To Act: In any such contest, the respondent or person whose
election is subject to the contest, shall not take any part in such contest, so
far as the determination thereof is concerned, nor shall such person cast any
vote in connection therewith.
H. Legal Disqualification: Whenever it shall appear, in any case, that the
person receiving the highest number of votes is ineligible to the office
because of any legal disqualification, it shall, for that reason, be the duty
of the mayor and council to declare such election null and void, and
immediately call a special election to fill said office.
I. Counting Ballots: In all cases of contested elections, the parties thereto
shall be entitled to have the package or packages of ballots which have been
returned to the clerk pursuant to law, opened in the presence of a committee of
the mayor and council, and the officer having the custody thereof, and to have
said ballots counted; or the same may be brought into open council meeting, and
then and there counted by a committee of three (3) members appointed for that
purpose.
J. Preservation Of Ballots: It shall be the duty of the clerk to carefully
preserve all ballots returned to the clerk by the judges of any city election
for six (6) months thereafter; and at the expiration of that time, if there be
no contest instituted in the meantime, and which may be still pending, said
clerk shall destroy such ballots by burning, under the direction of the mayor
and council 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/23-6.1.
1-8-3: ELECTION WARDS:
The city of Colona is divided into four (4) wards, the boundaries of which
shall be as follows:
A. First Ward: All of MHP1 LLC (formerly Kershaw Trailer Court) traveling east
to the intersection of Cleveland Road and State Highway 84 East along the south
side of Cleveland Road up to the address of 729 Cleveland Road then it includes
both sides of Cleveland Road up to the address of 909 Cleveland Road. Addresses
of 909, 913, 917, 925, 927, 931, and 937 Cleveland Road are not within the
legal boundaries of the City of Colona. After 937 Cleveland Road travel again
on the South side of Cleveland Road to the West side of Maple Court of Rokis
Subdivision, then South to the Hennepin Canal. This includes undeveloped
parcels 0611251003 & 0611207026. From there West along the canal to Route 84 at
its intersection with First Street, go North to the intersection of Fourth
Avenue; North side of Fourth Avenue West to Third Street; North to Third
Avenue; West along Third Avenue on the North side to its intersection of
Seventh Street; then North on Seventh Street to First Avenue; then North to
First Avenue. This includes the East side of Seventh Street starting at 222 7th
Street and going down to 102 7th Street; then along First Avenue going East to
cross Route 84 back at MHP1 LLC trailer court.
This includes Blocks 13, 12, 11, 10, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2 and 1 of Reese Gardens
Addition, 4, 3, 2 and 1 of Canalvue Addition, MHP1 LLC formerly Kershaw Trailer
Court, Robert Davis farm, Rokis Addition, Skinner Subdivision, Shriver Addition
Original Town of Colona, Reggentin Addition and lands incorporated.
B. Second Ward: Northwest Corner of Seventh Street at its intersection with
First Avenue including the West side only of Seventh Street, then South to
Third Avenue along the South side going East to Third Street then South to
Fourth Avenue and East to First Street; go South to the Hennepin Canal then
West to Second Street on the West side only, South to Sixth Avenue and West to
Third Street and South to Tenth Avenue, includes South side of Tenth Avenue; go
East at intersection of Tenth Avenue and Third Street to First Street, then
South to the Green River including all of Tenth Avenue from Third Street and
all of Eleventh Avenue to the West North to Ninth Avenue then West to Ninth
Street and North to the intersection of Seventh Street and First Avenue. This
includes all of 9th, 8th, 7th, 6th, 5th and 4th Streets and the West Side of
Third Street South of the Canal and includes Hennepin Canal road West to the
Rock River, the 300 block of Seventh Street, 300 block of Sixth Street, 300
block of Fifth Street and all of Fifth Avenue and Fourth Street to Third Avenue
and Third Street to Fourth Avenue.
This includes Blocks 15, 14, 9 and 8 of Reese Gardens Addition, Blocks 2, 3, 4
and 5 of Canalvue, Blocks 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 of Ryan's Garden Addition; Blocks 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10, 12 and Lots 15 through 34 of Block 11 in Green River Heights Addition
and all of Park Terrace Addition.
C. Third Ward: Beginning at the East side of Second Street at the Hennepin
Canal traveling South to Sixth Avenue then West to Third Street includes the
East Side of Third Street South to Tenth Avenue, includes north side of Tenth
Avenue; East to IL Highway 84 then south including the following: IL Highway 84
right-of- way; Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad (BNSF RR) right-of- way;
11.83 acres, parcel number 0615276005, known as 21467 Briar Bluff Road; 2.01
acres, parcel number 0615426006; 3.56 acres, parcel number 0615426007; 0.61
acres, parcel number 0615426008, known as 21619 Briar Bluff Road; 9.89 acres,
parcel number 0615426005; 20 acres, parcel number 0614300001, known as 1201 IL
Highway 84; and 1.22 acres, parcel number 0614300003. Then follow BNSF RR
right-of-way north to Poppy Garden Road. Travel east along the north side of
Poppy Garden Road, except for the addresses of 4733 and 4751 and parcel number
0611358001, to Interstate 80 and also includes 4726 Poppy Garden Road on the
south side. Travel north from Interstate 80 to Iowa Interstate Railroad and
west to the Hennepin Canal, including railroad right-of-way, with the exception
of Carroll Farm. Travel along Hennepin Canal west to its intersection with
Second Street.
This includes all of First Street and East side of Second Street to Sixth
Avenue then all of Second Street to Tenth Avenue North side, all of Green Park
Addition, Greenwood Additions 1 and 2, Greenwood Place, Carroll's Addition and
Greenview Estates and Nancy's Trailer Court. Riverview Trailer Park is
excluded.
The Poppy Garden Road addresses that are included are 4068, 4076, 4090 and
4726.
D. Fourth Ward: At intersection Interstate 80 and Burlington Northern Santa Fe
Railroad East travel along tracks, including railroad right-of-way and all of
Level Acres Extensions 1 – 7 Subdivisions, Heartland Subdivision, Schneider's
2nd Addition, Green River Industrial Park, 201 and 202 Exchange Street, and 240
and 242 Parkway. The address at 227 Union Street is excluded. Continue
traveling south along Briargate Drive, then east along Poppy Garden Road, south
along Osco Road, including Indian Trails Resort. The address at 21639 Green
River Road is excluded. Then travel west along south edge of Indian Trails
Resort to east edge of Stonebridge Crossing, continuing southward past U.S.
Highway 6, following the Colona corporate limits line, including the following
addresses: 5715 U.S. Highway 6, 20780 E. 550th Street, and 20812 E. 550th
Street; and the undeveloped area, parcel numbers 0624200007, 0624200009, and
0624200011. Also included is the undeveloped area bordered by U.S. Highway 6,
Interstates 280/74 and 80, and E. 450th Street. Also included are all of
Heeren's Subdivision, Lavender Crest Subdivision, Level Acres West Subdivision,
Mortensen's Subdivision 1st & 2nd Additions, Stonebridge Crossing Re-
subdivision 1 – 3 and Subdivision Phase 1, and Werner Addition.
Stonebridge Addition includes Mineral Creek Drive, Rock Point Road, River Mist
Drive, Stonebridge Boulevard, Woodbridge Lane, Misty Lane, Portage Way,
Stonebridge Court and Stonebridge Place. Lavender Crest Winery at 5201 U.S.
Highway 6 is included.
Mortensen Addition includes addresses on the following streets Clover, Cedar,
Linden, Spruce Drives and Pine Court.
The Poppy Garden Road addresses that are included are 5387, 5421, 5690, 5696,
5712, 5726, 5750, 5765, 5770, 5775 and 5777. The addresses on Briargate Drive
included are 213, 219, 220, 223, 224, 227, 228, 231, 232, 235, 236, 239, 240,
243, 244, 248, 251, 252, 255, 256, 259, 260, 263, 264, 267, 268, 271, 272, 275,
276, 279, 280, 283, 284, 287, 288, 291, 292, 296, 489, 492, 496, 500, 510 and
607. The rest of the addresses on Briargate are excluded.
Rita Drive is also excluded.
(Ord. 0-07-12, 6-11-2012)
1-8-4: ELECTION WARD MAP:
(Ord. 0-07-12, 6-11-2012)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL FINANCES
SECTION:
1-9-1: Annual Appropriations (Rep. by Ord. 0-15-009, 7-27-2015)
1-9-2: Tax Levy
1-9-3: Annual Audit
1-9-4: Indebtedness
1-9-5: Bidding And Contract Procedures
1-9-6: Council Approval Of Bills
1-9-7: Payments By Treasurer
1-9-8: Surety Bonds
1-9-9: Bank Depository
1-9-10: Collection Fees And Costs
1-9-11:    Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
1-9-1: ANNUAL APPROPRIATIONS:
(Rep. by Ord. 0-15-009, 7-27-2015)
1-9-2: TAX LEVY:
A. Tax Levy Ordinance: A tax levy ordinance shall be enacted as required by
law.
B. Filing With County: A certified copy of the tax levy ordinance shall be
filed with the county clerk not later than the last Tuesday of December. Such
ordinance shall show the total funds reserved for each item and the amount of
tax levied therefor. (Ord. 0-15-016, 9-14-2015)
1-9-3: ANNUAL AUDIT:
As soon as practicable at the close of each fiscal year and no later than six
(6) months thereafter, there shall be an audit of all accounts of the city made
by a competent person authorized to act as an auditor under the laws of the
state, to be designated by the council. Copies of such audit shall be filed
with the clerk and with the director of the state department of revenue and in
such other places as may now or hereafter be required by law. (1997 Code)
1-9-4: INDEBTEDNESS:
No indebtedness shall be incurred, excepting such indebtedness as may be
payable solely from the proceeds of a duly authorized bond issue, or from a
designated specified source, unless there is a prior reserving of funds in the
budget document out of which such indebtedness could be paid, as provided by
statute 1
. (Ord. 0-15-018, 9-14-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-5-1.
1-9-5: BIDDING AND CONTRACT PROCEDURES 1
:
A. Competitive Bidding Required: Any work or other public improvement that is
not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special
taxation, and all purchases of and contracts for supplies, materials, and
services shall, except as specifically provided herein, be based whenever
possible on competitive bids.
B. Formal Contract Procedure: All work or other public improvement that is not
to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation,
and all purchases, orders, or contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, or
contractual services except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated
cost thereof shall meet or exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be
purchased from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids,
unless competitive bidding is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the city
council then holding office.
C. Advertisement For Bids: A notice inviting bids shall be published a least
once in a newspaper with general circulation within the City. The City shall
also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the public
bulletin board in the City Hall.
D. Scope Of Notice: The newspaper notice required herein shall include a
general description of the work to be performed or the articles to be
purchased, shall state where specifications may be secured, and shall specify
the time and place for opening bids.
E. Bid Deposits:
1. Prescribed In Notice: When deemed necessary by the City Council, bid
deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
2. Unsuccessful Bidders: Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of
their bid deposits upon the award of the contract by the City Council.
3. Forfeiture By Successful Bidder: A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid
deposit required by the City Council upon failure on his/her part to enter into
a contract within ten (10) days after the award.
4. Form Of Deposit: Such bid deposit may be in the form of a certified check,
bond, or letter of credit in an amount as specified in the advertisement for
bids to ensure finalization of the contract and to indemnify the City against
all loss, damages, and claims that may accrue against the City as a consequence
of the granting of the contract.
F. Bid Opening Procedure:
1. Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the City Clerk and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
2. Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the
public notice.
3. Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the City
Council or by a City employee, in which event a tabulation of the bids shall be
furnished to the City Council at its next regular meeting.
G. Rejection Of Bids: The City, through its corporate authorities, shall have
the authority to reject all bids or parts of all bids when the public interest
will be served thereby.
H. Bidders In Default: The City shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is
in default on the payment of taxes, licenses, or other money due the City.
I. Award Of Contract:
1. Authority: The City Council shall have the authority to award contracts
within the purview of this Section.
2. Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the
City to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the City
Council shall consider:
a. The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the contract to
provide the service required;
b. Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly,
or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
c. The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency
of the bidder;
d. The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services with this
or other governmental bodies;
e. The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances
relating to the contract or service;
f. The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to
perform the contract or provide the service;
g. The quality, availability, and adaptability of the equipment, supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
h. The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the
use of the subject of the contract;
i. The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
j. The City Council may, by resolution, appoint or designate someone or a
committee to investigate and report to the Council his, her or its findings
regarding the qualifications of each bidder. Said report or reports may be used
by the Council in determining who is a responsible bidder.
3. Performance Bonds: The City Council shall have the authority to require a
performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts as it shall
find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the City and to
conform to the statutory requirements for such bonds.
J. Open Market Procedure: All work and purchases of supplies, materials, and
services of less than the estimated value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
shall be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without
observing the procedure prescribed by this section for the award of formal
contracts in such a manner so as to ensure the best interests of the public
after solicitation of bids on proposals by mail, telephone, facsimile
transmission, or otherwise.
K. Professional Service Contracts: All contracts for professional services,
including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, real estate appraisers,
and architects, and any other profession whose ethical code involves, prohibits
or discourages involvement in normal bidding procedures, may be entered into by
the City without observing the bidding procedures prescribed by this section
for the award of formal contracts.
L. Regular Employment Contracts: Regular employment contracts in the Municipal
service shall likewise be exempt from the provisions of this section.
M. Emergency Purchases: In case of an apparent emergency that requires
immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials, or services, the City
Council shall be empowered to secure by open market procedure as herein set
forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials, or
services regardless of the amount of the expenditure. A finding of such an
emergency shall be made in an affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of
the City Council at the time of such emergency contract or no later than the
first regular City Council meeting thereafter.
N. Cooperative Purchasing: The City shall have the authority to join with other
units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of
the City would be served thereby. (1997 Code)
O. Execution Of Contracts: The Mayor, or any other person designated by the
Council, may sign on behalf of the City any contract authorized by the Council.
No contract may be entered into without the authority of the Council. (Ord. 0-
16-12, 9-26-2016)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-9-1.
1-9-6: COUNCIL APPROVAL OF BILLS:
All bills payable by the City, other than for the payment of salaries
established by the Council, shall be submitted to the Council for approval
before payment. (1997 Code)
1-9-7: PAYMENTS BY TREASURER:
The Treasurer shall pay out money in payment of all bills, or for salaries, or
for any other purpose other than the retirement of principal or interest on
bonds or tax anticipation warrants only upon warrant signed by the Mayor and
Clerk as provided by statute. Such warrants shall designate the item to be paid
and the funds from which they are to be paid. (1997 Code)
1-9-8: SURETY BONDS:
A. State Authorized Surety Company: Whenever a surety bond to indemnify the
City is required as a prerequisite to exercising the duties of any office or
position, or to the issuance of a license or permit for the exercise of any
special privilege, the surety on such bond shall be a corporation licensed and
authorized to do business in this State as a surety company, except on approval
of the Council.
B. Additional Surety: Whenever, in its opinion, additional sureties or an
additional surety may be needed on any bond to indemnify the City against loss
or liability because of the insolvency of the existing surety or sureties, or
for any other reason, the Council may order a new surety or sureties to be
secured for such bond. If such new surety or sureties are not procured within
ten (10) days from the time such order is transmitted to the principal on the
bond, or his/her assignee, the Council shall declare the bond to be void, and
thereupon such principal, or assignee, shall be deemed to have surrendered the
privilege or position as condition of which the bond was required. (1997 Code)
1-9-9: BANK DEPOSITORY:
   A. The City Council shall from time to time by resolution designate a
financial institution as the City's primary financial depository hereinafter
called PFD.
   B. The City Treasurer is directed as soon as practical after such
designation to relocate and/or establish City deposits and accounts with the
designated PFD.
   C. At all times the Treasurer shall require the PFD to collateralize
Municipal deposits with securities held by another institution with a market
value in an amount of at least equal to the amounts on deposit that exceed the
insurance limitations of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or other
similar Federal insurance entity.
(Ord. 99-16, 12-13-1999)
1-9-10: COLLECTION FEES AND COSTS:
   In the event a fine or penalty is assessed pursuant to any provision of this
code, a default in the payment of a fine or penalty or any installment of a
fine or penalty may be collected by any means authorized for the collection of
monetary judgements. the city’s Mayor, Attorney, Finance Director, or their
designees may retain attorneys and private collection agents for the purpose of
collecting any default in payment of any fine or penalty imposed by this code,
or installment of a fine or penalty. The city shall add a 35 percent cost of
collections to any outstanding balance that requires the city to retain the
services of a collection agency. this 35 percent cost includes any default in a
fine or penalty or any installment of a fine or penalty that was previously
referred to an attorney or private collection agency and the payment of which
remains outstanding.
(Ord. O-19-14, 12-30-2019)
1-9-11: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
   A.   Tax imposed; Rate.
      1.    A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than the cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use
of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the City at a rate of 3
percent of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business.
      2.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 8-11-22, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
   B.    Collection of tax by retailers.
      1.    The tax imposed by this Ordinance shall be remitted by such
retailer to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required
to be collected pursuant to or as authorized by this Ordinance and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller’s tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
      2.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. O-20-01, 1-27-2020)
CHAPTER 10
ETHICAL CONDUCT
SECTION:
1-10-1: State Officials And Employees Ethics Act
1-10-1: STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT:
A. The regulations of section 5-15 1
and article 10 2
of the state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes
430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the "act" in this section) are
hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the officers and employees
of the city to the extent required by 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5.
B. The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the act, by any officer or any employee of the city, is hereby
prohibited.
C. The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the city under the act, is hereby prohibited.
D. The participation in political activities prohibited under the act, by any
officer or employee of the city, is hereby prohibited.
E. For purposes of this section, the terms "officer" and "employee" shall be
defined as set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/70-5(c).
F. The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as those
penalties set forth in 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/50-5 for similar
violations of the act.
G. This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of city officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
70-5(a).
H. Any amendment to the act that becomes effective after the effective date of
this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and shall be
applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of gifts and to
prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes its
provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated
into this section by reference without formal action by the corporate
authorities of the city.
I. If the Illinois supreme court declares the act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
supreme court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the city if the act is found unconstitutional by
the Illinois supreme court.
J. If the Illinois supreme court declares part of the act unconstitutional but
upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the act, or does not address
the remainder of the act, then the remainder of the act as adopted by this
section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that part of this
section relating to the part of the act found unconstitutional shall be deemed
repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of the city. (Ord.
08-04, 5-10-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 430/5-15.
2 2. 5 ILCS 430/10-10 - 10-40.
CHAPTER 11
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Short Title
1-11-2: Scope
1-11-3: Definitions
1-11-4: Notices
1-11-5: Late Payment
1-11-6: Payment
1-11-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-11-8: Audit Procedure
1-11-9: Appeal
1-11-10: Hearing
1-11-11: Interest And Penalties
1-11-12: Abatement
1-11-13: Installment Contracts
1-11-14: Statute Of Limitations
1-11-15: Voluntary Disclosure
1-11-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-11-17: Internal Review Procedure
1-11-18: Application
1-11-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city's procedures in
connection with all of the city's locally imposed and administered taxes. (Ord.
01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act".
CITY: The city of Colona, Illinois.
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The city's mayor and city council.
HEARING OFFICER: An administrative individual appointed by the city mayor with
the advice and consent of the corporate authorities to conduct hearings and to
issue final determinations regarding the collection of all locally imposed and
administered taxes.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The city's collector is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the city that
is collected or administered by the city, not an agency or department of the
state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the city other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the city's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the city that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
city. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
A. First-class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the persons
concerned at the persons' last known address, or
B. Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the city
pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the city on or before the due date, or b) received in an
envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated on
or before the due date, properly addressed to the city, with adequate postage
prepaid. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
A. The city shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
B. The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be four (4)
years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made.
The city shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered
taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly
to the city.
C. The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
1. The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing a claim
for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
a. The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the claim;
b. The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax subject to the
claim;
c. The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled check or
receipt for the payment;
d. The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or revised tax
return, in connection with the claim; and
e. A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the claim to be
applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and, as
applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the city.
2. Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator of any
claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
a. Grant the claim; or
b. Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as to the
reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
3. In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in part, a
claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or credit shall
bear interest at the rate of 2.5 percent per annum, based on a year of three
hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of
the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a
credit. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any locally administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
A. Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
1. The tax;
2. The time period of the audit; and
3. A brief description of the books and records to be made available for the
auditor.
B. Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the date
and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
C. The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit conducted.
The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty
(30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event taxpayer
is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may
request another date within the thirty (30) days, approved in writing, that is
convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
D. Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
E. It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available its
books and records for inspection by the city. If the taxpayer or tax collector
fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided,
the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based
on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's
tax liability.
F. If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally imposed
and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the amount of
overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of the
city's determination of the amount of overpayment.
G. In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local governmental
entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local governmental entity
imposing such tax. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-9: APPEAL:
A. The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer upon the
local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due, a bill,
a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The notice
shall include the following information:
1. The reason for the assessment;
2. The amount of the tax liability proposed;
3. The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
4. The obligations of the city during the audit, appeal, refund and collection
process.
B. A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax administrator of a
determination of tax due or assessment may file with the local tax
administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting forth the
basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest and petition
for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within forty five
(45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
C. If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the local tax
administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give written
notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date within
fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
D. If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the forty
five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a
final bill due and owing without further notice.
E. Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full payment of
the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the due date of
the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time for filing a
written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time for filing
a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended for more
than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five (45) day period.
(Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-10: HEARING:
A. Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written protest
and petition for hearing under section
1-11-9 of this chapter, the local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing
regarding any appeal. The taxpayer may request that a hearing officer conduct
the hearing rather than the local tax administrator.
B. No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
C. At the hearing the local tax administrator/hearing officer shall preside and
shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination,
audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial
proceedings shall not apply.
D. At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator/hearing
officer shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
A. Interest: The city hereby provides for the amount of interest to be assessed
on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 2.5 percent
per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the
number of days elapsed.
B. Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within the
time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the city issuing
a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file
penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the total tax
due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was required to be
filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The city may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The city, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns in
a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing.
The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
A. No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four (4) years
maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
B. If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the city,
the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due, the
statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
C. No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was filed
by the taxpayer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the city
clerk's office. (Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
1-11-17: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
A. Timely remove the lien at the city's expense;
B. Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
C. Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord. 01-01,
1-22-2001)
1-11-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the city's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict
with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be controlling.
(Ord. 01-01, 1-22-2001)
CHAPTER 12
PUBLIC WORKS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Public Works Department
1-12-2: Public Works Director
1-12-1: PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT:
A. Creation: There is hereby created a public works department in the city of
Colona. This department shall be administered by a director of public works
directed by the mayor and aldermanic council. The director shall supervise the
various divisions of this department, and in addition, thereto he shall perform
such further duties as may from time to time be directed by the mayor and
aldermanic council.
B. Organization: The public works department oversees the operations of many
other city departments. The public works department is organized as follows:
1. Public Works Director (PWD): The public works director is the manager of the
department, responsible for the direction, operation, and budget management of
the public works department to include all other departments assigned for the
city. Runs the public works department and subdepartments with the
responsibility of coordinating with other governmental agencies for the public
works department and as directed for city including ensuring that mandatory/
required reports and/or procedures, etc., are completed. Has the duty to
advise, communicate concisely, and keep the aldermanic council informed to aid
in their decision making process. Helps to coordinate the other public works
subdepartments, etc., for related projects and/or as other assigned duties may
require for the city. The PWD is able to designate a public works department
employee having the knowledge and experience as the assistant public works
director (APWD). The PWD as a city officer reports directly to the mayor and
the aldermanic council as a whole. The PWD also serves on and reports to the
public works standing committee as a city staff member and coordinates its
activities with the counsel of the aldermen serving on the said committee (see
section
1-12-2, "Public Works Director", of this chapter).
2. Building Department: The building department's mission is the upkeep of all
city owned buildings and grounds.
3. Building Inspectors: The city building inspector's mission is to inspect
remodeling and new construction work being done that require a city building
permit. In the absence of a city building inspector, the PWD assumes the
responsibilities for enforcing and making decisions regarding the related laws,
codes, practices, etc., as approved and/or accepted within this code.
4. Park Department: The park department's mission is the upkeep of all park
areas and grounds.
5. Colona's Scott Family Park At Indian Trails Resort: The park's mission is to
provide recreational opportunities for Colona residents and the general public.
6. Sewer Department: The sewer department's mission is the upkeep of all lift
stations, sewer mains and manholes.
7. Street Department: The street department's mission is the upkeep on all
drainage, roads, snow plowing, tree trimming, etc.
8. Wastewater Treatment Plant: The wastewater treatment plant's mission is the
upkeep and operation of the sewer treatment plant, daily testing, sludge
removal and reports to the IEPA.
9. Water Department: The water department's mission is to maintain all wells,
water mains and distribution system, replacement of water meters, chemical
treatment, water testing, reports to IEPA.
10. Zoning:
a. Mission: Enforce city zoning ordinance. Review any zoning request or related
questions.
b. Zoning officer: Normally is the public works director.
11. Henry County Dispatcher: The Henry County dispatcher will be used for
contact after hours at 309-755-8747. (Ord. 0-15-003, 3-11-2015)
1-12-2: PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
A. Creation Of Position: The position of Public Works Director is hereby
created, which position shall be filled by a majority of all members of the
Aldermanic Council confirming the recommendation from the Mayor. The Public
Works Director shall hold position at the pleasure of the Aldermanic Council
and shall be subject to removal only by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the
Aldermen holding office. The position holder will supervise under the direction
of the Mayor and Aldermanic Council. (Ord. 0-17-11, 6-26-2017)
B. Compensation, Vacation, And Sick Time: The compensation of the Public Works
Director shall be determined by resolution set by the Aldermanic Council.
Vacation and sick time is outlined in the City Employee Handbook.
C. Restriction On Participation Of Partisan Politics: The Public Works Director
shall not, during employment, engage in partisan politics in connection with
the City elections.
D. Initiation Of Removal: Either the Mayor or any member of the Aldermanic
Council may initiate the removal of the Public Works Director. The Aldermanic
City Council can decide to remove the Public Works Director and/or position by
vote after the proper motions followed by appropriate discussion.
E. Residency: There shall be no residency requirement.
F. Duties And Responsibilities: The Public Works Director shall direct and
supervise the entire Public Works Department. This includes, but is not limited
to, the Water and Sewer Treatment Department, Street Department, Park
Department, Colona's Scott Family Park, and Activity Center:
1. Direct and supervise all staff activities.
2. Enforce all City personnel rules and regulations.
3. Prepare annual budget for the Public Works Department.
4. Submit agenda for and attend monthly Public Works Committee meetings.
5. Serve as the City's Assistant Engineer.
6. Perform such other duties prescribed by the Mayor and/or Aldermanic Council.
7. Serve on and report to the City's public works standing committee as a staff
member and coordinate its activities with the counsel of the Aldermen serving
on the said committee. (Ord. 0-15-004, 3-11-2015)
8. Be responsible for the facilities and ground maintenance for the Colona's
Scott Family Park and Activity Center. Coordinate the activities as required,
budget preparation, and administration with the Chairman of the Public Works
Committee and/or authorized designee and with the direction and/or counsel of
the majority of this committee's Aldermen. The Public Works Director also
serves on said committee as a staff member. (Ord. 0-17-11, 6-26-2017)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLAN COMMISSION 1
SECTION:
2-1-1: Creation; Membership
2-1-2: Term Of Office
2-1-3: Compensation
2-1-4: Organization
2-1-5: Powers And Duties
2-1-6: Land Subdivision Or Resubdivision
2-1-7: Improvements
2-1-8: Expenditures
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12.
2-1-1: CREATION; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a plan commission for the city which shall consist of
six (6) members; seven (7) including the mayor, to include the following:
A. Mayor: The mayor shall be ex officio member of said plan commission, with
power to vote.
B. Appointment: Six (6) other members; citizens of the city, appointed by the
mayor, on the basis of their particular fitness for their duty on said plan
commission, and subject to the approval of the council. (1997 Code)
2-1-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
Ex officio members shall serve for the term of their elective office. Of the
six (6) appointed citizen members, two (2) shall serve for a period of one
year, two (2) for a period of two (2) years, two (2) for a period of three (3)
years, etc. Thereafter, such appointed citizen members shall serve for a period
of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired
terms only. (1997 Code)
2-1-3: COMPENSATION:
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation except that, if
the council deems it advisable, the secretary may receive such compensation as
may be fixed from time to time by said council and provided for in the budget.
(Ord. 0-15-013, 9-14-2015)
2-1-4: ORGANIZATION:
A. Officers; Rules And Regulations: Immediately following their appointment,
the members of the plan commission shall meet, organize, elect such officers as
it may deem necessary, and adopt and later change or alter, rules and
regulations of organization and procedure consistent with city ordinances and
state laws.
B. Record Of Proceedings: The commission shall keep written records of its
proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public inspection.
C. Annual Report: The commission shall also file an annual report with the
mayor and council, setting forth its transactions and recommendations. (1997
Code)
2-1-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The plan commission shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Official Plan:
1. Preparation: To prepare and recommend to the council a comprehensive plan of
public improvements, looking to the present and future development and growth
of the city. Such a plan, after its adoption by the council, will be known as
the official plan.
2. Scope: Such plan shall include reasonable requirements in reference to
streets, alleys, and public grounds within the corporate limits and in
contiguous territory outside of and distant not more than one and one-half (11/
2) miles from such limits and not included in any municipality, such
requirements to be effective whenever such lands shall be subdivided after the
adoption of such plan.
B. Amendments To Plan: To prepare and recommend to the council from time to
time such changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by
the council or by the plan commission.
C. Improvements: To prepare and recommend to the council from time to time
plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of such
official plan.
D. Aid City Officials: To give aid to the city officials charged with the
direction of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to
further the making of such improvements, and generally to promote the
realization of the official plan.
E. Publicity: To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public understanding.
F. Other Planning Commissions: To cooperate with municipal or regional planning
commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program
and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
G. Statutory Powers: To exercise such other powers germane to the powers
granted by statute 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-5.
2-1-6: LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION:
Following the adoption of an official plan in the manner prescribed by statute,
no map or plat of any subdivision presented for record, affecting land within
the corporate limits of the city or in contiguous territory outside of and
distant not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles from such limits and not
included in any other municipality, shall be entitled to record or shall be
valid, unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys, and
public grounds in conformity with any requirements applicable thereto of such
official plan. (1997 Code)
2-1-7: IMPROVEMENTS:
The city clerk shall furnish the plan commission, for its consideration, a copy
of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The plan commission may report in relation thereto if it deems a report
necessary or advisable for the consideration of the council. (1997 Code)
2-1-8: EXPENDITURES:
The commission may, at the discretion of the council, employ necessary help
whose salaries, wages, and other necessary expenses shall be provided for by
adequate reservation of funds made by the council from public funds. If said
plan commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice or services,
it may be done upon authority from the council and reservation of funds by the
council therefor. (Ord. 0-15-013, 9-14-2015)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSES 1
SECTION:
3-1-1: License Required
3-1-2: Application And Registration
3-1-3: License Fees
3-1-4: Council Authority
3-1-5: Term
3-1-6: Inspection Of Premises
3-1-7: Revocation Of License
3-1-8: Penalty
3-1-9: Businesses Involving Nudity Prohibited
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-60-1.
3-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No business shall be operated in the city of Colona until the operator of such
business shall have secured from the city a license to operate such business.
This requirement applies to all businesses including home based businesses.
(Ord. 0-14-10, 5-10-2010)
3-1-2: APPLICATION AND REGISTRATION:
A. Application for the operation of a retail business within the city limits
shall be made to the city clerk. An application for the operation of a retail
business shall state the nature of the business, the address of the premises
where said business will be operated and such other pertinent information as
may be required by the city council by ordinance or resolution. (1997 Code;
amd. Ord. 0-14-10, 5-10-2010)
B. All businesses are required to annually register with the city of Colona.
There shall be no cost to the business for such annual registration after the
payment of the initial licensing fee. (Ord. 0-14-10, 5-10-2010)
C. Any business within the city of Colona, Henry County, Illinois, which has
failed to annually register with the city of Colona by February 1 of each
calendar year shall be deemed in violation of this section requiring such
registration. Failure to register annually with the city of Colona, by February
1 each calendar year shall carry a fine to be established under the "general
penalty clause" of this code.
The fine to be established for violation of the failure to register requirement
may also be covered under its "no contest" section in title 5, chapter 5,
"Fines", of this code. (Ord. 0-18-12, 10-8-2012)
3-1-3: LICENSE FEES:
The council establishes the license fee for a nonexpiring license to be fifty
dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 12-08, 8-11-2008)
3-1-4: COUNCIL AUTHORITY:
Upon receipt of an application to operate a retail business, the city council
shall have the sole authority to determine whether or not such license shall be
issued. (1997 Code)
3-1-5: TERM:
All existing licenses shall be considered nonexpiring licenses and any newly
issued license shall be determined to be a nonexpiring license. (Ord. 12-08, 8-
11-2008)
3-1-6: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
All businesses licensed under this title shall be inspected by the proper
officials of the city at least semiannually to ensure that certain businesses
comply with the ordinances of the city. (1997 Code)
3-1-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Ordinance Violation: Any violation of any ordinance of the city will
constitute grounds for the revocation of a retail business license after the
city council finds it a fact that any actual violation is detrimental to the
best interests of the city and its inhabitants.
B. Notice Of Violation:
1. Written Notice: The licensing authority shall give written notice thereof by
certified mail addressed to the licensee or applicant.
2. Contents Of Notice: Such notice shall specify the alleged grounds of said
violation and shall inform the recipient of his/her right to demand a hearing
before a hearing officer designated for such purpose by the licensing
authority.
C. Demand For Hearing: A demand for hearing shall be made in writing to the
licensing authority and submitted no later than the tenth day next succeeding
the date of mailing of the aforesaid notice. If no demand for hearing is made
within said time, the license shall forthwith be revoked, suspended or denied.
D. Hearing: If a hearing is demanded, it shall be held within ten (10) days
thereafter, upon written notice to the party demanding hearing.
E. Hearing Officer: The hearing officer for such hearing shall be the zoning
officer and is empowered to hear testimony, take evidence, and to make findings
of fact.
F. Findings: The hearing officer shall thereafter report these findings along
with the hearing officer's recommendation, to the licensing authority.
G. Action Of Licensing Authority: Upon receipt of the hearing officer's
findings and recommendations, the licensing authority shall take final action.
H. Immediate Revocation:
1. Grounds: Any violation of any ordinance of the city or any violation of any
agreement made by license holder with the city which agreement existed prior to
the issuance of the license or thereafter will constitute grounds for the
immediate revocation of a retail business license after the city council makes
a fact finding that an actual violation of the ordinance and/or agreement
exists and such violation is detrimental to the best interests of the city.
2. Determination Of Immediate Action: Should the elected authorities determine
that such violation requires immediate action, then upon the concurrence of
two-thirds (2/3) of the elected authorities, the reasons for such revocation
shall be stated and such revocation shall be immediate.
3. Demand For Immediate Hearing: Licensee shall have twenty four (24) hours
after receipt of the notice of revocation to demand an immediate hearing which
hearing shall be held within forty eight (48) hours of such demand for a
hearing.
4. Findings Of Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall make findings and
shall be empowered with the concurrence of the mayor to temporarily lift such
revocation until the next council meeting. (1997 Code)
3-1-8: PENALTY:
Any person who shall operate a business without a license shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1997 Code)
3-1-9: BUSINESSES INVOLVING NUDITY PROHIBITED:
A. It shall be cause for revocation or suspension of a business license and/or
liquor license issued by the city if a licensee, his manager or agent shall
allow any live person to appear or have reasonable cause to believe that any
live person shall appear in any licensed premises in a state of nudity to:
provide entertainment; provide service; act as hostess, manager or owner, or to
serve as an employee in any capacity.
B. This section shall additionally include any establishment or business
operating within the city whether they be licensed or not.
C. For the purposes of this section, the term "nudity" shall mean the showing
of human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks, or the female breast
including the nipple or any portion below the nipple with less than a full
opaque covering. Each live person appearing in any establishment or business is
a separate offense.
D. In addition to suspension or revocation of any business and/or liquor
license 1
as set forth in subsections A and B of this section, the business violating
subsections A and B of this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 99-07, 7-26-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  3-2-19 of this title.
CHAPTER 2
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-2-1: Definitions
3-2-2: Local Liquor Control Commissioner
3-2-3: License Required
3-2-4: Application
3-2-5: Restrictions On Licenses
3-2-6: License Classifications; Fees
3-2-7: Investigation; Approval Of License
3-2-8: Bond
3-2-9: Location Restrictions
3-2-10: Posting License
3-2-11: Sanitary Conditions
3-2-12: Hours Of Sale
3-2-13: Prohibited Acts
3-2-14: Minors
3-2-15: Employees
3-2-16: Renewal Of License
3-2-17: Transfer Of License
3-2-18: Duplicate License
3-2-19: Revocation; Suspension
3-2-20: Penalty
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words are used in this chapter, they shall have such
meanings as ascribed to them below, unless the context specifically states
otherwise:
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid or
solid, patented or not, containing alcohol contents, spirits, wine or beer, and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by human beings.
BEER: A beverage obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this state, and not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquor, which conforms to the definition of a
"club" in 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-3.24.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm, partnership, club, association, or corporation who
receives a license under this chapter.
ORIGINAL PACKAGE: Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, key, hogshead or
other receptacle or container, whatsoever used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey any
alcoholic liquor.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public to be a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAIL SALE: Sales for use or consumption and not for resale in any form.
SALE: Any transfer, exchange or barter, in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee, and
includes, but is not limited to, all of the following acts when done for
consideration:
A. The selling of liquor.
B. The giving away of liquor.
C. The dispensing of liquor.
D. The providing of mix, ice, water, or glasses for the purpose of mixing
drinks containing alcoholic liquor for consumption on the same premises.
E. The pouring of liquor.
F. The maintaining of a private or public club which serves liquor on its
premises to its patrons or members.
G. The maintaining of a restaurant which serves liquor on its premises to its
patrons.
H. The possessing in any business or commercial establishment of alcoholic
liquor to be served to patrons on the premises.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables, containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits. (1997 Code)
3-2-2: LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
A. Mayor To Serve As Commissioner: The Mayor is authorized to be the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be charged with the administration of the
Liquor Control Act, chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and of such
ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic liquor as may be enacted.
B. Assistants: The Mayor may appoint a person or persons to assist him/her in
the exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties provided for such
Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
C. Entry Powers: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power to
enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any time upon any
premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of
chapter 235 of the Illinois Compiled Statutes, or any rules or regulations
adopted by such Commissioner or by the State Commission have been or are being
violated, and at such time to examine the premises of said licensee in
connection therewith.
D. List: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a
complete record of all such licenses issued by such Commissioner. (1997 Code)
3-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale in the City any alcoholic liquor
without having a license or in violation of the terms or such license. (1997
Code)
3-2-4: APPLICATION:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. Such applications shall be made in writing, and shall be signed
by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a
club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the
following information and statements:
A. Required Information:
1. The name; age; place of birth; if a naturalized citizen, the time and place
of naturalization; and address of the applicant. In the case of a
copartnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the
case of a corporation for profit or a club, the date of incorporation, the
objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the stockholders
of such corporation and his/her interest in such corporation; if owned by one
person or his/her nominee, the name and address of such person. In the case of
a partnership or corporation, the information required from the applicant shall
be furnished as to each partner or the principal officers of the corporation.
2. The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
3. The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of the corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
4. The location and description of the premises or place of business which is
to be operated under such license.
5. A statement as to whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar license on premises other than described in this application, and the
disposition of such application.
6. A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
this chapter, laws of the state or the ordinances of the city.
7. Whether a previous license by state or subdivision thereof, or by the
federal government has been revoked and the reasons thereof.
8. A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the city,
county, state or the United States in the conduct of his/her place of business.
9. That the applicant is of good moral character. (1997 Code)
10. A statement that the applicant is not a manufacturer, bottler, jobber or
wholesaler of liquors, wine or beer; and the further statement that no
manufacturer, any person, other than the applicant himself/herself, directly or
indirectly supplied, furnished, gave or paid, or lent money, for any
furnishings, fixtures, or equipment on the premises or place of business or
license of the applicant; that no manufacturer, bottler, jobber or wholesaler
of liquor, wine or beer or any agent, or any person other than the applicant
himself/herself is directly or indirectly interested in the ownership, conduct
or operation of the business of such applicant. These restrictions do not apply
to a microbrewery. (Ord. 0-16-5, 4-25-2016)
11. A statement that the applicant agrees to permit any police officer or other
official of the city free and unrestricted access to the licensed premises for
the purpose of inspecting the same. (1997 Code)
12. (Rep. by Ord. 00-05, 2-14-2000)
13. That applicant has all of the qualifications necessary to receive a retail
license from the state pursuant to the requirements of 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes article VII.
B. False Statement: The making of any false statement in the application or the
violation by the applicant of any of the agreements or stipulations by
applicant entered into by execution of the application shall be sufficient
grounds for the revocation of any license granted and shall further be deemed a
violation of this chapter and subject the person so offending to the penalties
provided for. (1997 Code)
3-2-5: RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSES:
No such license shall be issued to: (1997 Code)
   A.   (Rep. by Ord. 0-16-5, 4-25-2016)
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which such person resides.
   C.   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   D.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law.
   E.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is the keeper
of a house of ill fame.
   F.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   G.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   H.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license under a first
application.
   I.   A copartnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership shall
be qualified to receive a license.
   J.   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residency within the city.
   K.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   L.   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued.
   M.   Any law enforcing public officials, mayor or alderman, and no such
official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the
manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor.
   N.   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor license.
   O.   Any person with any outstanding bills or liens with the city.
(1997 Code)
3-2-6: LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS; FEES:
   A.   Classifications: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the city shall pay an annual license fee as
set forth in this section. Such licenses shall be divided into the following
classes:
      1.   Class A: Class A license which shall entitle the licensee to make
only package liquor sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption only off the
premises (e.g., gas stations/convenience stores).
      2.   Class C: Class C license which shall authorize the retail sale of
beer and wine on the premises operated as a restaurant and sales of food which
constitutes sixty percent (60%) or more of the gross receipts of the business.
      3.   Class D: Class D license which shall authorize the retail sale of
liquor for on and/or off premises consumption. Liquor sold for off premises
consumption must be sold in manufacturer's original packaging (i.e., bar with
package liquor sales).
      4.   Class E: Class E license shall entitle the licensee to sell, keep or
offer for sale at retail, any liquor on the premises where food and/or
entertainment are furnished (e.g. bar with video gaming, gas station with video
gaming). Said license shall not be construed to prohibit sales in the original
manufacturer's package.
      5.   Class T: Upon approval by the local liquor commissioner, a class T
or temporary license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail may be granted to
organized clubs, societies, associations, fraternal organizations, duly
constituted churches, or other entities. A temporary license may be issued
pursuant to this subsection A6 for one day, two (2) days, or three (3)
consecutive days. The license shall specify on its face the duration.
         a.   Number Of Licenses: No organization shall be issued more than one
temporary license during any thirty (30) day period.
         b.   Time Of Application: All applications for temporary licenses must
be received by the liquor commissioner at least thirty (30) days prior to the
dates being requested.
         c.   Dramshop Liability Insurance: All applicants for a temporary
license shall show evidence of dramshop liability insurance or other proof of
financial responsibility prior to the issuance of such license.
         d.   Fee: The fee for a class T license shall be twenty five dollars
($25.00) per day.
   B.   Term; Disposition And Proration Of Fees:
      1.   Disposition Of Fees: All such fees shall be paid to the clerk at the
time application is made, and shall be forthwith turned over to the treasurer.
In the event the license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to
the applicant; if the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in
the general fund or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the
city council by proper action.
      2.   Term; Proration: The official licensing year shall begin on June 1
in each year and end on May 30 of the next succeeding calendar year. All
licenses shall expire on May 31 in each calendar year but the license fees
provided for shall be reduced in proportion to the number of full calendar
months which have expired in the official license year, prior to the issuance
of such licenses, but the full license fee shall be charged for any license
issued at any time during the first month of such license year. The license fee
shall be paid and there shall be no refund of any portion of the same except
that the initial license fee to be paid shall be reduced in proportion to the
full calendar months which have expired in the year prior to the issuance of
such license. No license shall be issued for any term less than the balance of
the unexpired license year.
(1997 Code; Ord. 0-16-13, 3-12-2014; Ord. O-21-02, 3-8-2021; Ord. O-21-05, 5-
10-2021)
3-2-7: INVESTIGATION; APPROVAL OF LICENSE:
A. Investigation: All applications for a retailer's license shall be filed with
the local liquor control commissioner who shall investigate all of the
statements contained in each application.
B. Examination Of Applicant: The local liquor control commissioner shall have
the right to examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for a
local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served as provided by statute, and to examine
or cause to be examined the books and records of any such applicant or
licensee, to hear testimony and take proof for his/her information in the
performance of his/her duties, and for such purpose to issue subpoenas which
shall be effective in any part of this state. For the purpose of obtaining any
of the information desired by the local liquor control commissioner under this
section, such commissioner may authorize his/her agent to act on his/her behalf
as provided by statute. (1997 Code)
C. Issuance: Upon investigation, if the local liquor control commissioner shall
be satisfied that the matter and things contained are true and that the
applicant is of good moral character, entitled to a license, and that the
applicant has complied with all the requirements of this chapter, the local
liquor control commissioner may with the approval and consent of the majority
of the city council in attendance, approve the same and upon the receipt of the
required license fee, issue a license in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 0-17-12, 12-10-2012)
3-2-8: BOND:
Each person to whom a retailer's license is about to be issued, under the
provisions of this chapter, shall execute a penal bond in the form and with
sureties acceptable to the local liquor control commissioner in the sum of two
hundred dollars ($200.00), conditioned upon faithful performance and observance
of the provisions of the laws of Illinois, and of this chapter, and further
conditioned upon the prompt payment of any fine which may be levied or assessed
against any licensee for the violation of any of the penal provisions of the
state and this chapter, and such bond shall, upon approval, be filed in the
office of the local liquor control commissioner. (1997 Code)
3-2-9: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. Separate License Required: A separate license shall be required for and with
respect to each location or premises at which or upon which any liquor, wine or
beer is to be sold or offered for sale at retail.
B. Business Or Residential Districts:
1. Approval Of Adjacent Landowners: No retailer's class D license shall be
granted to any applicant for any premises within the corporate limits of the
city where the same is located in any block in the city which is at the time of
the application either wholly or partly devoted to business uses or residential
uses unless the applicant shall first file in the office of the local liquor
control commissioner a petition signed by a majority of property owners of the
frontage within one hundred feet (100') in each direction of the proposed
location on both sides of the street on which the proposed location shall
front, signifying their willingness to have a license issued; provided, that in
any case if the property owners of at least one hundred feet (100') of the
property immediately adjacent to or abutting on any side of the proposed
location shall not appear as signers on the petition, no license shall be
issued; provided further, that the signature of any adjacent property owner who
is then conducting a place of business in the block under a license issued
shall not be deemed necessary for the purpose of this subsection B1.
2. Vacation Of Premises: In the event any location to which a license is issued
on the petition of property owners as above shall become and remain vacant for
a period of five (5) or more months consecutively, no new license shall issue
to the premises without the necessary petition of property holders being again
presented in accordance with the provisions of this subsection B.
C. Proximity To Church, School, Etc.: No license shall be issued for the sale
at retail of any alcoholic liquor within one hundred feet (100') of any church,
school, hospital, home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
wives or children, or any military or naval station; provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply to clubs or restaurants, food shops or other places
where the sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal business carried on, if
such place of business not exempted shall have been established for such
purpose prior to the taking effect of this Chapter; nor to the renewal of a
license for the sale of alcoholic liquor on premises within one hundred feet
(100') of any church where such church has been established within such one
hundred feet (100') since the issuance of the original license.
D. Stores Selling School Supplies, Lunches: No license shall be issued to any
person for the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor at any store or other
place of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or
where the principal business transacted consists of school books, school
supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such minors.
E. View From Street:
1. Clear View Required; Exceptions: In premises in which the sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises is licensed, other than in restaurants,
hotels or clubs, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall
be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor
inside such premises which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such
licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth,
screen, partition or other obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or
lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such premises which
shall prevent a full view of the entire interior of such premises, and the
entire space used by the public must be so located that there shall be a full
view of the same from the street, road of sidewalk.
2. Lighting: All rooms where alcoholic liquor is sold for consumption on the
premises shall be continually lighted during business hours by natural or
artificial white lights so that all parts of the interior of the premises shall
be clearly visible.
3. Violation: In case the view into such licensed premises required by the
foregoing provisions shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by licensee
wilfully suffered to be obscured or obstructed, such license may be revoked in
the manner herein provided.
4. Plans, Drawings And Photographs Required: In order to enforce the provision
of this subsection, the City shall have the right to require the filing with
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner of plans, drawings and photographs
showing the clear line of the view as above required.
F. Change Of Location: A liquor dealer's license shall permit the sale of
alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application and license.
Such location may be changed only upon the written permission to make such
change issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. No change of location
shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the Statute of the State and the
provisions of this City Code. (1997 Code)
3-2-10: POSTING LICENSE:
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall
immediately post and keep posted while in force, in a conspicuous place on the
premises, the license so issued. (1997 Code)
3-2-11: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
All premises used for the sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the storage of such
liquor for sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and shall be
kept in full compliance with the Code provisions regulating the condition of
premises used for the storage or sale of food for human consumption. (1997
Code)
3-2-12: HOURS OF SALE:
A. Consumption On Premises: Unless otherwise herein provided, it shall be
unlawful to keep open or permit to be open any place where alcoholic liquor is
sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any day of the week.
B. Package Liquor: It shall be unlawful to keep open or permit to be open under
a Class A license as issued by the City, any package liquor store before the
hour of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and subsequent to the hour of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. on any day of the week.
C. Class B: It shall be lawful to keep open or permit to be open any
establishment operating under a class B license as issued by the city during
normal business hours. (1997 Code)
3-2-13: PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Sale To Minors, Intoxicated Persons Or Habitual Drunkards: No person
licensed under this chapter shall sell, or permit to be sold, any "alcoholic
liquor", "beer" or "wine" as defined, to any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years, or to any person notoriously addicted by habit to the abnormal use
of the same.
B. Written Affidavit: No licensee or licensee's agent shall require any person
suspected of being under the permissible drinking age to sign a written
affidavit of age as well as requiring written identification and proof of age.
(1997 Code)
C. Gambling: There shall be no illegal card games or illegal gambling allowed
on any premises licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, except for video gaming as
authorized by the Illinois legislature and as licensed by the Illinois gaming
board, which shall be allowed. (Ord. 0-09-12, 8-27-2012)
D. Minors Drawing, Pouring Or Mixing Liquor: No person under the age of twenty
one (21) shall attend any bar to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor, beer
or wine in any licensed retail premises.
E. Delivery On Sunday: No person licensed under this chapter shall order or
receive delivery of any liquor, beer or wine on Sunday at the premises so
licensed, or at any other premises.
F. Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city. (1997
Code)
3-2-14: MINORS:
A. Purchase Or Obtaining Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under
the legal age as defined by the state to be in possession of any alcoholic
liquor in any place in the city. Any person convicted of a violation of this
provision shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
B. Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age as
defined by the state to be in possession of any alcoholic liquor in any place
in the city. Any person convicted of a violation of this provision shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
C. Misrepresentation Of Age: It shall be unlawful for any person under legal
age as defined from time to time by the state to misrepresent his or her age
for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any tavern or
other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold.
D. Presence Prohibited:
1. It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retailer's liquor license or his/
her agent or employee to suffer or permit any minor to remain in any room or
compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place where
such licensed premises is located; provided, that this subsection shall not
apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or to
any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of, or
services of, commodities other than alcoholic liquor. In addition to all other
fines and penalties, the local liquor control commissioner may revoke or
suspend the retail liquor license for any violation of this subsection.
2. No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall frequent any tavern or
other place in the city where alcoholic liquor is sold.
E. Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to
permit any minor child of which he or she may be the parent or guardian to
violate any of the provisions of this section.
F. Sale, Gift Or Delivery Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any minor.
G. Display Of Warning: In every tavern or other place in the city where
alcoholic liquor is sold there shall be displayed at all times in a prominent
place a printed card which shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 21
Under the ordinances of the City of Colona, any person under the age of 21
years who, for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor,
beer or wine represents that he or she is 21 years of age or over shall be
subject to a fine of up to $200.00.
(1997 Code)
H. Consumption: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one
(21) to consume alcohol beverages in the city.
1. The penalty for violating this subsection shall fall under the general
penalty provisions.
2. This offense shall also be included as a no contest option. The no contest
fine is one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 00-08, 2-28-2000)
3-2-15: EMPLOYEES:
A. Disease: It shall be unlawful for any person to employ in any premises used
for the sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a
carrier of, any contagious, infectious or venereal diseases; and it shall be
unlawful for any person afflicted with or who is a carrier of any such disease
to work in or about any such premises or to engage in any way in the handling,
preparation or distribution of such liquor.
B. Minor: It shall be unlawful for any person to employ, for the purpose of
serving alcoholic liquor, any person who is under legal age as defined by the
statutes of the state in effect from time to time. (1997 Code)
3-2-16: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee shall have and be given the right to a renewal or reissue of such
license at the same place upon compliance with the ordinances now in force in
the city or which may be passed governing the issuance of such licenses;
provided, however, the privilege of renewal and/or reissue provided in this
section shall apply only so long as the license in each case shall have been
kept in force continually and uninterruptedly in the name of the licensee or
licensee's successor in interest, and nothing shall be deemed to restrict the
right of the local liquor control commissioner to revoke any such license.
(1997 Code)
3-2-17: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed one year
after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and shall not
constitute property, nor shall it be subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such licenses shall cease upon the death of the licensee;
provided, that executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased
licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue
the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the
appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent
or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6)
months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund
shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which
the licensee shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance
with the provisions of this section. (1997 Code)
3-2-18: DUPLICATE LICENSE:
Whenever such license shall be lost or destroyed, a duplicate shall be issued
by the local liquor control commissioner upon application made by the licensee,
who also shall take a verified statement of such loss or destruction. (1997
Code)
3-2-19: REVOCATION; SUSPENSION 1
:
A. Suspension By Local Liquor Control Commissioner: The local liquor control
commissioner may suspend or revoke any license issued under any one or more of
the following circumstances:
1. When the local liquor control commissioner is satisfied that the licensee
has violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any valid resolution
enacted by the city council or any applicable rule or regulation established by
the local liquor control commissioner that is consistent with the law.
2. The violation by the licensee of any law of the state relating to the
regulation of the sale of liquor.
3. The wilful making of any false statement by the licensee as to a material
fact in an application for a license.
B. Nonuse: When any license is voluntarily not used by the licensee within a
period of sixty (60) days from the date of issuance of said license, said
license is suspended. Further, if such license is issued and used by the
licensee and licensee voluntarily ceases to use such license for a period of
sixty (60) days, the license is suspended. The suspension for nonuse shall not
apply to a licensee or applicant whose place of business is not yet constructed
unless such construction of the business premises is not completed within one
hundred eighty (180) days after application for a liquor license. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 3-1-9 of this title.
3-2-20: PENALTY:
A. Should a license holder violate any provisions of this chapter, the license
holder shall for the first and each subsequent offense, be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, or in the discretion of the local liquor control
commissioner, the license may be revoked or suspended.
B. Any person not holding a Colona liquor license who violates any provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
C. Persons violating this chapter who are not holders of a Colona liquor
license are eligible to have the offense handled pursuant to the "no contest"
procedures as enacted by city ordinance. The "no contest" fine for a violation
of this chapter is hereby set at one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 99-03, 3-
22-1999)
CHAPTER 3
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX 1
SECTION:
3-3-1: Definitions
3-3-2: Tax Imposed
3-3-3: Exemptions; Regulations
3-3-4: Tax As Additional Compensation
3-3-5: Return Filed
3-3-6: Payment
3-3-7: Credit For Overpayment
3-3-8: Payments From City
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: A. The consideration received for the transmission of messages,
or for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas, or electricity for
use or consumption and not for resale, as the case may be; and for all services
rendered in connection therewith valued in money, whether received in money or
otherwise, including cash, credit, services and property of every kind and
material, and for all services rendered therewith; and shall be determined
without any deduction on account of the cost of transmitting said messages
without any deduction on account of the cost of the service, product or
commodity supplied, at the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or
any other expenses whatsoever.
B. As pertains to the "gross receipts" from the telephone company servicing the
City, "gross receipts" means the consideration received for supplying telephone
service, and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services and
property of every kind and material, and for all services rendered therewith;
and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost of the
service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used, labor or
service cost, and any other expenses whatsoever.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this State, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative operating within this State under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this State permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this State.
PERSONS: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of the State, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or the
representative appointed by order of court. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no
Municipal utility tax shall be assessed upon bills for utility service rendered
to the Municipality itself.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes
of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of
electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code 1
, directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of
electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of the
City, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, other than from an exempt
purchaser.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of a
person-to-person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a
consideration, of services or facilities (whether owned or leased) or both, to
persons in connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do
not, in turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not
include such furnishing of services or facilities to persons of the
transmission of messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for
the transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons
to other persons, for the transmission of messages. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 99-
05, 6-14-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3-3-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
A. Electricity:
1. Tax:
a. Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code 1
and any and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege
of using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the City at the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
(1) For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.004514
per kilowatt-hour;
(2) For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002962
per kilowatt-hour;
(3) For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002664
per kilowatt-hour;
(4) For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002590
per kilowatt-hour;
(5) For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002516
per kilowatt-hour;
(6) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.002368 per kilowatt-hour;
(7) For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.002331 per kilowatt-hour;
(8) For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.002294 per kilowatt-hour;
(9) For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
$0.002257 per kilowatt-hour;
(10) For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-
hours used or consumed in a month: $0.002220 per kilowatt-hour.
b. The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures imposed
by the City, the State or any other political subdivision of the State.
c. Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the tax shall not be
imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution
of the State of Illinois.
d. The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after August 1, 1999; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity
by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such
customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the Public
Utilities Act 2
, or the first bill issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001,
whichever issuance occurs sooner.
2. Collection Of Tax:
a. Subject to the provision of this subsection regarding the delivery of
electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this Chapter shall be collected
from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this State who
delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a debt of
the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the purchaser and
is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the original charge
for delivering the electricity.
b. Any tax required to be collected by this subsection, and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the person delivering
the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges
for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax.
c. Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the purchaser by
adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity shall also
be authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%)
of the tax they collect to reimburse them for their expense incurred in keeping
records, billing customers, preparing the filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying data to the City upon request.
3. Tax Remittance And Return:
a. Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return on a form
prescribed by the City. The return and accompanying remittance shall be due on
or before the last day of the month.
b. Following the month during which the tax is collected of or is required to
be collected of or is required to be collected under subsection A2 of this
Section.
c. If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under subsection A4 of this
Section, then the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the
City and pay the tax directly to the City on or before the last day of the
month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
4. Resales:
a. Electricity that is delivered to a person in the City shall be considered to
be for use and consumption by that person unless the person receiving the
electricity has an active resale number issued by the Director of Finance and
furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity and certifies
to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially nontaxable as a
sale for resale.
b. If a person who receives electricity in the Municipality claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Municipal
Clerk for a resale number. The application shall state facts showing why it is
not liable for the tax imposed by this subsection on any purchases of
electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Director of
Finance may reasonably require.
c. Upon approval of the application, the Director of Finance shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
d. The Director of Finance may cancel the resale number of any person if the
person fails to pay any tax payable under this subsection for electricity used
or consumed by the person, or if the number: 1) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or 2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
e. (1) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or consumption and
partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by this subsection
directly to the City pursuant to subsection A2b of this Section on the amount
of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect the tax
pursuant to subsection A1 of this Section and remit the tax pursuant to
subsection A3 of this Section on the amount of electricity delivered by the
reseller to a purchaser.
(2) Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active resale
number and complying with all other conditions of this subsection shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the municipality
the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other
information that the city may reasonably require.
5. Books And Records: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to pay
the tax imposed by this subsection shall keep accurate books and records of its
business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under
this subsection. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
6. Statute Of Limitations: No action to recover any amount of tax due under the
provisions of this subsection A shall be commenced more than three (3) years
after the due date of such amount.
7. Penalties: Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a
fraudulent return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of this
subsection A is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the
amount of tax due. (Ord. 99-05, 6-14-1999)
B. Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax: The rate of the simplified
municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the provisions of sections 5-25
and 5-30 of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax act, PA 92-0526 is
6.0 percent (in 1/4 percent increments) that shall take effect for all gross
charges billed by telecommunications retailers on and after January 1, 2003.
(Ord. 08-02, 9-9-2002)
C. Gas: Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the city,
and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts
therefrom. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
2 1. 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
3-3-3: EXEMPTIONS; REGULATIONS:
No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by
this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged
in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages be subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages
be subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter for such
transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of
the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" authorized by statute and this
code. (Ord. 99-05, 6-14-1999)
3-3-4: TAX AS ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION:
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or
services furnished to the municipality by the taxpayer as compensation from the
use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon, or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 99-05, 6-14-
1999)
3-3-5: RETURN FILED:
A. Initial Return: On or before June 30, each taxpayer not otherwise
hereinbefore paying said tax, shall make a return to the city treasurer for the
months of March, April, and May stating:
1. His/her name;
2. His/her principal place of business;
3. His/her gross receipts during those months on the basis of which the tax is
imposed;
4. Amount of tax;
5. Such other and related information as the corporate authorities may require.
B. Subsequent Returns: On or before the last day of every third month
thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the city treasurer for a
corresponding three (3) month period. (1997 Code)
3-3-6: PAYMENT:
The taxpayer making the return hereinbefore provided for shall, at the time of
making such return, pay to the city treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided, that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he/she so
elects report and pay an amount based upon his/her total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made exclusive of
any amount previously billed, with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any difference between such billings and the taxable gross receipts. (1997
Code)
3-3-7: CREDIT FOR OVERPAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor, shall be so credited. If a taxpayer
under this chapter is unable to use a credit authorized by this chapter solely
because the tax imposed by this chapter has been replaced by the tax imposed
under subsection 3-3-2A of this chapter then the taxpayer may apply such credit
against any tax due under subsection 3-3-2A of this chapter. (Ord. 99-05, 6-14-
1999)
3-3-8: PAYMENTS FROM CITY:
Payments made by the city to persons subject to this chapter shall not be
included in the gross receipts of that person and the city shall be exempt from
any charges by such person as are allowed by law because of this chapter. (1997
Code)
CHAPTER 4
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES; AMUSEMENT ARCADES 1
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Application; Fee
3-4-4: Term
3-4-5: Premises Requirements
3-4-6: Denial, Revocation Or Suspension
3-4-7: Hearing Procedure
3-4-8: General Requirements And Restrictions
3-4-9: Violation; Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-55-1.
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
AMUSEMENT ARCADE: Any business establishment with three (3) or more automatic
devices upon its premises and which allows said automatic amusement devices to
be operated thereon for use in games, contests or amusement through the
exercise of skill.
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine or pool table which, upon insertion of
a coin, slug or token in any slot or receptacle in the machine or attached
thereto, operates for use as a game, contest or amusement through the exercise
of skill. (1997 Code)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate an "amusement arcade", as
hereinabove defined, within the City without first obtaining a license for an
amusement arcade from the licensing authority designated by the City Council.
The licensing authority shall be an officer or agency designated by the City
Council to be the licensing authority for amusement arcades. (1997 Code)
3-4-3: APPLICATION; FEE:
A. Application; Required Information: All persons seeking a license shall
submit an application, in writing, to the licensing authority. Upon said
application, the applicant shall furnish to the licensing authority the
following information:
1. The names and addresses of all persons, including corporations, in whose
name the application is submitted.
2. The address of the location for which the applicant seeks a license.
3. The number and type of automatic amusement devices the applicant proposes to
be maintained at said location.
4. The criminal felony conviction record of the applicant, or its officers, if
the applicant is a corporation, if any, and, if the applicant does bear a
conviction record of a criminal felony or felonies, any information which the
applicant believes would show that the applicant has been rehabilitated.
B. Action Of Licensing Authority: Within not more than forty five (45) days of
receipt of such application, the licensing authority shall grant or deny the
application for license.
C. Fee: The licensing authority shall be empowered to collect with any
application for license or renewal application, any license fee established by
the City Council. (1997 Code)
3-4-4: TERM:
A license, if granted, shall be for a period of one year, and shall be
automatically renewed from year to year thereafter upon application and payment
of the license fee. (1997 Code)
3-4-5: PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
A. Location: No amusement arcade shall be located within three hundred feet
(300') of any church, grammar or secondary school or residential zoning
district unless such amusement arcade was so located prior to the enactment of
this Chapter, or unless the licensing authority waives the requirements of this
provision. Provided, however, that any amusement arcade so located prior to
enactment of this Chapter shall not receive a license pursuant to this Chapter
if at any time following such enactment the automatic amusement devices located
on the premises of such amusement arcade are removed.
B. Outside Security Lighting: Outside security lighting must be installed when
such lighting is deemed necessary by the licensing authority and the licensee
is notified of this fact. (1997 Code)
3-4-6: DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
A license may be denied, revoked or suspended for one or more of the following
reasons:
A. Wilful violation of any provision of this Chapter.
B. Conviction of a felony, of any person seeking or holding a license, under
any State or Federal law if the licensing authority determines that such person
has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
C. The maximum number of licenses permitted within the City, as the Council
shall from time to time determine, have been issued.
D. Wilful violation of any ordnance of the City.
E. Failure to submit a license renewal application and pay the required renewal
license fee. (1997 Code)
3-4-7: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Notice Of Violation: If the licensing authority shall find probable cause
that a licensee or applicant has violated the provisions of this Chapter or has
falsified the application form, the licensing authority shall give written
notice thereof by certified mail addressed to the licensee or applicant. Said
notice shall specify the alleged grounds of said violation and shall inform the
recipient of his/her right to demand a hearing before a hearing officer
designated for such purpose by the licensing authority.
B. Demand For Hearing: A demand for hearing shall be made in writing to the
licensing authority and submitted no later than the tenth day next succeeding
the date of mailing of the aforesaid notice. If no demand for hearing is made
within said time, the license shall forthwith be revoked, suspended or denied.
C. Hearing: If a hearing is demanded, it shall be held within ten (10) days
thereafter, upon written notice to the party demanding hearing.
D. Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer for such hearing shall be the Zoning
Officer, which officer is empowered to hear testimony, take evidence, and to
make findings of fact.
E. Findings: The Hearing Officer shall thereafter report these findings along
with the Hearing Officer's recommendations to the licensing authority.
F. Action Of Licensing Authority: Upon receipt of the Hearing Officer's
findings and recommendations, the licensing authority shall take final action.
(1997 Code)
3-4-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS:
A. Supervision By Adult: All automatic amusement devices within the premises
shall be visible to, and under the supervision of, a person of adult age.
B. Age Limit; Hours: During the regular school year, excepting weekends or
legal holidays, persons under the age of sixteen (16) years shall not be
allowed to operate automatic amusement devices Monday through Friday, between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., unless
accompanied by a parent or authorized guardian.
C. Curfew Enforcement: No persons under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be
allowed to enter or remain inside an automatic amusement arcade after the time
for curfew, if any, for persons that age. (1997 Code)
3-4-9: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any licensee who, after notice and hearing, is found to have wilfully violated
any provision of this Chapter shall be subject to the following penalties:
A. First Violation: For any first violation, a suspension of license for any
period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days in duration;
B. Second Violation: For any second violation, a suspension of license for any
period of time not to exceed ninety (90) days in duration;
C. Third Violation: For any third violation or more, either a suspension of
license for any period of time not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days in
duration or a revocation of license.
In addition to other penalties provided for herein, any person in violation of
this Chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 5
BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS 1
SECTION:
3-5-1: License Required
3-5-2: Application
3-5-3: License Fee
3-5-4: Bond Required
3-5-5: Minors
3-5-6: Hours
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2.
3-5-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool or bagatelle or
pigeon hole table open to the public without first obtaining a license therefor
as provided in this Chapter. (1997 Code)
3-5-2: APPLICATION:
All applications for such licenses as specified in Section
3-5-1 of this Chapter shall state thereon the location of the place of
business, the number of tables to be used and the names and addresses of all
persons owning all or a share of the business. (1997 Code)
3-5-3: LICENSE FEE:
The applicant shall pay therefor such license fee as the City Council shall,
from time to time, determine. (1997 Code)
3-5-4: BOND REQUIRED:
No license required by the provisions of this Chapter shall be issued unless
the application for said license is accompanied by a bond in the amount of two
thousand dollars ($2,000.00) conditioned to indemnify the City for any loss,
damage or liability that may be incurred in the conduct of such business. (1997
Code)
3-5-5: MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to enter
or remain in any hall licensed under the provisions of this Chapter; provided,
that any such minor may enter if such minor has been ordered to do so by the
direction, consent and knowledge of such minor's parent or guardian, and it
shall be unlawful for the proprietor, owner or person in charge to permit any
violation of the provisions of this Section. (1997 Code)
3-5-6: HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit, or for any place licensed under the
provisions of this Chapter to permit, the operation of, or the being open for
business of such place between the hours of one minute past twelve o'clock (12:
01) midnight and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. the following morning. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 6
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS 1
SECTION:
3-6-1: Definitions
3-6-2: License Required; Fee
3-6-3: Inspection
3-6-4: Regulations And Minimum Standards
3-6-5: Proof Of Insurance
3-6-6: Renewal
3-6-7: Violation And Noncompliance
3-6-8: Hearing
3-6-9: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 820/1.
3-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: An operator-occupied residence that provides
for a charge accommodation to the public of no more than five (5) guest rooms
and operates more than ten (10) nights in a one year period. Breakfast may be
provided to the guests only. Bed and breakfast establishments shall not include
motels, hotels, boarding houses, or food service establishments.
GUEST ROOM: A sleeping room serving no more than two (2) transient adult guests
per night.
OPERATOR: The owner or the owner's agent who resides in the bed and breakfast
establishment or on contiguous property. (1997 Code)
3-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
Licensed owner or the owner's agent may apply for a license to operate a bed
and breakfast establishment. No establishment shall be permitted to operate
without such license. Such license application shall be submitted to the City
Clerk along with the following:
A. Fee: Licensing fee as determined by the City Council from time to time to be
necessary for the enforcement of these regulations and the processing of such
application.
B. Liability Insurance: Proof of liability insurance in such minimum coverage
as the City Council shall deem from time to time as necessary for the
protection of the public.
C. Authorization To Inspect: Authorization to permit inspections upon proper
notice and identification of City inspectors including building, plumbing and
electrical inspectors. (1997 Code)
3-6-3: INSPECTION:
Upon receipt of the application and all other necessary information and
documents, the proper inspector or such other employee of the City as is
designated by the City Council shall inspect such establishment to determine
compliance with all applicable City ordinances. Such inspection shall be made
within twelve (12) calendar days. (1997 Code)
3-6-4: REGULATIONS AND MINIMUM STANDARDS:
Bed and breakfast establishments in addition to applicable City ordinances
shall comply with the requirements and minimum standards set forth in the
Illinois Bed and Breakfast Act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 820/1 et seq.,
and any subsequent amendments or revisions of that Act. (1997 Code)
3-6-5: PROOF OF INSURANCE:
The applicant shall provide proof of adequate liability insurance as required
by the licensing agency. (1997 Code)
3-6-6: RENEWAL:
Each application and other requirements as are set forth in Section
3-6-2 of this Chapter shall be submitted, annually, two (2) weeks prior to the
anniversary date of the issuance of the first license. (1997 Code)
3-6-7: VIOLATION AND NONCOMPLIANCE:
If the inspecting authority, after completing an inspection, shall determine
that such establishment has failed to comply with the provisions of this
Chapter or any other applicable City ordinance or State law, such inspecting
authority shall issue a notice in writing. (1997 Code)
3-6-8: HEARING:
A. Request For Hearing: Any operator affected by such notice may request, in
writing, a hearing before such body as the City Council shall, from time to
time, deem appropriate for such hearings. Such request must be filed within
five (5) calendar days after receipt by the operator of the notice by certified
mail from the inspecting authority.
B. Notice Of Hearing: Such hearing shall be conducted within fifteen (15)
calendar days after receipt by the City Clerk of a request. Notice of the time
and date of such hearing shall be given to the operator five (5) calendar days
prior to the hearing date and delivered by certified mail.
C. Action Of Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing
taking the testimony of the operator and the inspector. Upon hearing such other
witnesses as have relevant information concerning the notice, the Hearing
Officer may extend the time for compliance beyond that provided for by the
inspecting authority, may modify or withdraw the notice, or take such other
actions as is necessary to protect the public and provide substantial justice.
D. Decision Of Hearing Officer: The determination of the Hearing Officer shall
be in writing in five (5) calendar days following the hearing unless such time
is extended for good cause. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final.
(1997 Code)
3-6-9: PENALTY:
A. Revocation Of License: Any operator found to be in violation of any
applicable ordinance including this Chapter or of State law and having failed
to comply with such ordinance or State law upon proper notice shall have their
license revoked after a hearing for that purpose before the Hearing Officer
upon five (5) calendar days notice of the time, date and place of such hearing.
B. Misdemeanor: In the event that the Hearing Officer finds at such hearing
that the operator's noncompliance is without reasonable cause or grounds, such
operator shall further be guilty of a misdemeanor and, if convicted, shall be
subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Such operator may be subject to being charged with such violation either before
or after the hearing provided for in this Section. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 7
PEDDLERS 1
SECTION:
3-7-1: Definition
3-7-2: License Required; Exception
3-7-3: License Fees
3-7-4: Issuance Of License
3-7-5: Clerk To Keep Register
3-7-6: Hours
3-7-7: Notice Posted On Route 84
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5.
3-7-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, the following term shall have the meaning ascribed to
it in this Section:
PEDDLER: Any person who engages in the sale or solicitation for sale of any
wares, magazines, services, photographs, nostrums, or any other merchandise of
any kind, or description, when the sale or solicitation for sale of such items
is done from house to house. (1997 Code)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall hawk or peddle goods, wares, magazines, pictures, coupons or
other merchandise within the City limits without having first obtained a
license for that purpose; provided, that this Section shall not apply to
newsboys. (1997 Code)
3-7-3: LICENSE FEES:
The applicant shall pay therefor such license fee as the City Council shall,
from time to time, determine. (1997 Code)
3-7-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The City Clerk shall, on written application of any suitable person and the
payment to the Clerk of the license fee as herein provided, issue a license
with the Corporate Seal of the City for the term paid. (1997 Code)
3-7-5: CLERK TO KEEP REGISTER:
The City Clerk shall keep a register of names of the persons to whom such
licenses have been issued, the date and the number of such licenses, the term
for which such licenses are issued, and the date such licenses expire. (1997
Code)
3-7-6: HOURS:
Said license shall only be valid between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (1997 Code)
3-7-7: NOTICE POSTED ON ROUTE 84:
There shall be posted a notice at the south end of the City limits on Route 84,
at the west end of the City limits on Route 84, at the eastern limits of
Cleveland Road; and at the eastern limits of Poppy Garden Road. Such notice
shall read as follows:
Peddlers are required by ordinance to obtain a license from the City Clerk.
(1997 Code)
CHAPTER 8
FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES 1
SECTION:
3-8-1: License Required
3-8-2: Application For License
3-8-3: License Fee
3-8-4: Exemption
3-8-5: Sanitation Regulations
3-8-6: Inspections
3-8-7: Revocation Of License
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-3.
3-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any vehicle, including wagons
and motor vehicles propelled by human power, for the storage or carrying of any
meat, milk, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, lard, vegetables, bread or bakery
products, or any other provisions intended for human consumption, including
beverages, in the City for the purpose of delivering any such foodstuffs to any
place in the City for their use and consumption unless a license for such
vehicle is first secured and the provisions of this Chapter are fully complied
with. (1997 Code)
3-8-2: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Applications for such licenses shall be made to the City Clerk and shall recite
the name and address of the owner of the vehicle, the name of the person for
whom such deliveries are made and nature of the goods carried. The Clerk shall
issue such licenses and shall give to the Mayor a list of all such licenses
issued. (1997 Code)
3-8-3: LICENSE FEE:
The annual fee for such license shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
vehicle, and shall be issued for one year. Such fees shall be paid to the City
Clerk, who shall turn them over to the City Treasurer forthwith. (1997 Code)
3-8-4: EXEMPTION:
No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to deliver foodstuffs
from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a food-dealing
establishment in the City; but all provisions of this Chapter, other than that
providing for the payment of a fee, shall be complied with in connection with
such vehicle. (1997 Code)
3-8-5: SANITATION REGULATIONS:
A. Cleanliness: All such vehicles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they are so used.
B. Waste Material: It shall be unlawful to permit stale food, decaying matter,
or any other waste material or product to accumulate in or on any such vehicle
while it is so used.
C. Dust; Insects: If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any such vehicle,
such goods will be carried in a portion or compartment of the vehicle which is
screened or protected against dust and insects. (1997 Code)
3-8-6: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to make or cause to be made such inspections
as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.
(1997 Code)
3-8-7: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A. Revocation By Mayor: Any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter
may be revoked by the Mayor for any violation of any regulation hereof and such
revocations shall be in addition to any fine imposed by virtue of this Section.
B. Notice Of Revocation: The licensing authority shall give written notice
thereof by certified mail addressed to the licensee or applicant. Said notice
shall specify the alleged grounds of said violation and shall inform the
recipient of recipient's right to demand a hearing before a hearing officer
designated for such purpose by the licensing authority.
C. Demand For Hearing: A demand for hearing shall be made in writing to the
licensing authority and submitted no later than the tenth day next succeeding
the date of mailing of the aforesaid notice. If no demand for hearing is made
within said time, the license shall forthwith be revoked, suspended or denied.
D. Hearing: If a hearing is demanded, it shall be held within ten (10) days
thereafter, upon written notice to the party demanding hearing.
E. Hearing Officer: The Hearing Officer for such hearing shall be the Zoning
Officer and is empowered to hear testimony, take evidence, and to make findings
of fact.
F. Findings: The Hearing Officer shall thereafter report these findings along
with the Hearing Officer's recommendation to the licensing authority.
G. Action Of Licensing Authority: Upon receipt of the Hearing Officer's
findings and recommendations, the licensing authority shall take final action.
(1997 Code)
CHAPTER 9
TAXICABS 1
SECTION:
3-9-1: Definition
3-9-2: License Required
3-9-3: Application For License; Fee
3-9-4: Safety Test Required
3-9-5: Insignia; Emblem
3-9-6: Articles Left In Taxicabs
3-9-7: Refusal To Convey Passenger
3-9-8: Fare Payment In Advance
3-9-9: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-6.
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, the following word shall have the meaning ascribed to
it in this Section:
TAXICAB: Any public passenger vehicle transporting passengers for hire on a
trip basis to or from a destination as directed by the passenger. (1997 Code)
3-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle shall be used for the
transportation of persons for hire within the City, whether the said
automobile, autocar or other similar vehicle secures its passengers from a
public stand or stands upon the street or whether the same is kept in a private
garage, unless every such vehicle be licensed as hereinafter provided. (1997
Code)
3-9-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; FEE:
A. Form; Required Information: The owner of any such automobile, autocar, cab
or other similar vehicle for which it is desired to secure a license shall make
application to the City Clerk, setting forth therein the name of such owner, a
description of the vehicle for which it is desired to secure a license, and the
place where such vehicle is kept, if the same is kept in a private garage. The
application shall be provided by the said Clerk.
B. Bond; Insurance; Certificate Of Safety; Fee: Upon receipt of such
application and upon proof being submitted to the Clerk that the applicant has
complied with the provisions of the Illinois State law pertaining to surety
bonds or insurance policies by reason of the operation of such vehicle, and
upon proof that said vehicle has been tested and a certificate of safety issued
thereon, the Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a license for such vehicle
upon the payment by the applicant of a license fee as determined from time to
time by the City Council for each vehicle. (1997 Code)
3-9-4: SAFETY TEST REQUIRED:
A. Maintenance: Every taxicab operated on streets of the City shall be kept and
maintained in a good and safe mechanical condition.
B. Safety Test: Every such taxicab, within fifteen (15) days before application
for license is made, shall be subjected to the safety test provided by an
official testing station as established and set up by 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/13-101 et seq. Said safety test shall include the testing and
inspection of brakes, lights, horns, reflectors, rear view mirrors, safety
chains, frames, axles, body, wheels, steering apparatus and other safety
devices and appliances. The passing of the safety test shall not be a bar at
any time to prosecution for operating or causing to be operated a taxicab not
in good and safe mechanical condition.
C. Display Of Certificate: If the taxicab is in safe mechanical condition, the
operator of the official testing station shall at once issue and affix to said
taxicab a certificate of safety which shall at all times be displayed on said
taxicab.
D. Subsequent Certification: No certificate of safety issued during the second
six (6) months of the license year shall be of any effect after the first day
of the succeeding year.
E. Testing, Display Required: No taxicab shall be operated upon the street,
alleys or public places of said City without having been tested as herein
required or without having said certificate of safety displayed on said
taxicab. (1997 Code)
3-9-5: INSIGNIA; EMBLEM:
A. Required; Specifications: Every automobile, autocar, cab or other similar
vehicle licensed under the provisions of this Chapter shall have the name of
the owner thereof plainly painted in letters at least one and one-half inches
(11/2") in height, and the number of the license plainly painted in numbers at
least four inches (4") in height, in a conspicuous place on the outside of each
side of such vehicle, and such name and number shall be kept so painted plainly
and distinctly at all times while such vehicle is in use during the continuance
of such license.
B. Removal: Upon the expiration of such license (unless same is forthwith
renewed) such name and number shall be at once erased from such vehicle and
such vehicle shall not thereafter be used with such name or number thereon.
(1997 Code)
3-9-6: ARTICLES LEFT IN TAXICABS:
Whenever any package, article, baggage or goods of any kind shall be left in or
upon any vehicle licensed under the provisions of this Chapter, the operator of
such vehicle shall, upon discovery of such package, baggage or goods, forthwith
deliver the same to the policeman on duty at the police station in the City.
(1997 Code)
3-9-7: REFUSAL TO CONVEY PASSENGER:
No person licensed as aforesaid when unemployed and his/her legal fare is paid
or tendered to him/her, shall, without lawful excuse, refuse to convey within
the City any person, with or without baggage, as aforesaid when applied to for
that purpose, or having undertaken to convey such person, shall omit or neglect
to do so, under the penalty herein prescribed. (1997 Code)
3-9-8: FARE PAYMENT IN ADVANCE:
Any person licensed as set forth in this Chapter may demand his/her legal fare
to be paid in advance by any person seeking to employ him/her, and may refuse
to convey any person who shall fail to comply with such demand. Any person so
licensed shall give to any person requesting the same his/her name and the
number of his/her license. (1997 Code)
3-9-9: PENALTY:
Every person who shall keep, use or operate, or be in charge, possession or
control of, or cause to be kept, used or operated upon any of the streets or
public ways of the City any automobile, autocar, cab or other similar vehicle
for the conveyance of passengers for hire or reward which has not been licensed
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter or who keeps, uses or
operates, or causes to be kept, used or operated, any such automobile, autocar,
or other similar vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 10
SCAVENGERS
SECTION:
3-10-1: Definition
3-10-2: License Required; Fee
3-10-3: Application For License
3-10-4: Liability Coverage
3-10-5: Vehicle Requirements
3-10-6: Sundays Prohibited
3-10-7: Disposal Of Refuse
3-10-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, the following word shall have the meaning ascribed to
it in this Section:
SCAVENGER: One who engages in the business or occupation of collecting and
hauling for the purpose of disposal or otherwise, any garbage, refuse, junk or
other trash or material. (1997 Code)
3-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a scavenger or
the collection or disposal of animal or vegetable refuse or offal without
having first secured a license therefor. The annual fee for such license shall
be three hundred dollars ($300.00) due May 1 each year. (1997 Code)
3-10-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for such license to operate in the City as a scavenger shall be
made to the City Clerk, and shall be referred by the City Clerk to the City
Council. No such license shall be issued except on the order of the City
Council. (1997 Code)
3-10-4: LIABILITY COVERAGE:
All applicants shall, when making applications for license hereunder, tender to
the City Clerk a certificate of insurance certifying to liability coverage in
the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each accident and
a total aggregate coverage of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
(1997 Code)
3-10-5: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his business shall be watertight, and
equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for the
transportation of refuse. (1997 Code)
3-10-6: SUNDAYS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven over or through any street in
the City during or on Sundays. (1997 Code)
3-10-7: DISPOSAL OF REFUSE:
It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse any
place in the City limits or within one mile thereof without first securing the
written permission of the City Council. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 11
GARAGE, YARD SALES
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definition
3-11-2: Permit Required; Conditions; Fee
3-11-3: Limitation On Number Of Sales
3-11-4: Record Of Permits
3-11-5: Penalty
3-11-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this Chapter, the following words or terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
YARD, GARAGE OR BASEMENT SALE: The holding out for sale of any new, used or
antique household goods, utensils or appliances; tools; books; papers or
magazines; bric-a-brac; curios; clothing; jewelry; toys; sporting goods;
cosmetics; or similar household items to the general public and conducted on or
about premises zoned for single or multi-family residential use or used as a
private residence. (1997 Code)
3-11-2: PERMIT REQUIRED; CONDITIONS; FEE:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard,
garage or basement sale, as hereinbefore defined, on or about premises zoned
for residential use unless such person shall first obtain from the office of
the City Clerk a permit for such a yard or garage sale.
B. Display Of Permit: The permit must be displayed in a prominent place during
time of sale.
C. Duration; Fee: No permit shall be granted or issued for more than three (3)
consecutive days and shall be issued only upon the completion and submission of
an application form approved by the City Clerk, and upon the payment of a
permit fee which the City Council may from time to time provide. (1997 Code)
3-11-3: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF SALES:
Yard, garage and basement sales at any one residential location or address
shall be limited in number to no more than six (6) such sales during any one
calendar year and a maximum of two (2) such sales during any one calendar
month. (1997 Code)
3-11-4: RECORD OF PERMITS:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the City Clerk to maintain a record
of the permits issued and the location for which such permits are issued. (1997
Code)
3-11-5: PENALTY:
Any person in violation of this Chapter shall be subject penalty as provided in
Section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day a person is in violation of this Chapter shall
constitute a separate violation. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 12
KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
SECTION:
3-12-1: License Required
3-12-2: Application
3-12-3: License Fee
3-12-4: Investigation
3-12-5: Issuance Of License
3-12-6: Term Of License
3-12-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of buying, selling or dealing in birds,
dogs, and other small animals used as household pets and for domestic purposes
without first obtaining a license. (1997 Code)
3-12-2: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license required by this Chapter shall make written
application to the City Clerk, stating the name and residence of the applicant
and the place at which the applicant intends or desires to carry on the
business, giving the street location as well as a description of the premises.
(1997 Code)
3-12-3: LICENSE FEE:
A. Less Than Twenty: Any person desiring a license required by this Chapter,
where not less than three (3) and not more than a total of twenty (20) birds,
dogs, cats, and other small animals are held for sale as household pets and for
domestic purposes shall pay a license fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) annually.
B. More Than Twenty: Where more than twenty (20) birds, dogs, cats and other
small animals are held for sale as household pets and for domestic purposes,
the license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) annually. (1997 Code)
3-12-4: INVESTIGATION:
Upon the filing of an application for a license required by this Chapter, it
shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or other person or persons
designated by the City Council to cause an investigation to be made of the
premises named and described in the application for the purpose of determining
the fitness and suitability of the premises for the business from a public
health standpoint. The Building Inspector or other person or persons designated
by the City Council shall transmit to the City Council the application,
together with his/her recommendation for or against the issuance of the
license. (1997 Code)
3-12-5: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
If the City Council shall be satisfied that the applicant or its chief
officers, if applicant is a corporation, is in conformity with the provisions
of this Chapter, the City Clerk, upon payment by the applicant of the license
fee prescribed in this Chapter, shall issue a license to the applicant. (1997
Code)
3-12-6: TERM OF LICENSE:
Each license issued shall expire on April 30 following the date of its
issuance. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 13
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
(Rep. by Ord. 08-02, 9-9-2002)
CHAPTER 14
AUTOMOBILE SALES AND DEALERSHIPS
SECTION:
3-14-1: Definition
3-14-2: Vehicle Requirements
3-14-3: Business Requirements
3-14-1: DEFINITION:
"Automobile dealership" is defined as a business engaged in the display of
vehicles for sale within the city of Colona which sells four (4) or more
vehicles in any year. Sale of such vehicles need not have occurred on premises.
The display of such vehicles resulting in these sales within a year is to be
enough to meet this definition. (Ord. 0-15-014, 9-15-2015)
3-14-2: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
A. All vehicles located on premises for display or sale shall have titles
available on the premises for inspection at all times.
B. All such vehicles shall be properly insured and shall meet all state
requirements concerning maintenance and display for public sale. (Ord. 0-15-
014, 9-15-2015)
3-14-3: BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS:
A. Any dealership located within the city limits of the city of Colona shall
have its own license to do business and transact such business, and shall be
both licensed and registered with the state of Illinois, and such license and
registration must be available for inspection at all times. The license of a
dealership shall only be for the designated location within the city of Colona.
B. Any business operating under the authority of a license granted by the state
of Illinois by virtue of an exhibition permit for vehicle dealers shall be
required to meet the following obligations in the city of Colona:
1. The maximum concentration of vehicles will be determined for each individual
dealership by the zoning officer. In no event shall there be more than one
vehicle for every two hundred (200) square feet of established parking area on
exhibitor's property.
2. There shall be an annual license fee payable on May 1 of each year, in the
amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to the initial fee due upon
license issuance. If a license is issued at any time during a year there shall
be a proration of the annual fee. All fees are nontransferable. (Ord. 0-15-014,
9-15-2015)
CHAPTER 14A
USED MOTOR VEHICLES AND PARTS BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-14A-1: License Required
3-14A-2: Separate License For Each Location
3-14A-3: Application For License
3-14A-4: Investigation Of Application For License
3-14A-5: License Issuance; Rejection
3-14A-6: Persons Eligible For License
3-14A-7: Licensee To Be Owner Or Beneficiary Of Licensed Business
3-14A-8: License Nontransferable Or Assignable; Exceptions
3-14A-9: Expiration Date Of License
3-14A-10: Renewal Of License
3-14A-11: Grounds For Revocation Of License
3-14A-12: Parental Consent Required To Deal With Minors
3-14A-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of buying,
selling, exchanging or dealing in used or secondhand motor vehicles and used or
secondhand parts of motor vehicles without first having obtained a license from
the state. Proof of said license shall be submitted to the city.
There shall be an annual license fee payable on May 1 of each year in the
amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), in addition to the initial fee due
upon license issuance. If a license is issued at any time during a year there
shall be a proration of the annual fee. All fees are nontransferable.
Existing used or secondhand dealerships within the city at the time of passage
hereof shall be grandfathered for the remainder of the year of passage and
adoption of this chapter. The existing licensed dealerships shall not be
transferrable without the permission of such transfer from the city mayor and
council. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-2: SEPARATE LICENSE FOR EACH LOCATION:
A separate license shall be required for each location, place, or premises
where a business or occupation regulated by this chapter is proposed to be
carried on. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Application for a license required by this chapter shall be made in writing to
the city clerk and shall state the following:
A. The name of the applicant, and if a corporation, the names of the principal
officers and the name of one or more persons whom the corporation shall
designate as manager or person in charge;
B. The location of the place or premises at or on which it is desired to carry
on such business;
C. The length of time which the applicant has resided in the city, or if a
corporation or association, the length of time which the manager or person in
charge has resided in the city;
D. What type of shop the applicant maintains in connection with the principal
place of business in the city and whether it is equipped to service and repair
the types of makes of cars which the applicant intends to sell; and
E. Such other reasonable and pertinent information as the city council may from
time to time require. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-4: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter, the city
clerk shall refer it to the chief of police, who shall conduct an investigation
to determine whether or not:
A. The applicant is a person of good moral character or, if a partnership, the
partners are of good moral character;
B. The applicant is a bona fide resident of the state, and the manager of the
applicant's business is a bona fide resident of the city;
C. The applicant proposes to engage in a legitimate used car business; and
D. The proposed business location would constitute a nuisance, fire hazard, or
in any way jeopardize the safety of citizens. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-5: LICENSE ISSUANCE; REJECTION:
When the chief of police has completed the investigation required by section
3-14A-4 of this chapter, the application and findings shall be referred to the
city council for further action. If it shall appear to the council from the
investigation by the chief of police that the license applied for should be
issued and the applicable sections of this chapter have been complied with, the
council may direct the city clerk to issue the license; otherwise, it may
reject the application. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-6: PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license required by this chapter shall be issued to any person unless the
business to be licensed is to be operated by and for the benefit of the person
applying for such license. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-7: LICENSEE TO BE OWNER OR BENEFICIARY OF LICENSED BUSINESS:
It shall be unlawful for a person licensed pursuant to this chapter to engage
in business, delineated in this chapter unless he is the owner of such
business, or unless the business is conducted for the benefit of such licensee.
(Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-8: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE OR ASSIGNABLE; EXCEPTIONS:
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferred or assigned by
the licensee. However, if the business licensed under this chapter descends by
the laws of intestacy, or by devise or bequest comes into the ownership of any
other person, the license shall automatically be transferred to the person who
so acquires such business, subject to compliance with the terms of sections
3-14A-4 and
3-14A-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-9: EXPIRATION DATE OF LICENSE:
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on March 31 following
the issuance of such licenses. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-10: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
All applications for renewal of licenses required by this chapter shall be
referred by the city clerk to the council for its approval or disapproval.
(Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-11: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council may, at any time, revoke a license issued under this chapter
for any of the following reasons:
A. Conviction of the applicant or license holder of the violation of any
section of this chapter or any section of this code which is related to the
licensee's business or any other violation of a statute applicable to the
licensee's business or that would render the licensee an unfit person to
conduct such business;
B. The obtaining of or an attempt to obtain a license by fraudulent
misrepresentation;
C. Fraud or dishonesty in any transaction relating to such business;
D. Failure to keep authentic records of business transaction relating to such
business;
E. Failure to maintain a shop in connection with the applicant's principal
place of business in the city tooled and equipped satisfactorily to service or
repair, in accordance with the standards set by the council, the makes and
types of cars sold by the licensee. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
3-14A-12: PARENTAL CONSENT REQUIRED TO DEAL WITH MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed pursuant to this chapter to
purchase or receive property from a minor without the written consent of the
minor's parent or guardian. (Ord. 0-15-015, 9-15-2015)
CHAPTER 15
HOTEL/MOTEL TAX
SECTION:
3-15-1: Imposed
3-15-2: Definitions
3-15-3: Collection
3-15-4: Books And Records
3-15-5: Payment
3-15-6: Penalties
3-15-1: IMPOSED:
A tax of five percent (5%) is imposed upon the gross rent charged for the
privilege of renting and using a hotel or motel room within the city of Colona
for each twenty four (24) hour period or any portion of a twenty four (24) hour
period. The tax shall not be levied and imposed upon any person who rents a
hotel or motel room for more than thirty (30) consecutive days or to a person
who works and lives in the same hotel or motel. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
HOTEL/MOTEL ROOM: A room in a structure offered for rental on a daily basis,
excluding permanent residents who occupy a room in excess of thirty (30)
consecutive days. One room offered for rent with or without an adjoining bath
shall be considered a single hotel/motel room. The number of hotel/motel rooms
within a suite shall be computed on the basis of those rooms used for sleeping
purposes.
OWNER: Any person possessing an ownership interest in or conducting or
operating a hotel or motel room or otherwise receiving cash consideration for
the rental of hotel or motel rooms.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-3: COLLECTION:
A. The ultimate incidence of liability for payment of the tax is the person who
seeks the privilege of occupying the hotel or motel room, referred to as the
"renter".
B. The tax shall be paid in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
The owner of every hotel or motel shall secure payment of the tax from the
renter of the hotel or motel room.
C. The owner shall pay over to the accounts and finance representatives of the
city of Colona the tax under procedures prescribed by the city of Colona or as
otherwise specified in this chapter.
D. Every person required to collect the tax shall secure receipt of payment of
the tax from the renter at the time the person who collects the rental payment
for use of the hotel/motel room. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-4: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The city of Colona accounts and finance department representatives may enter
the premises of any hotel or motel for the inspection and examination of
records in order to assure the proper administration of this chapter, and to
assure the enforcement and collection of the tax. No person shall prevent,
hinder, or interfere with the city of Colona accounts and finance
representatives in the discharge of duties authorized or prescribed under this
chapter. Every owner shall keep accurate and complete books and records,
available for inspection at all reasonable times by the city of Colona,
including a daily sheet showing the number of hotel or motel rooms rented
during a twenty four (24) hour period, including multiple rentals of the same
hotel or motel rooms, and the actual hotel or motel tax receipts collected by
date. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-5: PAYMENT:
A. Commencing on March 1, 2006, the owner or owners of each hotel or motel room
within the city of Colona shall file a tax return, showing tax receipts
received with respect to each hotel or motel room during each month, commencing
on or after February 1, 2006. The return shall be due on or before the last day
of each succeeding calendar month and the return shall indicate the monthly
return period. For example a return filed on or before the last day of February
shall indicate tax receipts for the preceding period of January 1 through
January 31. If the owner's average monthly tax receipts do not exceed one
hundred dollars ($100.00) when using as a minimum the last six (6) consecutive
months as a database, the accounts and finance representatives of the city of
Colona may authorize the owner to file a return on a quarterly basis, with
returns for January, February, and March due on or before April 30 of each
year, with the return for April, May, and June due on or before July 31, with
the return for July, August, and September due on or before October 31, and the
return for October, November, and December due on or before January 31.
B. If the tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of one and one-half
percent (11/2%) for a thirty (30) day period, or a prorated portion, from the
date of delinquency shall be added to the tax and collected.
C. The amounts collected by the city of Colona pursuant to this chapter shall
be expended solely to promote tourism and conventions and to attract
nonresident overnight visitors to the city. (Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
3-15-6: PENALTIES:
Any person found guilty of failing to pay, collect, report, or transmit the
hotel/motel tax to the city of Colona, pursuant to the terms of this chapter,
shall be guilty of a municipal offense. Upon the first conviction of a
municipal offense within a two (2) year calendar period, the fine shall be no
less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two hundred ninety nine
dollars ($299.00). A second or third conviction within a two (2) year calendar
period shall be no less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and no more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate and distinct municipal
offense shall be committed each day when any person shall continue a violation
of this chapter, or otherwise permit a continuing violation after notification.
(Ord. 01-06, 1-23-2006)
CHAPTER 16
VENDOR MERCHANT
SECTION:
3-16-1: Definitions
3-16-2: License Required; Application
3-16-3: Exemptions
3-16-4: Issuance; Fees; Display
3-16-5: Denial; Revocation
3-16-6: Fixed Location Restrictions
3-16-7: Prohibited Activities
3-16-8: Penalty
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of this chapter:
MOBILE/VENDOR MERCHANT: Any person, the nature of whose business activity
indicates retail sales from a mobile unit and the intent to remain in business
in the city for less than one year, and hereinafter referred to as "vendor".
(Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-2: LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a vendor
merchant in the city without first obtaining a license as provided in this
section, excepting as hereinafter provided in section
3-16-3 of this chapter.
B. An applicant for vendor merchant license shall give the following
information:
1. The name or names of the person having the management or supervision of
applicant's business during the time that it is proposed it will be carried on
in the city and the local address or addresses of such person while engaged in
such business.
2. The permanent address or addresses of such person; whether such person will
act as proprietor, agent, consignee or employee and the credentials
establishing such relationship; the name and address of the person for whose
account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under
the laws of what state the same is incorporated.
3. The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant's
business and the length of time during which it is proposed that said business
shall be conducted.
4. The place or places other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant, where applicant within three (3) years next preceding the date of
said application conducted a vendor business, stating the nature thereof and
giving the post office box number and street address of any building or office
in which said business was conducted.
5. A statement of the nature and character of the tangible personal property or
service to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the city; whether
the goods are new, damaged or rejects; whether the same are proposed to be sold
from stock in possession or by sample; where the goods or products are located
at the time said application is filed.
6. Whether or not the person having management or supervision of the
applicant's business has been convicted of a felony within the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of said application or of the violation of any
law or ordinance relating to the same or similar business to be conducted by
applicant, the nature of such offense and the punishment therefor.
7. Whether the applicant has ever applied for a license under this chapter,
which has been denied or revoked by another authority in the state of Illinois.
8. A copy of the taxpayer's current state sales tax number and a copy of any
county or state license is required.
9. A certificate of insurance for all vehicles used in the operation of the
business is required.
10. Copies of any written agreements between the vendor and the owner of the
location where the vendor conducts his business must be on file with the city.
(Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Persons engaged in the following described activities are exempt from the duty
of applying for a vendor merchant license:
A. Persons selling at wholesale to merchants for the purpose of the resale.
B. Persons selling or distributing newspapers.
C. Persons selling tangible personal property or services to business
enterprises.
D. Persons who sell, at their permanent residence in the city, works of art or
crafts made or created by such person or a member of such person's immediate
family.
E. Persons licensed by the state to sell real estate or insurance.
F. Persons selling or delivering tangible personal property or services through
a permanent business licensed by the city.
G. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to events that are regulated
by the city. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-4: ISSUANCE; FEES; DISPLAY:
A. If an application for a one week license under this chapter contains a
complete statement of the information required and all material required to be
submitted therewith is filed with the city clerk, the clerk shall issue the
license. All other licenses for five (5) days and beyond require city council
approval. The license issued hereunder shall not be transferable. There shall
be no refund of the license fee.
B. Before a license shall be issued, applicant shall pay to the city clerk a
license fee according to the following schedule:
1. For one week, fifty dollars ($50.00) Monday through Friday only. Holidays
are not included.
2. For one month, one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
3. For six (6) months, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
4. For one year, four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
5. Duplicate licenses, five dollars ($5.00).
C. Each vendor merchant shall at all times while doing business in the city
keep in the possession of such person the license required by this chapter and
shall display the license as evidence of compliance with the requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-5: DENIAL; REVOCATION:
A. The city council may deny a license to any applicant under this chapter for
the following reasons:
1. Held a license under this chapter that has been revoked within two (2) years
of the date of the present application.
2. Failed to make a complete application.
3. During the past two (2) years has a history of:
a. Fraudulent applications for similar licenses.
b. Misrepresentation of the quality of merchandise or services offered for
sale.
c. Crimes involving personal injury.
B. The city council may revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter by sending a notice of revocation by certified mail to the license
holder at his last known address, return receipt requested, or by personal
service on the license holder or its officers for any of the following causes:
1. Information showing that the license was erroneously issued initially.
2. For any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
3. For any violation of any city or state law regulating the sales activities
of the license holder.
C. The license shall stand denied or revoked unless within five (5) days after
denial or receipt of the notice of revocation from the chief of police the
applicant or holder files a written request for a public hearing on the police
chief's action. A public hearing shall be conducted before the city council on
whether a license should be denied, reinstated or revoked, as the case may be.
The city council may order the license issued or reinstated either
conditionally or unconditionally, or revoke the license. Thirty (30) days'
notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given to the
license holder, who shall have an opportunity to appear before the city council
and present any evidence or arguments he may have why the action taken by the
chief of police should not be approved by the city council. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-
2006)
3-16-6: FIXED LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
A. No vendor merchant shall engage in business at a fixed location without the
written permission, by lease or otherwise, of the owner or person in control of
the property. This written agreement shall be signed by the parties and shall
include the dates the vendor merchant shall be conducting business. This
agreement shall be submitted as part of the application.
B. A vendor merchant doing business at a fixed location shall provide
sufficient off street parking space for his employees and customers.
C. Any display of tangible personal property, or signs or advertisements
therefor, shall be at least ten feet (10') from the city's right of way. All
signs and advertisements used in connection with the business licensed in this
chapter shall comply with the provisions of the zoning code of the city of
Colona.
D. A vendor merchant doing business at a fixed location shall do so only in
areas properly zoned for business activity. A vendor merchant selling food
items shall comply with all applicable provisions of the health rules and
regulations of Henry County. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-7: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
A. No person shall engage in activities regulated under this chapter on public
property without first procuring special authorization from the city council.
(Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
3-16-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
Each sale or solicitation of a sale made without a license or bond in violation
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 02-06, 2-13-2006)
CHAPTER 17
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
3-17-1: Permit Required
3-17-2: Application For Permit
3-17-3: Regulations
3-17-4: Fees
3-17-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A pyrotechnic display permit must be obtained from the city clerk of Colona in
order to qualify for such displays and all applicants must be adults. (Ord. 11-
06, 5-22-2006)
3-17-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. General: The application for such display may be obtained from the offices
of the city clerk of Colona.
B. Requirements: The minimum requirements each adult applicant must meet in
order to qualify for issuance of a permit are as follows:
1. Applicant must submit a written application for a permit at least fifteen
(15) days in advance of the date of the pyrotechnic display.
2. The pyrotechnic display service must be provided by a licensed pyrotechnic
distributor, and the display must be conducted by a licensed pyrotechnic
distributor, and the display must be conducted by a licensed lead pyrotechnic
operator.
3. Applicant must show proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) with an insurance company authorized to do
business in Illinois.
4. The fire chief or his designee for the local fire district must inspect the
display site and ensure the display can be performed in full compliance with
the NFPA standards adopted and amended by the OSFM rules, part 235, for the
type of pyrotechnic display to be performed. Further, the chief of the fire
department providing fire protection must sign the display permit. (Ord. 11-06,
5-22-2006)
3-17-3: REGULATIONS:
The permit once issued is not transferable to another person or entity and the
sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for display are lawful only
for the purposes given by the permit. (Ord. 11-06, 5-22-2006)
3-17-4: FEES:
The permit fees for department approved fireworks display/pyrotechnic firing
shall be as follows:
Pyrotechnic firing fees:
 
1 - 25 devices    $  50.00
26 - 100 devices  150.00
101 - 200 devices 250.00
201 plus          350.00
 
(Ord. 11-06, 5-22-2006)
CHAPTER 18
NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND
NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-18-1: Findings Of Fact
3-18-2: Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed
3-18-3:    Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax Imposed
3-18-4:    Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
3-18-5:    Clerk To File Ordinance With Illinois Department Of Revenue
3-18-6:    Effective Date
3-18-7:    Limitation On Use Of Proceeds
3-18-8:    Qualified Exemption Of Aviation Fuel From Both Taxes
3-18-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   B.   The City of Colona is a non-home rule Illinois municipality pursuant to
the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   C.   Section 8-11-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1)
empowers non-home rule Illinois municipalities to impose certain Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Taxes as outlined at Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3) (the "Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occ1J.pation Tax");
   D.   Section 8-11-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1)
empowers non-home rule Illinois municipalities to impose certain Municipal
Service Occupation Taxes as outlined at Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) (the "NonHome Rule Municipal Service
Occupation Tax");
   E.   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
empowers a non-home rule municipality to "impose a tax upon all persons engaged
in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than on an item of
tangible personal property which is titled and registered by an agency of this
State's Government, at retail in the municipality" based upon the "gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business" for "expenditure
on public infrastructure or for property tax relief or both" as defined in
Section 8-11-1.2 ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2);
   F.   Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4)
empowers a non-home rule municipality to "impose a tax upon all persons
engaged, in such municipality, in the business of making sales of service ...
of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by such
servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of
real estate as an incident to a sale of service;"
   G.   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
and Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Cocle (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4)
empower the City of Colona, IL to impose the Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax and the Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax in 1/4%
increments up to one percent (1%);
   H.   Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3)
requires any municipality imposing a Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.3) to impose a Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax under
Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) at “the
same rate” as the rate imposed as the Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax being imposed;
   I.   Any Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax imposed by the
City of Colona, IL under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-1.3) shall be administered, collected and enforced by the Illinois
Departtnent of Revenue;
   J.   Any Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax imposed by the City
of Colona, IL under Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-1.4) shall be administered, collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue;
   K.   Proceeds generated from the imposition of any Non-Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax or Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax by
the City of Colona, IL must be used for "public infrastructure" or "property
tax relief," as those terms are defined at Section 8-11-1.2 of the Illinois
Municipal Code ( 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2); and
   L.   The City Council of the sCity of Colona, IL believe that it is
appropriate, necessary, and in the best interests of the City of Colona, IL and
its residents, that the City of Colona, IL levy a Non-Home Rule Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax pursuant to Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3) and a Non-Home Rule Municipal Service
Occupation Tax pursuant to Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-1.4) so that the City of Colona, IL can provide property tax relief
and invest in public infrastructure, as those terms are defined at Section 8-
11-1.2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.2).
(Ord. O-25-04, 3-24-2025)
3-18-2: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of this state's government, at retail in
this municipality at the rate of 0.75% of the gross receipts from such sales
made in the course of such business while this chapter is in effect. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3).
(Ord. O-25-04, 3-24-2025)
3-18-3: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, of the selling price of all tangible
personal property transferred by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of
service. The rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section 3-
18-2, above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-1.4).
(Ord. O-25-04, 3-24-2025)
3-18-4: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-25-04, 3-24-2025)
3-18-5: CLERK TO FILE ORDINANCE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE:
   As required under Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.3), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this
chapter with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before April 1, 2025.
(Ord. O-25-04, 3-24-2025)
3-18-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   This chapter shall take effect on:
   A.   The first day of July next following the adoption and filing of this
chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
April 1st; or
   B.   The first day of January next following the adoption and filing of this
chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
October 1st.
(Ord. O-25-04, 3-24-2025)
3-18-7: LIMITATION ON USE OF PROCEEDS:
The City of Colona, IL shall only expend the proceeds generated from any tax
imposed by virtue of this chapter on:
   A.   Expenditures related to "municipal roads and streets, access roads,
bridges, and sidewalks; waste disposal systems; and water and sewer line
extensions, water distribution and purification facilities, storm water
drainage and retention facilities, and sewage treatment facilities;"
   B.   Efforts to "reduce the levy for real estate taxes or avoid an increase
in the levy for real estate taxes that would otherwise have been required" by
the City of Colona, IL; or
   C.   Any other or further permitted uses under Section 8-11-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1) as may now or hereafter be
authorized therein.
(Ord. O-25-04, 3-24-2025)
3-18-8: QUALIFIED EXEMPTION OF AVIATION FUEL FROM BOTH TAXES:
   No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to impose any tax on
aviation fuel, as defined in Section 3 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35
ILCS 120/3), unless the proceeds of said tax are expended for airport-related
purposes, as that term is defined in Section 6z-20.2 of the State Finance Act
(30 ILCS 105/6z-20.2), and said expenditures are made in compliance with the
certification requirements for airport-related purposes under Section 2-22 of
the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-22).
(Ord. O-25-04, 3-24-2025)
CHAPTER 19
RAFFLES AND POKER RUNS
SECTION:
3-19-1: Title
3-19-2: Purpose
3-19-3: Definitions
3-19-4: License Requirements
3-19-5: License Issuance
3-19-6: Operation And Conduct
3-19-7: Documentation And Recordkeeping
3-19-8: Enforcement
3-19-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known, cited and referred to as the CITY OF COLONA RAFFLE
AND POKER RUN ORDINANCE. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct of raffles
and poker runs within the City of Colona, Henry County, Illinois. (Ord. 0-18-
09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-3: DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this chapter, the definitions hereunder shall be
observed and applied:
BUSINESS: Is a voluntary organization composed of individuals and/or businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and
civic interest of a community.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Is an organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to
those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit upon the public.
EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: Is an organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably
in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax-
supported schools.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: Is an organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by
the government.
HARDSHIP: Is a situation in which an organization that has not been in
existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately before making
application for a license organizes for the sole purpose of providing financial
assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering
extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or
disaster.
LABOR ORGANIZATION: Is an organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit in
the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
LICENSEE: Is an organization which has been issued a license to operate a
raffle or poker run.
NET PROCEEDS: Means the gross receipts from the conduct of raffles or poker
runs, less sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle or poker run.
NON-PROFIT: Means organized, operated and conducted on a not-for- profit basis
without personal profit to individual(s) or the organization.
PERSON: Means an individual, firm, organization, public or private corporation,
government, partnership or unincorporated association.
POKER RUN: Is an event in which participants travel to multiple predetermined
locations, including a key location, to draw a playing card or equivalent item
at each location in order to assemble a facsimile of a poker hand or other
numeric score. "Poker run" includes dice runs, marble runs or other events
where the objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an
item at each location.
RAFFLE: Means a form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the Criminal
Code of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed under 230 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 15/ (Raffles and Poker Runs Act), in which:
A. The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated as the
winning chance;
B. The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some other
method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part of
persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Is any church, congregation, society or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS ORGANIZATION: Is any association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-4: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
Any person seeking to conduct or operate a raffle or poker run as outlined in
this chapter shall submit a Raffle/Poker Run Application using the form
provided by the City Clerk. Applications must be submitted to the City Clerk at
least five (5) days prior to conducting a raffle or poker run, and prior to
selling tickets or chances for a raffle. The fee for the license application is
twenty five dollars ($25.00) for all license classes. Completion of an
application does not guarantee approval or issuance of a raffle/poker run
license.
An organization may appeal license decisions in writing within ten (10)
business days of decision by submitting notice of appeal to the County Board
Office.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business, corporation, organization
or other entity to conduct or operate a poker run, conduct or operate a raffle
or to sell, offer for sale, convey, issue or otherwise transfer for value,
tickets or a chance on a raffle unless conducted pursuant to terms outlined on
a raffle or poker run license duly issued by the City of Colona and in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Raffles and Poker Runs
Act 1
. A raffle or poker run license shall be valid for the period outlined on the
license and shall not be valid for more than twelve (12) months.
Raffle and poker run licenses shall be issued only to bona fide business,
religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational or veterans organizations
that operate without profit to their members and which have been in existence
continuously for a period of five (5) years or more immediately before applying
for a license and which have had during that entire five (5) year period, a
bona fide membership engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to an
organization that the City Clerk determines is organized for the sole purpose
of providing financial assistance to an identified individual or group of
individuals suffering extreme financial hardship as a result of an illness,
disability, accident, or disaster. The City Clerk may waive the five (5) year
requirement for bona fide business, religious, charitable, labor, fraternal,
educational or veterans organizations that apply for a license to conduct a
raffle or poker run if the organization has identified and maintains a valid
non-profit certification from the Internal Revenue Service, or if the
organization is a local organization that is affiliated with and chartered by a
national or State organization that meets the five (5) year requirement. A
current copy of the organization's constitution, by-laws or other documentation
must be included with the Raffle/Poker Run Application at the time of
submission. The following groups or individuals are ineligible for any license
under this chapter:
A. Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
B. Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling promoter;
C. Any person who is not of good moral character;
D. Any firm or organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C
of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed;
E. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this
section is an officer, director, or employee, whether compensated or not; and
F. Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B, or C of this
section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle or poker
run as defined in this chapter.
Political committees must include documentation of raffle approval from the
State Board of Elections when applying for a raffle license with the City
Clerk. Raffle licenses for political committees will be issued in accordance
with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
All operation and conduct of raffles and poker runs shall be under the
supervision of a single manager designated by the licensee. A fidelity bond
must be obtained by an organization conducting a raffle or poker run and the
bond must be submitted with each Raffle/Poker Run Application. A personal
surety bond may be obtained from the raffle/poker manager in lieu of a fidelity
bond for organizations conducting a raffle/poker run in which the total retail
value of all prizes and merchandise awarded is less than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
Organizations may request a bond waiver from the City Clerk following a
unanimous vote in support of the waiver by members of the organization
conducting the raffle or poker run. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 15.
3-19-5: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The City Clerk shall review all raffle and poker run applications and shall,
within thirty (30) days from the date of application, approve or deny the
request for license. If the application is approved, the City Clerk shall issue
the raffle or poker run license according to the following classification
structure:
A. Class A - General Raffle License: A general raffle license shall permit an
organization the ability to conduct a raffle. Multiple drawings may be held to
award the prizes, but all drawings must occur on the same day and at the same
location.
B. Class B - One Ticket, Multiple Raffles License: The license allows up to
four (4) raffles to be conducted with the same raffle tickets. Each ticket
shall specify the dates of ticket sales and the dates of each drawing. Each
drawing date shall be considered a separate raffle and will require a separate
license. Each license will allow one drawing event for the prizes awarded.
C. Class C - One-Time Hardship Raffle License: This license allows a not-for-
profit fund-raising organization or group organized for the sole purpose of
providing emergency financial assistance to an identified individual or group
of individuals suffering severe financial hardship as a result of an injury,
disability, accident, or disaster to conduct one raffle for that purpose.
D. Class D - Twelve-Month Raffle License: A twelve-month license shall permit
the conduct of a raffle or raffles. Class D licenses shall be licensed annually
for a twelve (12) consecutive month period commencing on the day the license is
approved.
E. Class E - Limited Annual Raffle License: This license permits an
organization to regularly conduct raffles among its own membership at regularly
scheduled organizations meetings. Drawing may only be held and chances for
these raffles may only be sold on the day of the meeting. Class E raffles shall
be licensed annually on a calendar year basis. Renewal applications shall be
made on or before November 1st for the following calendar year.
F. Class F - Poker Run License: A Class F license allows an organization to
conduct a single poker run, dice run, marble run, or other event where the
objective is to build the best hand or highest score by obtaining an item or
playing a randomized game. A Class F license shall only be issued to provide
financial assistance to an identified individual or group of individuals
suffering extreme financial hardship as the result of an illness, disability,
accident, or disaster or to maintain the financial stability of the
organization. (Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-6: OPERATION AND CONDUCT:
A. The operation and conduct of a raffle or poker run shall be under the
supervision of at least one raffle or poker run manager designated by the
licensee.
B. The entire net proceeds of any raffle or poker run must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purpose of the license.
C. No person except a bona fide member of the licensee may participate in the
management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
D. No person may receive remuneration or profit for participating in the
management or operation of the raffle or poker run.
E. A licensee may rent the premises on which to determine the winning chance or
chances in a raffle or poker run only from an organization which is also
licensed under this chapter.
F. Raffle chances and poker run entrance fees may be sold, offered for sale,
conveyed, issued or otherwise transferred for the value only within the area(s)
stated and for the time period(s) outlined on the license. The winning chances
may be determined only at the location(s) specified on the license.
G. If a raffle drawing or poker run is unable to be held as documented on the
license due to an extreme emergency or natural disaster, the licensee must seek
approval of the City Clerk before the drawing or poker run can be held on a
different date. If a drawing or poker run is cancelled due to inadequate sale
of entries or raffle tickets or due to some reason other than an extreme
emergency or natural disaster, the licensee must notify all participants or
ticket purchasers, refund all monies and return all prizes within thirty (30)
days. Such cancellation will be reported to the City Clerk within ten (10) days
of that decision with a full explanation as to the reason.
H. The maximum price which may be charged for each entry or raffle chance sold,
offered for sale, conveyed, issued or otherwise transferred for value shall not
exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
I. Each entry or raffle chance shall have printed thereon the cost of the entry
chance, the aggregate retail value of all prizes to be awarded in the raffle or
poker run, and the maximum number of raffle chances or entries to be issued,
except as provided below:
1. When raffle chances or entries are sold, conveyed, issued, or otherwise
transferred only at the time and location at which winning chances will be
determined and only to persons then in attendance.
2. When the raffle chance is also a ticket to an event and a portion of the
cost of the ticket is designated for a dinner, golf or other item of value to
be consumed or used by the purchaser at the event.
J. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or poker runs only with written permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area
where winning chances in a raffle or winning hands or scores in a poker run are
being determined only when accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. (Ord.
0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-7: DOCUMENTATION AND RECORDKEEPING:
Each licensee shall report to the City Clerk its gross receipts, expenses, and
net proceeds from raffles and poker runs, including the payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment. Reporting shall occur within thirty (30) days of each
raffle drawing or poker run. No new raffle or poker run licenses will be issued
to an organization until all reports from the organization's previous raffles
or poker runs have been completed and submitted to the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-18-
09, 4-9-2018)
3-19-8: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall
constitute a violation. Any person, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day the violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   B.   The imposition of the penalties as described in this section shall not
preclude the State's Attorney from instituting appropriate action to prevent
unlawful raffle or poker runs, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation of
this chapter.
(Ord. 0-18-09, 4-9-2018)
CHAPTER 20
PUBLIC WORKS BIDDING
SECTION:
3-20-1: Definitions
3-20-2: Bid Submission Requirements
3-20-3: Incomplete Submissions By Bidders And Subcontractors
3-20-4: Validity Of Pre-Qualification Classification
3-20-5: Lowest Bidder Not Chosen
3-20-6: Multiple Low Bids
3-20-7: Public Records
3-20-8: Materiality
3-20-9: Severability
Appendix A:   Responsible Bidder Affidavit Of Compliance
Appendix B:   Form A: Subcontractors Who Will Perform Work On The Project
Appendix C:   Form B: Individuals Who Will Perform Work On The Project
3-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
   For purposes of this chapter, the term "public works" shall mean the
following: any constructing, altering, reconstructing, repairing,
rehabilitating, refinishing, refurbishing, remodeling, remediating, renovating,
.custom fabricating, maintenance, landscaping, improving, moving, wrecking,
painting, decorating, demolishing, and adding to or subtracting from any public
building, structure, airport facility, highway, roadway, street, alley, bridge,
sewer, drain, ditch, sewage disposal plant, water work, parking facility,
railroad, excavation, or other project, development, real property, or
improvement, or to do any part thereof, whether or not the performance of the
work herein described involves the addition to, or fabrication into, any
structure, project or development, real property or improvement herein
described of any material or article of merchandise, which is paid for out of a
public fund or out of a special assessment. The term also includes any public
works leased by a political subdivision under a lease containing an option to
purchase.
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
3-20-2: BID SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:
   In determining whether a bidder is a "responsible bidder" for the award of a
public works contract, the bidder must submit the following inforrnation and
supporting documentation verified under oath on a form designated by the City,
in order for the bid to be accepted:
   A.   A copy of the Illinois Secretary of State's Department of Business
Services online records evidencing that the bidder has a current corporate
annual report on file. If the bidder is an individual, sole proprietor, or
partnership, this subsection will not apply.
   B.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois Department
of Revenue if bidder has employees ( e.g., document with account number,
Illinois Business Tax number).
   C.   Documents evidencing current registration with the Illinois Department
of Employment Security if bidder has employees (e.g., document with UI account
number.
   D.   Disclosure of any Federal, state or local tax liens or tax
delinquencies against the contractor or any officers of th.e contractor in the
last five (5) years.
   E.   A statement that all employees are:
      1.   Covered under a current workers' compensation insurance policy; and
      2.   Properly classified under such policy.
      If the bidder is insured with a carrier, the evidence of workers'
compensation insurance shall be a copy of the "Information Page" of the
bidder's workers' compensation policy and any continuation of that Information
Page which includes the name and .address of the insured, as well as the class
codes the compensation premium is based on and the total estimated remuneration
per class code.
   F.   A statement of compliance with all provisions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act (820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) and all rules and regulations
therein, for the past five (5) years. Such statement shall also provide that
the contractor has reviewed the Prevailing Wage Act or federal Davis-Bacon and
Related Acts, has reviewed and agrees to pay the applicable prevailing wage
rates attached to the bid specifications, and will strictly comply with the
Prevailing Wage Act or Federal Davis-Bacon and Related Acts and related
requirements. A contractor who has been found by the Illinois Department of
Labor to be in violation of the Prevailing Wage Act twice within a three (3)
year period shall be deemed not to be a Responsible Bidder for two (2) years
from the date of the last finding.
   G.   A copy of the written program for the prevention of substance abuse to
be filed with a public body pursuant to the Substance Abuse Prevention on
Public Works Projects Act (820 ILCS 265/1 et seq.).
   H.   A statement that individuals who will perform work on the public works
project on behalf of the contractor are properly classified as either:
      1.   An employee; or
      2.   An independent contractor under all applicable state and federal
laws and local ordinances.
   I.   Documents evidencing any professional or trade license required by law
or local ordinance for any trade or specialty area in which the contractor is
seeking a contract award. Additionally, the contractor must disclose any
suspension or revocation of such license held by the company, or any director,
officer, or manager of the company.
   J.   Evidence of participation in apprenticeship training programs
applicable to the work to be performed on the project, which are approved by
and registered with the United States Department of Labor's Office of
Apprenticeship, or its successor organization; and evidence that any applicable
apprenticeship program has graduated at least five (5) apprentices in each of
the past five (5) years for each of the construction crafts the bidder will
perform on the project. Evidence of graduation rates are not required for
apprentice type crafts dedicated exclusively to the transportation of material
and equipment to and from the public works project. The required evidence
includes but is not limited to a copy of all applicable apprenticeship
standards and Apprenticeship Agreement(s) for any apprentice(s) who will
perform work on the public works project; and documentation from each
applicable apprenticeship program certifying that it has graduated at least
five (5) apprentices in the last five (5) years for each construction craft the
bidger w(II perform on the project. Additional evidence of participation and
graduation requirements may be requested by the City at its discretion.
   K.   Bidder shall certify that all employees expected to perform work on the
project have completed a ten (10)-hour or greater OSHA safety program. Only
workers that have satisfactorily completed a ten (10)-hour or greater OSHA
safety program will be allowed to participate on the project. The bidder must
have copies of employee OSHA cards on file, and the City may request the bidder
provide copies of the employee's OSHA cards; failure to produce an employee's
OSHA card may result in a determination that the bidder is not a responsible
bidder.
   L.   Disclosure of the name and address of each subcontractor from whom the
contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to hire on any part of the
project. Further, each such subcontractor shall be required to adhere to the
requirements set forth herein as though it were bidding directly to the City.
Each contractor shall submit all subcontractor information and supporting
documentation to the City prior to the subcontractor commencing work on the
project.
   M.   Statements as to past performance, which shall give an accurate and
complete record of all public works projects completed in the last three (3)
years by the contractor. Such statements shall include the name of the public
body and the project, original contract priced, final contract price, the names
of all subcontractors used, if applicable, and a statement as to compliance
with completion deadlines.
   N.   Any determination by a court or governmental agency for violations of
federal, state, or local laws, including but not limited to serious, willful or
repeated violations of the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA),
violations of contracting or antitrust laws, tax or licensing laws,
environmental laws, or the Federal Davis-Bacon and Related Acts.
   Any material changes to the contractor's status, at any time, must be
reported in writing to the City within fourteen (14) calendar days of its
occurrence. Failure to comply with this requirement is grounds for the
contractor to be deemed a non-responsible bidder.
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
3-20-3: INCOMPLETE SUBMISSIONS BY BIDDERS AND SUBCONTRACTORS:
   A.   It is the sole responsibility of the bidder to comply with all the
submission requirements at the time it submits its bid to the City. Bidder
submissions deemed inadequate or incomplete may result in a determination that
the bidder is not a responsible bidder.
   B.   The submission requirements also apply to all subcontractors, except
the successful bidder shall submit all subcontractor submissions to the City
prior to the subcontractor commencing work on the project. Failure of a
subcontractor to submit the required information shall not disqualify the
successful bidder from performing work on the project and shall not constitute
a contractual default and/or breach by the successful bidder. However, the City
may withhold all payments otherwise due for the work performed by a
subcontractor, until the subcontractor submits the required information and the
City approves such information. Further, where the. City deems necessary, the
      City may also require that the successful bidder remove the subcontractor
from the project and replace it with a responsive and responsible
subcontractor.
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
3-20-4: VALIDITY OF PRE-QUALIFICATION CLASSIFICATION:
   A.   Upon designation by the City that a contractor's or subcontractor's
submission in anticipation of bid is complete and timely, and upon any further
consideration deemed necessary by the City, the contractor or subcontractor may
be pre-qualified for future public works projects. A contractor's
classification as “qualified” shall exempt the contractor or subcontractor from
the comprehensive submission requirements contained herein for a period of
twelve (12) months. Thereafter, contractors or subcontractors who are pre-
qualified must submit a complete application for continuation of “pre-
qualified” standing on a form provided by the City, (also referred to as the
“short form”) by December 31 for the upcoming calendar year. Failure by any
pre-qualified contractor or subcontractor to timely submit its complete
application for continuation of “pre-qualified” standing shall result in
automatic removal of the designation, effective January 1 of the upcoming year.
However, the “removed” contractor or subcontractor shall still be permitted to
bid on City public works projects.
   B.   Any material changes to the contractor's status, at any time, must be
reported in writing within ten (10) business days of its occurrence to the
City. The pre-qualification designation is solely within the discretion of the
City and the City specifically reserves the right to change or revoke the
designation for a stated written reason(s).
   C.   Denial of pre-qualification shall be in writing and shall be forwarded
to the contractor within seven (7) working days of such decision. Any
contractor denied or losing pre-qualification status may request
reconsideration of the decision by submitting such request in writing to the
City within five (5) business days of receipt of notice of denial.
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
3-20-5: LOWEST BIDDER NOT CHOSEN:
   When the award is not recommended to the lowest bidder, a statement of the
reason for such recommendation shall be prepared by the City.
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
3-20-6: MULTIPLE LOW BIDS:
   When two (2) or more responsible bidders submit the same low bid, the
contract award shall be determined by drawing lots at a public meeting, unless
one bidder is a local contractor and one is a non-local contractor, in which
event, the local contractor shall be awarded the contract.
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
3-20-7: PUBLIC RECORDS:
   All information submitted ,by a successful bidder pursuant to this chapter
are public record subject to review pursuant to the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq).
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
3-20-8: MATERIALITY:
   The requirements of this chapter are a material part of the bid documents
and the contract and the .successful bidder shall insert this chapter in all
subcontracts.
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
3-20-9: SEVERABILITY:
   If any portion of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other portions
or applications of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid
portions or applications and, to this end, the portions of this chapter are
severable.
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
APPENDIX A: RESPONSIBLE BIDDER AFFIDAVIT OF COMPLIANCE
To be completed by Contractor/Subcontractor
 
Project:        Contract Number:
Business Name:
Business Address:
 
Contact Person: Phone:
Fax:            E-mail:
For Office Use Only
Evidence of compliance with laws pre-requisite to doing          Yes [ ] No [ ]
business in the State
Valid Federal FEIN or SS#                                        Yes [ ] No [ ]
Compliance with Equal Opportunity Employer provisions            Yes [ ] No [ ]
List of subcontractors (if applicable)                   N/A [ ] Yes [ ] No [ ]
Certificates of Insurance:
   General Liability                                          Yes [ ] No [ ]
   Workers' Compensation                                      Yes [ ] No [ ]
   Automobile Liability                                       Yes [ ] No [ ]
Statement of past compliance with the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act and agreement to pay prevailing              Yes [ ] No [ ]
wages on this project
Evidence of participation in applicable apprenticeship           Yes [ ] No [ ]
program(s)
Written substance abuse prevention program or
certification that employees are coveted under a                 Yes [ ] No [ ]
collective bargaining agreement
Verification that individuals are properly classified as         Yes [ ] No [ ]
employees or independent contractors
List of employees covered under workers' compensation
policy, verification that employees are properly                 Yes [ ] No [ ]
classified and evidence of coverage
 
Fringe Benefit Coverage:
   Health & Welfare                               Yes [ ] No [ ]
   Retirement                                     Yes [ ] No [ ]
Required professional or trade licenses:     N/A [ ] Yes [ ] No [ ]
Additional Criteria (if applicable):
   Statements as to past performance              Yes [ ] No [ ]
   No violations of federal/state/local laws      Yes [ ] No [ ]
 
Affidavit of Compliance
Contractor and all subcontractors shall complete this Affidavit of Compliance
("Affidavit") and submit supporting documentation as required pursuant to An
Ordinance Establishing Responsible Bidder Requirements on Public Works
Projects. Contractor must submit this Affidavit and all related evidence with
its bid. Contractor shall be responsible for providing this Affidavit to all
subcontractors who will perform work on the project. All subcontractors'
Affidavits and supporting documentation must be submitted no later than the
date and time of the contract award. Failure to comply with all submission
requirements may result in a determination that the Contractor is not a
responsible bidder.
For the remainder of this Affidavit, "Contractor" refers to the general
contractor and all subcontractors. Each item must be answered. If the question
is not applicable, answer “N/A.” If the answer is none, answer “none.”
The certifications set forth in this Affidavit and all documents attached
hereto shall become a part of any contract awarded to the Contractor.
Furthermore, Contractor shall comply with these certifications during the term
and/or performance of the contract.
_________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
The undersigned                                               , as
                                  and on
         (Name)               (Title)
behalf of                                  having been duly sworn under oath
certifies that:
      (Contractor)
Business Organization
The form of business organization of the Contractor is (check one):
 
   Sole Proprietor or Partnership    LLC�
   Corporation                       Independent Contractor (Individual)
 
If bidder/subcontractor is a corporation, indicate the state and the date of
incorporation:
 
Authorized to do business in the State of Illinois: Yes [ ] No [ ]
 
Describe supporting documentation attached:
                                                      
(E.g. Secretary of State Certificate of Good Standing)
Federal Employer I.D. #:                                                       
Social Security# (if an individual or sole proprietor):
                                             
 
The Contractor, or agent, partner, employee or officer of the
Contractor, is not debarred, suspended, proposed for department Yes [ ] No [ ]
or declared ineligible from contracting with any unit of state
or local government.
 
EOE Compliance
 
Contractor is in compliance with provisions of Section 2000e of
Chapter 21, Title 42 of the United States Code and Federal       Yes [ ] No [ ]
Executive Order No. n246 as amended by Executive Order No. 11375
(known as the Equal Opportunity Employer provisions).
 
Subcontractors
 
Contractor disclosed the name and address of each subcontractor
for whom the contractor has accepted a bid and/or intends to    Yes [ ] No [ ]
hire on any part of the project (Form A).
Contractor provided this Affidavit of Compliance to all of the  Yes [ ] No [ ]
above-referenced subcontractors.
 
Certificate of Insurance
Attached are certificates of insurance showing the following coverage:
 
General Liability     Yes [ ] No [ ]
Workers' Compensation Yes [ ] No [ ]
Automobile Liability  Yes [ ] No [ ]
 
Prevailing Wage Compliance
 
Contractor has complied with all provisions of the Illinois
Prevailing Wage Act and federal Davis-Bacon and related Acts,   Yes [ ] No [ ]
and all rules and regulations therein, for the past five (5)
years.
Contractor has reviewed the applicable prevailing wage law,
including the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, and federal Davis-  Yes [ ] No [ ]
Bacon Act.
Contractor will pay the applicable prevailing wage rates.       Yes [ ] No [ ]
Contractor will strictly comply with applicable prevailing wage Yes [ ] No [ ]
laws.
Contractor has not been found by the Illinois Department of
Labor to be in violation of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act    Yes [ ] No [ ]
twice within the past three (3) year period. ("Yes" indicates
compliance with the Act):
If the above answer is "No," list the date(s) of the Department's finding of a
violation:
 
 
Participation in Approved Apprenticeship Program(s)
 
Contractor participates in apprenticeship and training programs
applicable to the work to be performed on the project, which are
approved by and registered with the United States Department of  Yes [ ] No [ ]
Labor's Office of Apprenticeship, or its successor
organizations.
Describe supporting documentation attached (e.g. Standards of Apprenticeship,
Apprenticeship Agreement, verification of participation):
 
 
Substance Abuse
Contractor complies with the Substance Abuse Prevention on Public Works
Projects Act by:
 
Attaching a Written substance abuse program in effect for its   Yes [ ] No [ ]
employees that meets or exceeds the requirements of the Act; or
Having signed a collective bargaining agreement in effect for   Yes [ ] No [ ]
its employees that deals with the subject matter of the Act
 
Employee Classification
 
Contractor's employees who will perform work or the project are
properly classified as an employee or independent contractor     Yes [ ] No [ ]
under all applicable state and federal laws and local ordinances
(Form B).
 
Workers' Compensation
 
Contractor's employees who will perform work on the project are:
   Covered under a current workers' compensation policy:      Yes [ ] No [ ]
   Properly classified under such policy:                     Yes [ ] No [ ]
Describe supporting documentation attached:                      Yes [ ] No [ ]
 
Fringe Benefits
 
Contractor's employees who will perform work on the project are Yes [ ] No [ ]
covered by a health and welfare plan.
Contractor's employees who will perform work on the project are Yes [ ] No [ ]
covered by a retirement plan.
List of employees attached (Form B).                            Yes [ ] No [ ]
Describe supporting documentation attached (e.g. plan .documents, SPDs,
verification of coverage, or employee statement declining coverage):
 
 
Professional or Trade Licenses
 
Contractor will possess all applicable professional and
trade licenses required for performing the Contract     N/A [ ] Yes [ ] No [ ]
work:
 
 
License Number Date Issued Current Expiration Holder of License
 
If any of the above license(s) have been revoked or suspended, state the date
and reason for suspension/revocation:
Documentation Attached (Contractor must initial next to each item):
       Form A:   Name and address of subcontractors from whom Contractor has
accepted a bid or intends to hire to perform work on any part of the project.
NOTE: All subcontractors .shall complete and submit ah Affidavit of Compliance
no later than the date and time of the contract award.
       Form B:   List of individuals who will perform work on the project on
behalf of the Contractor, verifying that each individual is properly classified
as an employee or independent contractor. Contractor also verifies that all
Contractor's employees are covered under a current workers' compensation
policy,. properly classified under the workers' compensation policy, and
covered by a health and welfare and retirement plan.
       Certificate of Good Standing
   (or other evidence .of compliance with laws pre-requisite to doing business
in the state)
       Certificates of Insurance
       Standards of Apprenticeship/Apprentice Agreements
       Fringe Benefit Coverage (Health & Welfare/Retirement)
       Substance Abuse Prevention program (or applicable provision from CBA in
effect)
       Workers' Compensation Coverage
       Professional or Trade Licenses
 
Additional Information Required
If required in the bid specifications, Contractor shall complete items I and/or
II below:
I.   Statement of past three (3) years experience on public construction
projects.
 
Public Body/Project Reference Name/Phone# Original Price/Final Subcontractors
Name/Year                                 price
 
II.   List any determinations by a court or governmental agency for violations
of federal, state or local laws, including but not limited to violations of
contracting or antitrust laws, tax or licensing laws, environmental laws, the
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA), the National Labor Relations Act
(NLRA), or federal Davis-Bacon and related Acts.
 
Date Law Determination Penalty
 
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
APPENDIX B: FORM A: SUBCONTRACTORS WHO WILL PERFORM WORK ON THE PROJECT
Name Address Work to be Performed
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
            
 
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
APPENDIX C: FORM B: INDIVIDUALS WHO WILL PERFORM WORK ON THE PROJECT
List all individuals who will perform work on this project with the following
information:
A.   Individual is an employee (E) or independent contractor (I);
B.   Individual's trade classification (indicate apprenticeship status where
appropriate);
C.   Employee (E) is covered under Contractor's current workers' compensation
(WC) policy;
D.   Employee (E) is covered under a health and welfare (H&W) plan and
retirement plan provided by the employer (ER) or declined coverage (Declined).
Name E/I Trade WC  H&W      Retirement
               Y/N ER/Other ER/Declined
 
VERIFICATION
I certify that I am authorized to execute this Affidavit of Compliance on
behalf of the Contractor set forth on page one (1), that I have personal
knowledge of all the information set forth herein and that all statements,
representations, information and documents provide in or with this Affidavit
and attachments hereto are true and accurate.
The Contractor may report any change in any of the facts stated in this
Affidavit within fourteen (14) days of the effective date of such change by
completing and submitting a new Affidavit. Failure to comply with this
requirement is grounds for the Contractor to be deemed a non-responsible
bidder.
                                                                                     
                  Signature of Authorized Officer
   
State of Illinois
County of
                                                                                                      
Subscribed and sworn to         Name of Authorized Officer (Print or Type)
before me this             day of
                                   ,
20   ,                                                                          
                  Title
                                               
Notary Public Signature &
Seal                                                                          
                  Telephone Number
(Ord. O-23-06, 5-22-2023)
CHAPTER 21
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-21-1: Findings Of Fact
3-21-2: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
3-21-3: Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
3-21-4: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
3-21-5: Clerk To File Ordinance With Illinois Department Of Revenue
3-21-6: Effective Date
3-21-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, provides that the
corporate authorities of each municipality may pass all ordinances and make all
rules and regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers
granted to municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed
proper;
   B.   The City of Colona, IL is a non-home rule Illinois municipality
pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970, as amended;
   C.   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
provides that, beginning on January 1, 2026, all Illinois municipalities may
impose a tax “upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at
retail in the municipality” (the “Municipal Grocery Tax”) (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   D.   The Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax may be imposed “at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from these sales” (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24);
   E.   Any Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   F.   Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24)
requires any municipality imposing a Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation
Tax under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24) to
also impose a Service Occupation Tax at the same rate, “'upon all persons
engaged, in the municipality, in the business of making sales of service, who,
as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer groceries” as “an
incident to a sale of service” (the “Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax”)
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24);
   G.   Any Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax shall be administered,
collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue;
   H.   The City Council of the City of Colona, IL believe that it is
appropriate, necessary and in the best interests of the City of Colona, IL and
its residents, that the City of Colona, IL levy a Municipal Grocery Retailers'
Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24); and
   I.   The City Council of the City of Colona, IL believe that it is
appropriate, necessary and in the best interests of the City of Colona, IL and
its residents, that the City of Colona, IL levy a Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax as permitted by Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. O-25-03, 3-10-2025)
3-21-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
chapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. O-25-03, 3-10-2025)
3-21-3: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in Section 3-21-2, above. The
imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. O-25-03, 3-10-2025)
3-21-4: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. O-25-03, 3-10-2025)
3-21-5: CLERK TO FILE ORDINANCE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE:
   As required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/
8-11-24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this chapter
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2025.
(Ord. O-25-03, 3-10-2025)
3-21-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on the later of:
   A.   January 1, 2026;
   B.   The first day of July next following the adoption and filing of this
chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
April 1st; or
   C.   The first day of January next following the adoption and filing of this
chapter with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
October 1st.
(Ord. O-25-03, 3-10-2025)
TITLE 4
PUBLIC HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES 1
SECTION:
4-1-1: Nuisances Enumerated
4-1-2: Abatement Required
4-1-3: Investigation By City; Power Of Entry
4-1-4: Abatement Procedures
4-1-5: Costs Assessed; Lien
4-1-6: Violation And Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-60-2, 740 ILCS 55/221.
4-1-1: NUISANCES ENUMERATED:
The following acts and conditions are declared to be nuisances:
A. Unlawful Act: It shall be unlawful to permit or do any act which endangers
the public health or results in annoyance or discomfort to the public. [65 ILCS
5/11-20-5]
B. Depositing Substances In Canal, Public Ways:
1. No person shall throw, place or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited,
any dung, carrion, dead animal, offal, putrid or unwholesome substance, or the
contents of any privy into the canal within the limits of the City or upon any
street, alley or public grounds, and upon any lot within the limits of the
City.
2. It shall be unlawful to throw, place or deposit or cause to be thrown or
deposited, any unsightly substances on any public property of the City. [65
ILCS 5/11-20-4, 740 ILCS 55/221 subd. 1, and 55/221b]
C. Garbage And Refuse:
1. Burning Refuse: It shall be unlawful to burn any incombustible or other
organic refuse outside a lawfully constructed incinerator, so as to permit said
refuse to be blown away by the wind. No person shall cause to be burned any
refuse at the front of a lot or near public streets. [415 ILCS 5/9(d)]
2. Disposal Of Garbage: It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain
within the City any garbage or other materials subject to decay, excepting in
tight containers with tight-fitting lids not in excess of thirty three and one-
half (331/2) gallons. It shall be unlawful to permit to fall from any vehicle
any garbage, refuse or ashes on any public street in the City; provided, that
this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the placing of garbage,
refuse or ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this Title for
the purpose of having such matter collected and disposed of 1
. [740 ILCS 55/221a]
3. Place Refuse For Collection: It shall be unlawful for any resident within
the City to place for more than twenty four (24) hours any refuse or garbage
intended for disposal collection on or along or next to City streets,
alleyways, and other travelled areas where refuse collection is made.
D. Sale Of Unwholesome Food And Drink: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer
for sale any unwholesome or polluted food or drink of any kind in the City. [65
ILCS 5/11-20-2]
E. Pollution Of City Water Supply: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any
person to obstruct or pollute any watercourse or source of water supply in the
City. [740 ILCS 55/221 subd. 3]
F. Stagnant Pools Of Water: Any stagnant pool of water in the City is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any
such nuisance to remain or exist on any property under his or her control. [65
ILCS 5/11-20-4]
G. Discharging Polluting Substances: It shall be unlawful for any person to
connect or cause to be connected, any drain carrying or to carry any toilet,
sink, basement, septic tank, cesspool, industrial waste, or any fixture or
device discharging polluting substances to any storm water drain in the City.
[605 ILCS 5/9-123]
H. Smoke Emission: It shall be unlawful to cause or permit the emission of
dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agent in the
City so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the residents thereof. For the
purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart
as published and used by the United State Geological Survey shall be and is
hereby adopted as a standard for such grading and the smoke shall be and is
hereby defined as declared to be "dense" when it is of a degree of density of
number 3 of said chart, or greater, for more than six (6) minutes in any one
hour whether such period of time is consecutive or not. [65 ILCS 5/11-19.1-11]
I. Swimming In Canal: There shall be no swimming within the limits of the City
except adjacent to places where there are available showers and suitable places
for changing of clothes. No person, regardless of the facilities, shall swim in
the canal.
J. Deposits In Ditches: It shall be the responsibility of landowners to
maintain ditches abutting such owner's property free from debris, trash and
other nonindigenous objects which may constitute a health or safety hazard. Any
owner who fails or refuses to maintain abutting ditches free of debris, trash
and other nonindigenous objects after proper notice to such owner by the City
shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
K. Firewood Stacks: Firewood shall be stacked in a neat and orderly manner in
the side or rear yard of a residence. Residents shall be allowed two (2) weeks
from the date the wood is obtained to comply with this Chapter. Failure to
comply with this regulation is hereby declared a nuisance and is unlawful. [65
ILCS 5/11-53-1]
L. Cluttered, Discarded Or Abandoned Items: It is hereby declared a nuisance
and unlawful to maintain premises cluttered with discarded or abandoned items
of personal property or with tools or personal property used in a business or
trade or to leave such objects haphazardly upon such premises.
M. Landscape Waste: It is hereby declared a nuisance and unlawful to allow
piles of brush and/or fallen or cut tree limbs to remain on the premises from
which it was grown. No piles of brush, tree limbs or grass clippings shall be
allowed to be brought from a premises from which it was grown to another
premises unless it is a landfill or compost site approved by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. [65 ILCS 5/11-42-14] (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  4-3-3 of this Title.
4-1-2: ABATEMENT REQUIRED:
The existence of any violation of the provisions of Section
4-1-1 of this Chapter or of any provisions of this Title shall be deemed a
nuisance and shall be abated as hereinafter provided. (1997 Code)
4-1-3: INVESTIGATION BY CITY; POWER OF ENTRY:
A. Duty To Investigate: For the purpose of discovering nuisances, it shall be
the duty of the police, fire, and building officers and inspectors to
investigate, confirm and report any nuisances coming to their attention.
B. Proper Identification; Entry On Premises: In order to investigate, confirm
and report nuisances, said officers and inspectors shall, upon proper
identification, be permitted at any reasonable hour and in a reasonable manner,
to visit and enter into or upon any premises or property within the City to
make an investigation thereof, if they shall have reasonable grounds to believe
that a nuisance exists. (1997 Code)
4-1-4: ABATEMENT PROCEDURES:
A. Nuisance Determined: Whenever any nuisance shall be reported to or
investigated and determined by the police, fire, or building officers or
inspectors, notice shall be given to the owner or person in control of the
property or premises involved and to the appropriate City officials whose
functions include the abatement of such nuisances.
B. Notice To Abate:
1. Whenever any building official or inspector or any police or fire officer
determines that a nuisance exists on any private property or premises, the
proper City official shall cause a written notice to be served upon the owner
or person in control of such property or premises who is causing, permitting or
maintaining such nuisance, which notice shall give the person served ten (10)
days from the date of service of the notice to abate the nuisance. Such notice
shall be a means of personal service of a copy of the complaint or by certified
or registered mail of a copy of the complaint. Personal service shall be by any
authorized inspector from the City or by any police officer of the Police
Department or any person authorized by law to make personal service.
2. Such notice shall fairly apprise such person of the nature of the nuisance,
his/her duty to abate or remove the nuisance within the time provided therein,
the penalty for failure to abate the same and shall state that, if said
nuisance is abated by the City, liability for necessary expenses to be incurred
shall accrue as provided in Section
4-1-5 of this Chapter.
C. Time Limits: It is hereby declared the duty of any person determined to have
created, caused, erected, maintained or permitted a nuisance to exist within
the City to discontinue and abate such nuisance within ten (10) days, or such
other time period as may be specified in the notice, from the time he/she
receives written notice thereof.
D. Abatement By City: Whenever any nuisance is not abated by the owner, lessee
or person in control of the premises or property affected within the time
provided by notice, the proper City officer shall cause the abatement or
removal of such nuisance.
E. Summary Abatement By City: Whenever any nuisance: 1) constitutes or is
deemed to be an imminent or immediate danger to the public health or safety, or
2) exists on public property, the proper City officer shall cause such nuisance
to be summarily and immediately abated and removed, regardless of any ten (10)
day or other time period specified by notice to the person responsible
therefor; provided, however that in situation 1) above, such officer shall have
first applied for and obtained the written permission of the Mayor for such
summary abatement. (1997 Code)
4-1-5: COSTS ASSESSED; LIEN:
A. Lien: Any costs or expenses of abatement reasonably incurred by the City
pursuant to the provisions of subsection 4-1-4D of this Chapter shall be deemed
a debt to the City by the owner, lessee or person in control of premises upon
which such nuisance existed; provided, that where specifically provided in this
Code or by statute 1
, such costs and expenses shall become a lien upon the real estate affected,
superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens.
B. Civil Action: It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to enforce by civil
action any and all such debts or liens as provided in subsection A of this
Section. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7, 5/11-20-8, 5/11-20-121 and 5/11-31-1.
4-1-6: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
A. General Penalty: Whenever in this Chapter any act is prohibited or is made
or declared to be unlawful or a nuisance, or whenever the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, when no
specific penalty is provided therefor, any person violating such provision
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Failure To Abate:
1. Separate Offense: It shall be unlawful and a violation of this Chapter for
any person to neglect, refuse or otherwise fail to remove or abate any nuisance
after expiration of the ten (10) days or other specified time period provided
by notice thereof, and each twenty four (24) hours or fraction thereof during
which such nuisance continues or exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
2. Penalty: Any person who shall cause, permit or allow a nuisance to continue
or exist as provided for in subsection B1 above shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2
WEEDS AND GRASS 1
SECTION:
4-2-1: Height Limitations
4-2-2: Abutting Ditches
4-2-3: Abatement By City
4-2-4: Fees For Mowing
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-6, 5/11-20-7. See section
  5-2-4-5 of this code for burning restrictions.
4-2-1: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or person in possession of premises situated
within the city to cut weeds and grass growing on their respective premises
whenever the same shall be in need of cutting. In no event shall such weeds and
grass be allowed to grow in excess of eight inches (8"). (1997 Code)
4-2-2: ABUTTING DITCHES:
It shall be the duty of the owner of premises situated in the city to maintain
abutting ditches by cutting grass, weeds and other indigenous growth when
needed. In no event shall the grass, weeds or other indigenous growth be in
excess of eight inches (8"). (1997 Code)
4-2-3: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
A. Cutting By City: If the owner or person in possession shall allow weeds and
grass to grow to a height of eight inches (8") or more, the city shall be
authorized to cut said weeds and grass and maintain the premises in accordance
with this chapter.
B. Cost Of Abatement: The city shall have recourse against the owner and/or
party in possession for the recovery of such expenses related to this chapter
by first billing the owner and requesting payment within a specified time.
C. Nonpayment Of Costs; Lien: If the bill is not paid, the city may file a lien
against the premises in the office of the recorder of deeds of Henry County.
D. Redemption Of Lien: Redemption of the lien shall include any attorney fees,
recording costs and any other expenses incurred. This recourse is not exclusive
as the city may take any other action as permitted by law. (1997 Code)
E. Notice To Property Owners: If the city of Colona by necessity has to give
notice of violations of weed and grass height limitations, it shall be
sufficient that such notice may be given only once to a property owner during
any calendar year. Such notice may be sent by regular mail addressed to the
address of property owner as shown on the tax assessment records. Such mailing
shall be sufficient notice to such property owner for any calendar year. (Ord.
0-13-12, 10-22-2012)
4-2-4: FEES FOR MOWING:
Fees for mowing shall be set from time to time as the city council shall
determine. (1997 Code)
A. Mowing expenses per mowing is:
1. One hundred dollars ($100.00) up to ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2. Two hundred dollars ($200.00) up to one acre (43,560 square feet).
3. One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per part or whole acre in excess of
first acre mowed.
B. That each time a mowing takes place there shall be in addition to the mowing
charge an administration charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) added each
time a mowing occurs. (Ord. 0-02-13, 6-10-2013)
CHAPTER 3
GARBAGE COLLECTION 1
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: Collection
4-3-4: Nondisposable Containers
4-3-5: Yard Waste
4-3-6: White Goods
4-3-7: Solid Waste Vehicles
4-3-8: Fee Collection Procedures
4-3-9: Audit
4-3-10: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 et seq.
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a safe, sanitary and efficient method
for the collection and disposal of all residential solid waste and yard waste
to safeguard the citizens of the City from hazards to their health, safety, and
welfare that result from the uncontrolled collection and disposal of solid
waste. (1997 Code)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms are defined:
BULKY RUBBISH: Rubbish either too large or heavy to be loaded in solid waste
collection vehicles with safety and convenience by solid waste collectors with
the equipment available therefor.
CITY: The City of Colona, Illinois.
COMMERCIAL UNITS: Any business or multiple-family dwelling larger than a duplex
and mobile home parks.
COMMERCIAL USER: Income-producing establishments; churches, schools and
multiple-family dwellings (more than 2 residential units) and any other entity
not considered single-family residences or residential duplexes which elect to
use dumpsters.
GARBAGE: Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL: Solid waste material including but not limited to,
explosives, rags or other waste soaked in volatile and inflammable materials,
drugs, poisons, radioactive materials, hot ashes, wastes contaminated by
infection or contagious diseases, highly combustible materials and other
materials which may present a special hazard to collection or disposal
personnel, equipment or to the public.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE: Petroleum distillate-based solvents, oil-based
liquid paint, paint strippers, and pesticides.
OWNER: The owner of that particular real estate.
PACKER UNITS: A garbage truck used to compact and then haul garbage and
rubbish.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
REFUSE: Garbage and rubbish.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: Any building or buildings used solely for home
occupancy and includes single-family dwellings and duplexes.
RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE: Garbage produced at residential dwelling units.
RESIDENTIAL RUBBISH: Rubbish resulting from the maintenance and operation of
residential dwelling units.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes.
SOLID WASTE: Unwanted or discarded garbage or rubbish.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINERS: A water-resistant receptacle, nondisposable, designed
for the temporary storage of solid waste.
SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of public works of the city.
USER: The owner, tenant or occupant of the property entitled to use the
services provided by this contract.
WHITE GOODS: Appliances that contain freon such as refrigerators, freezers, air
conditioners, as well as nonfreon items such as large household appliances,
including washers, dryers and hot water heaters.
YARD WASTE: Organic debris (grass clippings, leaves, flowers, tree branches and
limbs, etc.) which is produced as part of yard and garden development and
maintenance.
In any dispute as to other definitions of terms, Webster's dictionary shall
control. (1997 Code)
4-3-3: COLLECTION:
A. Use Of City Contractor Required: All residents of the city shall exclusively
use the contractor selected by the city for the collection of residential solid
waste and yard waste in a manner and degree of frequency to be determined by
motion of the city council, but not less frequently than once a week.
B. Collection Not Provided By City: The city shall not provide for the
collection of commercial solid waste, hazardous materials or any residential
solid waste or yard waste not prepared for disposal pursuant to this chapter.
C. Bulky Waste: Bulky rubbish will be collected by special pickup procedures as
determined by motion of the city council.
D. Written Procedures: A copy of any and all procedures under the provisions
hereof shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be available
for public inspection. (1997 Code)
4-3-4: NONDISPOSABLE CONTAINERS:
Solid waste shall be placed in suitable containers. Solid waste containers
shall not be more than thirty three and one-half (331/2) gallons. Containers
shall be waterproof and fitted with tight-fitting lids. The containers shall
have handles, bails or other suitable lifting devices. The containers shall be
of a type originally manufactured for solid waste, with tapered sides for easy
emptying. They shall be of light weight and sturdy construction. The weight of
any individual container and contents shall not exceed fifty (50) pounds.
Galvanized iron and similar metal containers, rubber or fiberglass containers
and plastic containers which do not become brittle in cold weather may be used.
Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar containers shall not be acceptable
for use as containers. (1997 Code)
4-3-5: YARD WASTE:
A. Separation Required: All yard waste shall be separated by the owner or
occupant from all other garbage and refuse accumulated on the premises and
shall be composted on the premises or placed in approved degradable bags and
put out for collection.
B. Containers: Persons choosing not to compost yard waste on their own property
may place yard waste in specially marked degradable bags for collection. Only
bags sold or specifically authorized by the city and identified as such may be
used. The city, by motion, will establish the size, use and cost of the yard
waste bags and where the bags will be available for purchase. Yard waste bags
containing material other than yard waste shall not be collected. Yard waste
bags, when used, may not exceed fifty (50) pounds in weight. (1997 Code)
4-3-6: WHITE GOODS:
A. Sticker Required: Residential dwelling units may have white goods picked up
for disposal. If the city or city provider is to pick up the white goods, the
owner of the white goods must purchase a city or city provider approved sticker
and place it on the white goods to be picked up. Cost of such sticker shall be
as determined from time to time by agreement between City and/or City provider.
B. Independent Disposal Service: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
owner of the white goods from contracting directly with a disposal service to
remove the white goods. (Ord. 07-01, 5-14-2001)
4-3-7: SOLID WASTE VEHICLES:
Each truck or vehicle used in the collection of solid waste shall be equipped
with either an all metal watertight box or with a box with a metal lining so
that there shall be no escape of liquid contents from the box onto the ground
or street. All vehicles used for the collection of solid waste shall be kept
closed at all times except when stopped to receive solid waste. Any truck,
trailer or other vehicle transporting solid waste on the streets of the City
shall be covered with a canvas or other effective means to prevent the same
from falling or blowing onto the streets of the City. (1997 Code)
4-3-8: FEE COLLECTION PROCEDURES:
There is hereby established and the City shall impose, collect and enforce a
schedule of mandatory fees for solid waste collection services as follows:
A. Residential Dwelling Units: Residential dwelling units will be charged as a
single-family rate per dwelling unit per month.
B. Deposit: There shall be no customer deposit to renters that have the service
in their name.
C. Statements: Charges for garbage disposal service shall be billed, dated and
sent out on the water-sewer bills, but shall be maintained in a separate
account. Billing for garbage disposal service shall be on the water-sewer bill
issued immediately prior to that month's disposal service. (1997 Code)
D. Delinquent Accounts: Bills for service shall be rendered monthly and shall
be considered delinquent twenty (20) days after their rendition. In the event
of failure to pay the bills within the twenty (20) day period, an additional
charge of ten percent (10%) of the present bill shall be added as a late
payment penalty to arrive at the total bill for refuse with delinquency
charges. (Ord. 0-15-23, 11-23-2015)
1. Collection; Lien: If an account is delinquent for sixty (60) days, the City
Clerk shall be authorized and directed to institute legal proceedings, in the
name of the City, to collect the delinquent account or place a lien against the
premises for nonpayment of services or effectuate any other remedy provided by
law to collect any such delinquencies.
2. Costs Of Collection: Users of the service and the owner of the subject real
estate shall be liable for all costs associated with the collection action
including reasonable attorney fees.
3. Notice To Owner: Failure of the City Clerk or Collector to mail the notice
to the owner of the premises, if the owner is different than the occupant or
user of the garbage collection service, or the failure of the owner to receive
the notice shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as
mentioned in the foregoing subsections.
4. Release Of Lien: If the City shall have filed the statement of lien claim
with the County Recorder of Deeds, then before the City will execute and file a
release of the lien claim with the County Recorder of Deeds, there shall be
paid to the City Collector or Clerk all outstanding amounts plus eighteen
percent (18%) per year interest on the principal amount due to the City plus a
sum sufficient to cover the City's expenses in recording and releasing the lien
claim and payment of the City's attorney fees, if any.
E. Termination Of Service:
1. Notice Of Termination: Any user requesting a termination of service shall
give written notice to the City ten (10) days prior to the time such
termination of service is desired. (1997 Code)
2. Temporary Discontinuation: If the dwelling is vacant more than ninety (90)
days and will continue to be vacant, a temporary vacant discontinuation of
service may be applied for by submitting the proper form to the City Clerk or
Collector. If any usage of sewer or water is found on the account during that
time, discontinuation will cease and service will be charged beginning with the
month usage begins. If a property will be vacant from three (3) months to six
(6) months and the property owner(s) reside at that property, a property owner
may apply for temporary vacation discontinuation of service during this time on
the form supplied by City Hall, and it will be submitted for approval to the
City Clerk. If any usage of sewer or water is found on the account during that
time, discontinuation will cease and service will be charged for each month
that was suspended. Discontinuation of service less than three (3) consecutive
months and more than six (6) consecutive months is not allowed under the
vacation rate. (Ord. 0-17-12, 7-24-2017)
3. Responsibility For Payment: Responsibility for payment of services prior to
the date of termination shall be with the owner of the premises. No penalty or
past due bills shall be charged for transferring the service to subsequent
users.
F. Refunds: The City Collector or Clerk is authorized and directed to refund
the unused portion of a fee paid in advance.
G. Separate Account: The City Clerk is authorized to establish a separate
account to receive funds herein and to pay the proper and authorized contractor
pursuant to contract as entered into by the City.
H. Rate; Administration Fee: The rate charged each unit shall be set from time
to time by the Council, over and above the per unit charge by the contractor.
Such fee is to cover costs of administering the accounts by the City. (1997
Code)
4-3-9: AUDIT:
The City may conduct an audit annually to ensure proper payment and to prevent
fraudulent usage. (1997 Code)
4-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each separate violation of this chapter in addition to
any other civil or criminal penalties the City may choose to pursue according
to law. (1997 Code)
TITLE 5
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT 1
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created
5-1-2: Police Commission
5-1-3: Chief Of Police
5-1-4: Membership
5-1-5: Rules And Regulations
5-1-6: Stolen, Abandoned, Or Lost Property
5-1-7: Rewards
5-1-8: Reserved
5-1-9: Part Time Police Officers
5-1-10: Repealer
5-1-11: Effective Date
5-1-12:    Bonus Eligibility For Lateral Transfer Of Police
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-1-2.
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby created a police department for the city which shall consist of
the chief of police, who shall be the ex officiate superintendent of police.
(Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-2: POLICE COMMISSION:
It shall be the duty of the police commission to take applications on a form
prescribed by the city council, and upon receiving said applications, conduct
an investigation as to the fitness of the applicant. It shall also be the duty
of the police commission to recommend to the council the promotion of police
officers. The corporate authorities reserve the right to accept or reject the
recommendation of the police commission where promotion of police officers are
concerned and may consider previous background checks and service records in
their deliberation of such recommendations. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-3: CHIEF OF POLICE:
A. Head Of Department: The chief of police shall be the head of the department
and have supervision over all officers and members thereof. The chief of police
shall be allowed to flex his/her daily schedule to attend required meetings of
the corporate authorities. The chief of police shall be under the direction of
the collective corporate authorities. No one member of the corporate
authorities has the authority to act alone to direct the chief of police. If
there arises a public safety emergency situation, the mayor, in the absence and
consent of the aldermanic council, shall have the authority to direct the chief
of police in the time of a public safety emergency.
B. Mayor To Appoint: Mayor is hereby empowered to make appointments to the
police department of the city by and with the advice and consent of the city
council, and shall have power to make necessary rules setting forth the
qualifications necessary for appointment to the said department.
C. Responsibilities: The chief of police shall keep such records and make such
reports concerning the activities of the police department as may be required
by statute, by ordinance or by the city council. The chief shall be responsible
for the performance by the police department of its functions. All persons who
are members of the police department shall serve subject to the orders of the
chief of police.
D. Chain Of Command: Shall there arise a matter within the police department
where there may be a grievance of the subordinate members of the police
department with the chief of police, the chain of command will be followed as
prescribed by the current internal policies and/or by the prescription of
remedies mutually agreed to in the current bargaining agreement.
E. Chief Of Police Compensation: The compensation provided for the police chief
shall be as fixed by the council from time to time.
F. Duties: It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see to the
enforcement of all of the provisions of the bargaining agreement, all other
written city policies or ordinances in effect that do not conflict with the FOP
bargaining agreement, shall be enforced.
G. Authority To Alter Bargaining Agreements, City Code, And All Other Written
City Policies: The chief of police does not have the authority to supersede or
alter any provisions agreed to in writing within the bargaining agreement
during its prescribed term at any time as a temporary or permanent verbal
agreement. The chief of police must have the permission of the corporate
authorities to supersede or alter all other written city policies or
ordinances. The corporate authorities do not have the authority to supersede or
alter any provisions agreed to in writing within a bargaining agreement during
its prescribed term, after acceptance of said agreement, unless both the city
and the bargaining unit agree to mutually open the contract with the intent to
bargain the existing language during its prescribed term. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-
2015)
5-1-4: MEMBERSHIP 1
:
A. Bargaining Unit Members And Agreement: The city has entered into a
bargaining unit agreement with the members of the Colona bargaining members of
the Colona police department. All other written policies and ordinances of the
city shall apply to all members of the police department that do not conflict
with the terms of agreement of the current bargaining agreement during its
prescribed term.
B. Conduct: It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to
conduct him/herself in a proper and law abiding manner at all times, and to
avoid the use of unnecessary force. The current bargaining agreement shall
supersede this section if this section conflicts therein. Each member of the
department shall obey the orders and directions of his/her superior in the
chain of command, with the chief of police being the head of the chain of
command. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection 1-7-1E4 of this code for bond requirements.
5-1-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations that do
not conflict with the current bargaining unit agreement, all other written city
policies, and ordinances as the chief shall deem advisable. Such rules must be
approved by the city council prior to execution and shall be bonding on all
such members of the police department. Such rules and regulations may cover,
besides the conduct of the members, rules for the better efficiency of the
department. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-6: STOLEN, ABANDONED, OR LOST PROPERTY 1
:
The chief of police shall have care and control of all lost, abandoned or
stolen property recovered in the city. If the stolen, abandoned or lost
property is not claimed after six (6) months from the date said property was
recorded as received, the city may hold a public auction of said property as
prescribed by drafting an ordinance to do so. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 1030.
5-1-7: REWARDS:
The chief of police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the
police department and the due discharge of his or her duties, may permit such
member to retain for his or her own benefit, so far as may be permitted by law,
any reward or present tendered therefor, and it shall be cause of removal for
any member of the force to receive any such reward or present without notice
thereof to the chief of police and without permission of the chief of police.
(Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-8: RESERVED:
(Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-9: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
A. Training: All police officers, other than those officers who shall be
employed on a full time basis, shall be qualified to enter and successfully
complete any training mandated by the Illinois law enforcement training
standards board.
B. Hiring Standards: Any person employed as a part time police officer must
meet the following standards:
1. Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health, and
physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
2. Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
3. Pass a medical examination.
4. Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
5. Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
6. Possess no prior felony convictions.
7. Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been honorably
discharged.
C. Submittal To Law Enforcement Training Standards Board: The aforesaid hiring
standard, particularly with respect to part time police officers employed by
the city of Colona, Illinois, shall be submitted to the Illinois law
enforcement training standards board, as required by statute.
D. Maximum Hours: Part time officers will work no more than one thousand five
hundred sixty (1,560) hours in a calendar year. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-10: REPEALER:
That all ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of
such conflict. (Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-11: EFFECTIVE DATE:
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from after its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.
(Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
5-1-12: BONUS ELIGIBILITY FOR LATERAL TRANSFER OF POLICE:
   A.   Qualification Requirements:
      1.   The officer must have a current certification from the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training and Standards Board or have retired within the past twelve
(12) months.
      2.   The transferring officer must have completed the full-time police
academy and be in good standing with no adverse employment action, or be a part
time officer with the Colona Police department with current certification from
the ILETSB and current continuous service with the Colona Police Department for
a minimum of two (2) years.
      3.   The officer must be eligible to be granted a waiver of basic
training from the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board.
      4.   The officer will be eligible to transfer up to a maximum of ten (10)
years of their years of certified law enforcement experience for purposes of
the officer' initial placement on the Department's pay scale.
         a.   By way of example, an officer who is laterally hired into the
Department with ten (10) years of prior certified law enforcement experience
would start at the ten (10)-year step, and remain there until they reach year
eleven (11) on the pay scale. The officer would remain eligible for any annual
wage increases in accordance with the terms of any applicable collective
bargaining agreement.
         b.   The transfer of an officer's prior years of certified law
enforcement experience shall apply only to the officer's initial placement on
the pay scale bargaining agreement for other terms and conditions of employment
(such as determining layoffs or granting vacation requests).
         c.   Part time officers who are laterally hired into the Colona Police
Department are only eligible to count their prior full-time experience for
purposes of the City's lateral incentive set forth herein.
   B.   Bonus Entitlement:
      1.   An officer hired as a lateral transfer will be entitled to receive a
four thousand-dollar ($4,000.00) lump sum bonus after one year of satisfactory
service.
      2.   An officer will be entitled to receive an additional lump sum bonus
of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) after a second year of satisfactory
service.
      3.   The total any officer may receive as a sign-on bonus is to be seven
thousand dollars ($7,000.00).
      4.   Any officer receiving the lateral bonus must remain with the Colona
Police department for at least three (3) years, or the officer will be required
to reimburse the City for the full amount of any lateral bonus provided to the
officer.
   C.   Lump Sum Bonus: The lump sum bonus cannot be included in the Officer's
regular payroll check and it must be specifically labeled as a bonus. All
bonuses paid shall be subject to proper tax withholding.
(Ord. O-22-07, 7-25-2022; amd. Ord. O-24-03, 7-9-2024)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES 1
SECTION:
5-2-1: Offenses Relating To The Person
5-2-1-1: Fraud, Concealment And False Activities
5-2-1-2: Assault Or Battery; Fighting
5-2-1-3: Cruelty To Persons
5-2-1-4: Encouraging Delinquency
5-2-1-5: Escapes
5-2-1-6: Theft And Related Offenses
5-2-1-7: Video Gaming
5-2-1-8: Gaming House
5-2-1-9: Intoxication
5-2-1-10: Vagrancy
5-2-1-11: Offenses Relating To City Officials
5-2-2: Offenses Against Public Peace And Order
5-2-2-1: Disorderly Conduct
5-2-2-2: Disturbing The Peace
5-2-2-3: General Offense; Aid To An Offense
5-2-2-4: Assemblages, Crowds
5-2-3: Offenses Concerning Morals And Decency
5-2-3-1: Indecent Conduct
5-2-3-2: Profanity
5-2-3-3: Prostitution
5-2-3-4: Sale Or Distribution Of Indecent Literature, Contraceptives Or Videos
5-2-4: Offenses Involving Public And Private Property
5-2-4-1: Damage Or Injury To Property
5-2-4-2: Obstruction Of Any Sidewalk
5-2-4-3: Snow Removal On Sidewalks
5-2-4-4: Deposits Of Refuse On Public Ways
5-2-4-5: Fires; Burning Restrictions
5-2-4-6: Keeping Junk Restricted
5-2-4-7: Trespassing
5-2-4-8: Letting Premises For Unlawful Purpose
5-2-4-9: Barbed Wire, Electric Fences
5-2-4-10: Expectorating
5-2-4-11: Abandoned Refrigerators
5-2-4-12: Placement Of Objects Above Streets
5-2-4-13: Prohibited Activities In Streets
5-2-5: Miscellaneous Offenses
5-2-5-1: Advertising, Billposting Restrictions
5-2-5-2: Businesses; Prohibited Acts
5-2-5-3: Parking Of Campers; Ownership
5-2-5-4: Hitchhiking
5-2-5-5: Weapons Offenses
5-2-5-6: Loudspeakers Or Sound Trucks
5-2-5-7: Injury To Birds
5-2-5-8: Jaywalking
5-2-6: Drug Paraphernalia
5-2-6-1: Definition
5-2-6-2: Possession
5-2-6-3: Manufacture Or Delivery
5-2-6-4: Advertisement
5-2-6-5: Penalty
5-2-7: Drugs
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1.
5-2-1: OFFENSES RELATING TO THE PERSON:
5-2-1-1: FRAUD, CONCEALMENT AND FALSE ACTIVITIES:
A. Admission Fees, Fraudulently Avoiding Payment Of: It shall be unlawful for
any person to fraudulently enter, without payment of the proper admission fee,
any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission fees are
charged; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to
prohibit or restrict the free admission of police officers engaged in the
performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or amusement.
[65 ILCS 5/11-5-1]
B. Concealing Knowledge: It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal
knowledge of the commission of any offense or to conceal knowledge of any
unlawful act as defined in this Code. [720 ILCS 5/31-3]
C. False Alarm: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start or
spread any false alarm of fire in the City. [720 ILCS 5/26-1(a)(2)]
D. False Pretenses: It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain any food,
drink, goods, wares or merchandise under false pretenses, or to enter any
public place and call for refreshments or other articles and receive and refuse
to pay for same, or depart without paying for or satisfying the person from
whom he or she received the food, goods, wares and merchandise. [65 ILCS 5/11-
5-1, 720 ILCS 5/17-1]
E. Swindling: It shall be unlawful for any person, who by color, or aid of any
trick or sleight of hand performance, or by fraud or by fraudulent scheme,
cards, dice or device, to win for himself/herself or for another any money or
property or a representative of either. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720 ILCS 5/28-1]
(1997 Code)
5-2-1-2: ASSAULT OR BATTERY; FIGHTING:
A. Assault: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "assault" which is
hereby defined as any conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension
of receiving a battery. [720 ILCS 5/12-1]
B. Battery: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "battery". A person
commits battery if he/she intentionally or knowingly, without legal
justification and by any means, causes bodily harm to an individual or makes
physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual. [720
ILCS 5/12-2]
C. Fighting: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight, or
to fight, or to commit any assault or battery in any public place in the City.
[65 ILCS 5/12-3.2] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-3: CRUELTY TO PERSONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cruelly or inhumanely whip, injure, beat
or mistreat his or her own spouse, child, stepchild or apprentice, or other
child under his or her care. [720 ILCS 5/12-3.2] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-4: ENCOURAGING DELINQUENCY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, by any act or neglect, to encourage, aid
or cause a child to come within the purview of the juvenile authorities; and it
shall likewise be unlawful for any person, after notice that a driver's license
of any child has been suspended or revoked, to permit such child to operate a
motor vehicle during the period that such driver's license is suspended. [720
ILCS 130/2] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-5: ESCAPES:
A. Attempt: It shall be unlawful for any person convicted of any offense or in
lawful custody to escape or attempt to escape from custody. [720 ILCS 5/31-6]
B. Aid In: It shall be unlawful for any person to aid or assist any person to
escape from lawful confinement or to assist any person to escape from the
custody of any peace officer. [720 ILCS 5/31-7] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-6: THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES:
A. Petit Theft: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit "petit theft"
which is hereby defined as a theft when the property taken is of value of less
than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), with the intent to permanently
deprive the owner of use or possession of the property. [720 ILCS 5/16-1]
B. Possession Of Burglar Tools: It shall be unlawful for any person to have in
his/her possession any nippers of any description known as burglar's nippers,
picklock, skeleton key, jimmy or other burglar's instrument or tool of any
description, unless it be shown that the possession is innocent or for a lawful
purpose. [720 ILCS 5/19-2] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-7: VIDEO GAMING:
   A.   Title: This section shall be known as the VIDEO GAMING ORDINANCE.
   B.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the definitions set forth
in the Illinois Video Gaming Act at 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5 shall
apply.
   C.   License Required: No person shall operate or maintain a video gaming
terminal within the City of Colona without first obtaining a license therefor
from the City Council as provided.
   D.   License Application: Before any video gaming license shall be issued,
an application for such license shall be filed with the City Council after
first having been sworn on oath, stating:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant;
      2.   That the applicant currently holds a liquor license of a Class C, D,
or E, in the City of Colona, which liquor license is currently in good
standing;
      3.   That the applicant complies with all requirements to operate and
maintain a video gaming terminal as set forth in the Illinois Video Gaming Act.
   E.   License Term; Fee: The official licensing year shall begin on June 1 of
each year and end on May 31 of the next succeeding calendar year. All licenses
shall expire on May 31 of the licensing year. The license fee shall be two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for each video terminal maintained on site.
No adjustment shall be made to the amount of the license fee for licenses
obtained after the start of the licensing year. No refunds of any license fee
shall be permitted. If gaming is not in operation within six (6) months after
the issuance of the video gaming license, the license becomes null and void.
   F.   Number Of Terminals Allowed: No more than six (6) video gaming
terminals shall be permitted at any licensed premises. No more than ten (10)
video gaming premises shall be permitted within the City of Colona. The City
Council shall have the authority to approve or disapprove any application for a
gaming license. This number may be amended by the City Council as deemed
necessary.
   G.   Penalties: Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall
be fined as provided in section 5-5-1 of this title, and in the discretion of
the Mayor, the license may be suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 0-19-02, 3-25-2019; Ord. O-19-09, 9-23-2019; Ord. O-22-02, 4-11-2022;
Ord. O-23-10, 8-14-2023)
5-2-1-8: GAMING HOUSE:
No person shall keep or maintain any gaming house or room, or any place where
gaming or betting of any kind is done or going on, or shall procure or permit
any persons to come together in any house, rooms or place occupied or owned by
him/her, or under his/her control, for the purpose of playing at any game for
money or other valuable thing, or anything representing or intended to
represent money or other thing of value, or shall permit any such persons to
play at any such game when they have come together in any such room, house or
place. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-9: INTOXICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an intoxicated condition in or on
any street, alley or other public place in the City. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-3] (1997
Code)
5-2-1-10: VAGRANCY:
It shall be unlawful:
A. For any person without visible means of support and the physical ability to
work not to seek employment or labor, or to refuse to work when employment is
offered him/her.
B. For any person to seek alms as a business.
C. For any person to roam about from place to place without any lawful
business.
D. For any idle or dissolute person or associate of known thieves to wander
about the streets at a late and unusual hour of the night, or to lodge in any
other place than is kept for lodging purposes without the permission of the
owner of the property or the person in possession thereof.
E. For any person to consort habitually with common prostitutes, habitual
drunkards or any user of narcotics. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-4] (1997 Code)
5-2-1-11: OFFENSES RELATING TO CITY OFFICIALS:
A. False Representation: It shall be unlawful for any person to represent
falsely himself/herself to be an officer of the City or to attempt to
impersonate any such officer or, without authority, perform any official act
therein on behalf of an officer. [720 ILCS 5/17-2]
B. Resisting An Officer: It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere
wilfully with, resist, delay, obstruct, molest or threaten to molest any
officer of the City in the exercise of his/her official duties. [720 ILCS 5/31-
1]
C. Refuse To Assist Police Officers: It shall be unlawful for any male citizen
over the age of eighteen (18) years to refuse or neglect to render assistance
to any police officer when called upon for such assistance or aid in the
suppression of riot or other unlawful assemblage or in the arrest of any person
who has committed an offense. [720 ILCS 5/31-8] (1997 Code)
5-2-2: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER:
5-2-2-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct or of
any conduct tending toward a breach of the peace. The causing or making of any
unnecessary loud noise or shouting or yelling shall be considered disorderly
conduct. [720 ILCS 5/26] (1997 Code)
5-2-2-2: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
   A.   Definitions: As used in this Section, the following words and terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    LOUD, UNUSUAL NOISES: The playing of music at such volume that the
activities of another are being disturbed; or shouting, screaming such that the
activities of another are being disturbed; or in any manner creating such
volume of noise not pertaining to the maintenance or utility of the premises
that disturbs the activities of another.
   PRINCIPAL ADULT OCCUPANTS: The owner or lessor or the premises or the person
or persons who maintain the premises and reside at such premises.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for the principal adult occupants of any residence
to allow their premises to be used by any person, whether a resident of the
premises or a guest or visitor; to wilfully, maliciously and intentionally
disturb the peace and quiet of another or of a neighbor or family or religious
congregation or other assembly by loud, unusual noises.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously and
intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of another or of any neighbor,
family, religious congregation or other assembly by indecent behavior or by
offensive or unbecoming conduct to threaten, quarrel, fight, provoke an assault
or battery, or to curse, swear or utter obscene, vulgar, or indecent language
offensive to another in their presence when they are lawfully upon their
property or upon a public place. [720 ILCS 5/26-1a1]
   D.   Engine Idling: No person operating a motor vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight rating of eight thousand pounds (8,000 lbs.) or more, including but not
limited to a refrigerated motor vehicle or trailer, or who owns or leases the
property upon which such motor vehicle or trailer is located, shall cause or
allow that motor vehicle, when it is not in motion, to idle between the hours
off ten o’clock (10:00) p.m. to six o’clock (6:00) a.m. or otherwise cause or
allow the main engine or any refrigeration unit of the motor vehicle to operate
when parked or standing if the motor vehicle is located in a residential area
or within one hundred feet (100') of a residential area, except under the
following circumstances:
      1.   A sound wall exists between the property upon which the motor
vehicle is located and the residential area;
      2.   The motor vehicle is a school bus;
      3.   The motor vehicle is a waste hauling vehicle;
      4.   For the purposes of loading and unloading the vehicle for the
minimum period of time necessary for said loading and unloading, nor shall it
apply to a commercial vehicle enclosed within a building or private property;
      5.   A police, fire, ambulance, public safety, other emergency or law
enforcement motor vehicle or any motor vehicle used in an emergency capacity,
idles while in an emergency or training mode and not for the convenience of the
vehicle operator;
      6.   The motor vehicle is owned or operated by a Federal, State, or local
governmental agency;
      7.   The motor vehicle is owned by an electric utility and is operated
for electricity generation or hydraulic pressure to power equipment necessary
in the restoration, repair, modification, or installation of a utility service;
      8.   The motor vehicle is owned by a public utility and operated to power
equipment necessary in the restoration, repair, modification, or installation
of a utility service;
      9.   The motor vehicle idles while forced to remain motionless because of
on-highway traffic, an official traffic control device or signal, or at the
direction of a law enforcement official;
      10.   The motor vehicle idles when operating defrosters, heaters, air
conditioners, or other equipment solely to prevent a safety or health emergency
and there is no other alternative location that is not within one hundred feet
(100') of a residential area to locate the motor vehicle;
      11.   The motor vehicle idles as part of a government inspection to
verify that all equipment is in good working order, provided idling is required
as part of the inspection;
      12.   When the motor vehicle idles due to mechanical difficulties over
which the operator has no control;
      13.   An armored motor vehicle when a person remains inside the vehicle
to guard the contents, or while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded;
      14.   A bus idles a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes in any sixty (60)-
minute period to maintain passenger comfort while non-driver passengers are on
board;
      15.   The motor vehicle is:
         a.   A bus owned by a public transit authority; and
         b.   Being operated on a designated bus route or on a street or
highway between designated bus routes for the provision of public
transportation.
(1997 Code; amd. Ord. O-23-05; 4-24-2023)
5-2-2-3: GENERAL OFFENSE; AID TO AN OFFENSE:
A. General Offense: It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act or
fail to perform any requirement which is prohibited or required by State law,
insofar as such laws are applicable to Municipal government.
B. Aid To An Offense: It shall be unlawful for any person, in any way or
manner, to aid, abet, counsel, advise or encourage any other person in the
commission of any of the acts mentioned herein or in any manner encourage the
commission of such offense hereby defined. [720 ILCS 5/5-1 et seq.] (1997 Code)
5-2-2-4: ASSEMBLAGES, CROWDS:
A. Unlawful Assemblages: It shall be unlawful to collect, gather or be a member
of any disorderly crowd, or any crowd gathered for any unlawful purposes.
B. Disturbing Assemblages: It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any
lawful assemblage or gathering in the City.
C. Collecting Crowds: It shall be unlawful for any person to collect within the
City a crowd of people to the annoyance of the citizens thereof or to the
annoyance or injury of the police.
D. Public Picnics; Open Air Dances: It shall be unlawful for any person to
rent, use or allow to be used, any yard, ground or grave or other real estate
within the City for public picnics or open air dances to be conducted in such
manner as to be an annoyance or injury to the public.
E. Riot: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse immediately to
disperse upon an order to do so by a police officer, when two (2) or more
persons are assembled for the purpose of disturbing the peace or for the
purpose of committing any unlawful act. [20 ILCS 1815/40, 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2, 720
ILCS 5/25-2] (1997 Code)
5-2-3: OFFENSES CONCERNING MORALS AND DECENCY:
5-2-3-1: INDECENT CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Commit any indecent or immoral act; or to appear in any public place not
properly or decently garbed.
B. Present, exhibit, conduct or take part in any indecent, lascivious or
obscene show, play, theatrical, exhibition or other form of entertainment.
C. Present or exhibit sexual parts of the body in any place where such conduct
may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others for the purpose or intent to
arouse or satisfy sexual desire of the person or to void bodily wastes. [720
ILCS 5/11-9, 5/11-20] (1997 Code)
5-2-3-2: PROFANITY:
It shall be unlawful to use profanity on any street, alley or other public
place in the City. (1997 Code)
5-2-3-3: PROSTITUTION:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to pursue or advertise in
any manner his/her vocation as a prostitute or for any person to advertise the
profession of a prostitute or solicit for a prostitute. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720
ILCS 5/11-14]
B. House Of Prostitution: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or assist
in the keeping of a house of ill fame or prostitution or knowingly to reside
therein or knowingly to rent, lease or permit any person to occupy any house or
room owned, leased or controlled by him/her for such purpose. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-
1, 720 ILCS 5/11-17] (1997 Code)
5-2-3-4: SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF INDECENT LITERATURE, CONTRACEPTIVES OR VIDEOS:
A. Indecent Publications: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or expose
to minors any of the following:
1. Sell or offer for sale, or to circulate, pass from one person to another or
expose in any public place any where in view of a store or place frequented by
the public, any immoral, indecent or obscene publications, printed or written
matter or pictures or other representations.
2. Keep any such publication, printed or written matter, picture or other
representation in any place frequented by or where it may come into the
possession of minors or to disclose or expose any such material to a minor. [65
ILCS 5/11-5-1, 720 ILCS 5/11-20, 720 ILCS 670]
B. Literature Concerning Venereal Diseases:
1. No person shall offer to sell, or give away, distribute or have in his/her
possession, with intent to give away, sell or distribute, any book, pamphlet,
circular, handbill, or advertisement of any kind purporting to treat diseases
known as "venereal diseases", describing or explaining the genital organs,
giving the nature and remedies of diseases peculiar to females, or the nature
or causes of nervous debility, impotency, sterility or barrenness, gonorrhea,
gleet, stricture, syphilis, infection of the prostate gland or the remedies
therefor, or the cause or remedies for abortion or miscarriage, or articles or
means of preventing conception.
2. No person shall sell, give, distribute or have in his/her possession, with
intent to give away, sell or distribute any book, pamphlet, circular, handbill,
advertisement or notice of any kind, giving or purporting to give information
from whom or where medicine or anything whatever may be obtained for the cure,
prevention or treatment of uterine diseases, or diseases peculiar to females,
venereal diseases, or diseases of the genital organs, or nervous debility,
impotency, sterility or barrenness, gonorrhea, gleet, stricture, syphilis,
infection of the prostate gland, abortion or miscarriage, or articles or means
of preventing conception.
C. Sale of Contraceptives: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Vend, sell, distribute or give away in any manner whatsoever any article,
drug or medicinal preparation, manufactured, produced or intended for use, or
which may be used as a contraceptive; provided, however, that the provisions
hereof shall not apply to regularly licensed practitioners of medicine, or drug
stores employing a registered pharmacist, or any licensed retail business
within the City.
2. Vend, sell, give away or distribute any such articles, drugs or medicines
for use as, or possible for use as, contraceptives, by means of machines or
peddling or canvassing within the City. The proprietor of any premises wherein
any such drugs, medicines, or articles are kept, contrary to the provisions of
this subsection shall be presumed to be the vendor or distributor of the
medicines, drugs or articles. (1997 Code)
5-2-4: OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY:
5-2-4-1: DAMAGE OR INJURY TO PROPERTY:
A. Injury To Public Property: It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface
or interfere with any property belonging to the City without proper authority
from the Council.
B. Damage To City Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully,
deliberately or maliciously damage, deface, or in any way render inoperative,
any property owned or under the control and operation of the City. The word
"property" as used hereinabove means both real and personal property, including
any locks, fences, gates, chains, padlocks or other devices or fixtures
whatsoever that may be installed upon or used in connection with property owned
or operated by the City.
C. Malicious Injury To Property: It shall be unlawful for any person to
wilfully and maliciously injure, deface, mutilate, remove, pull down, break or
in any manner interfere with or molest or secrete or destroy any real or
personal property belonging to or under the control of any person or of the
City. [720 ILCS 5/21-1] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-2: OBSTRUCTION OF ANY SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or to leave any objects of any
nature upon a sidewalk in the city or otherwise obstruct a sidewalk. [65 ILCS
5/11-80-13] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-3: SNOW REMOVAL ON SIDEWALKS:
It shall be the duty of the owner or resident of premises adjoining any
sidewalk in the city to remove any snow or ice from each sidewalk within twenty
four (24) hours after accumulation of such snow or ice. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-13]
(1997 Code)
5-2-4-4: DEPOSITS OF REFUSE ON PUBLIC WAYS:
A. Deposits On Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Throw or deposit any glass, tacks, nails or other similar articles on any
street, alley or sidewalk or other public place in the city.
2. Deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public thoroughfare any
material or substance injurious to person or property.
3. Dump or deposit or cause to be dumped or deposited any grass, leaves,
branches, or any other things in the roadway or gutter of any public street in
the city.
B. Windblown Refuse: It shall be unlawful to deposit or leave any refuse or
material in such a place or condition that it can be blown by the wind so as to
be scattered or cause clouds of dust or particles; and it shall be unlawful to
permit the escape of soot, ashes or other solid products or results of
combustion so as to be windblown or scattered. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-10, 605 ILCS 5/
9-121, 625 ILCS 5/11-1413] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-5: FIRES; BURNING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Burning Leaves, Refuse, Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Burn leaves, tree branches, paper excelsior or other materials on Sunday,
Monday, Wednesday and Friday. (Ord. 0-20-04, 12-27-2004)
2. Burn any garbage, or other organic refuse, outside of any building at any
time in the city.
3. Burn paper, excelsior or other material which may be blown about by the wind
anywhere in the city unless the same is burned in a stove, fireplace or furnace
or in an incinerator with a screen sufficiently fine to prevent the escape of
ignited particles.
4. Burn leaves, tree branches, paper, excelsior or other materials except
between the hours of sunrise and sunset on the days burning is permitted.
5. Start a fire that will not be constantly attended until it is completely
extinguished. Fire control and extinguishing equipment must be available to the
person attending the fire.
6. Burn green grass and/or evergreen clippings.
B. Storage Of Combustible Refuse: It shall be unlawful to store or permit the
storage of combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard or to
store or throw away any refuse of any kind in an alley, street, or public way
in the city. [65 ILCS 5/11-8-4, 5/11-8-5]
C. Lighting Bonfires: It shall be unlawful to build or light any bonfire close
to any building or structure, or on any asphalt street or sidewalk pavement.
[65 ILCS 5/11-80-2, 5/11-80-13] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-6: KEEPING JUNK RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified as junk
adjacent to or in close proximity to any schoolhouse, church, public parks,
public grounds, business buildings or residences without first providing proper
and tight buildings for the storage of the same. (1997 Code)
B. Keep a yard cluttered with abandoned junk or unused furniture, any white
goods or appliances, car parts or junk piles, thereby creating an unsightly
nuisance in the neighborhood. (Ord. 98-09, 10-26-1998)
5-2-4-7: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take down any fence or to let down any
bars or to open any gate in or on the property of another without the consent
of the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof. [720 ILCS 5/21-3] (1997
Code)
5-2-4-8: LETTING PREMISES FOR UNLAWFUL PURPOSE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, use or allow to be used any
building or property owned by such person for any purpose whereby riotous or
disorderly persons are gathered. (1997 Code)
5-2-4-9: BARBED WIRE, ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or
any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed wire
as a guard to any parking lot, stairway, entrance to a building or parcel of
land. [65 ILCS 5/11-30-1] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-10: EXPECTORATING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any sidewalk or
upon the floor of any public building or room used for public assemblies. [65
ILCS 5/11-80-10] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-11: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS:
It shall be unlawful to abandon any refrigerator, freezer or icebox or other
device having an automatic lock on a compartment large enough to enclose a
human being in any place accessible to children without first removing the
doors of such refrigerator, freezer or icebox. [720 ILCS 505/1] (1997 Code)
5-2-4-12: PLACEMENT OF OBJECTS ABOVE STREETS:
A. Scaffolds: Any scaffold or ladder placed in such a way that they overhang or
could fall onto any public street, alley or other public place in the City
shall be firmly constructed and safeguarded; and it shall be unlawful to place
or leave any tools or articles on any such place in such a manner that the same
could fall onto any such street, sidewalk, alley or other public place from a
height greater than four feet (4'). [740 ILCS 150/1]
B. Articles On Window Sills: It shall be unlawful for any person to place or
keep on any window sill, porch or other projection above the first story of any
building abutting on any sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling
upon any person on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless said article
be securely fastened or protected by screens. (1997 Code)
5-2-4-13: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES IN STREETS:
A. Throwing Missiles: It shall be unlawful to cast, throw, or propel any
missile on any street, alley or other public place.
B. Playing Ball, Other Games: It shall be unlawful for any person:
1. To play ball or throw any ball to and fro upon any public thoroughfare in
the City.
2. To play any games upon any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place
where such games cause unnecessary noise or interfere with traffic or
pedestrians. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-9]
C. Water Flowing Upon Streets: It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any
water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-2] (1997
Code)
5-2-5: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES:
5-2-5-1: ADVERTISING, BILL POSTING RESTRICTIONS:
A. Unlawful Advertising; Injure Lawful Advertisements: It shall be unlawful to
advertise any unlawful business or article in the City, and it shall be
unlawful to injure or deface any lawful advertisement or notice. [720 ILCS 295/
1]
B. Advertising Matter In Motor Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person,
whether a licensed bill poster or not, to distribute handbills, circulars,
dodgers, pamphlets, cards, pictures or any advertising matter of any kind
whatsoever, by placing the same in or upon any motor vehicle standing or parked
in the public streets of the City.
C. Posting Bills: It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills or
advertisements on any public property without the authority of the City; and it
shall be unlawful to post any bill or advertisement on any property without the
written consent of the owner thereof. [65 ILCS 5/11-80-14] (1997 Code)
5-2-5-2: BUSINESSES; PROHIBITED ACTS:
A. Junked Vehicles; Junk Shops Prohibited:
1. Junked Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership,
corporation or other business entity to carry on any business of junking
vehicles in the city. [65 ILCS 5/11-42-3]
2. Junk Shops: It shall be unlawful to operate or carry on the business of
junking, junk dealing, or to keep any junk shop, store or place for the
purchase or sale of junk, rags, old rope, paper or bagging, old iron, brass,
copper, or empty bottles. [65 ILCS 5/11-42-3]
B. Unwholesome Business: It shall be unlawful to establish or conduct any
packing plant, slaughterhouse, rendery, tallow chandlery, soap factory, glue
factory, tannery, or any offensive or unwholesome business within the city or
within one mile of the limits thereof. [65 ILCS 5/11-42-7, 5/11-42-9, 5/11-42-
10; 740 ILCS 55/221 subdivisions 8 and 17]
C. Picketing: It shall be unlawful for any person, not an employee, past,
present or expectant, of the owner or proprietor of the business attempted to
be picketed and who has no personal dispute with the owner or proprietor
concerning terms and conditions of employment to stand, sit or walk on any
street or sidewalk in the city with the intent and purpose of dissuading or
discouraging any person from patronizing the place of business. (1997 Code)
5-2-5-3: PARKING OF CAMPERS; OWNERSHIP:
It shall be unlawful to park campers, trailers, etc., unless the person in
possession of said camper or trailer can show proper title, ownership or
registration of such camper or trailer. (1997 Code)
5-2-5-4: HITCHHIKING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or loiter upon any sidewalk,
street, avenue, alley or public highway or grounds within the limits of the
city for the purpose of "thumbing", requesting, asking, or soliciting a ride
from the operator of any motor vehicle. [625 ILCS 5/11-1006] (1997 Code)
5-2-5-5: WEAPONS OFFENSES:
A. Discharge: It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm or air gun, BB gun,
bow and arrow, or any toy gun projecting lead or any missiles excepting in a
regularly established shooting gallery; provided, that this subsection shall
not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm
in the performance of his/her duty. [720 ILCS 535/3]
B. Concealed: It shall be unlawful to carry any concealed weapon in the city in
violation of the laws of this state.
C. Furnishing To Prisoners: It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish or
attempt to furnish or take into jail or to deliver or attempt to deliver to any
prisoner therein confined or in the custody of any officer, any weapon, tool,
intoxicating liquors, drug or other article without the consent of the officer
in charge. [720 ILCS 5/31-6] (1997 Code)
5-2-5-6: LOUDSPEAKERS OR SOUND TRUCKS:
It shall be unlawful to play, operate, or use any device known as a sound
truck, loudspeaker or sound amplifier, radio or phonograph, tape deck or CD
player, with loudspeaker or sound amplifier or any instrument of any kind or
character which emits loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any
vehicle unless such person is in charge of such vehicle shall have first
applied to and received permission from the chief of police to operate any such
vehicle so equipped. [65 ILCS 5/11-5-2] (1997 Code)
5-2-5-7: INJURY TO BIRDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or wound, or attempt to kill or
wound, by use of a firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow or otherwise, any bird
other than English sparrows, or to take the eggs or young of any bird. (1997
Code)
5-2-5-8: JAYWALKING:
"Jaywalking" is defined as proceeding diagonally across a street intersection,
or crossing a street between intersections, or at a place other than a
crosswalk. It shall be unlawful to jaywalk across Route 84 in the city of
Colona, Illinois within the boundaries designated as school zones by existing
signs for such purposes. Enforcement of this section shall be strictly applied
from thirty (30) minutes before the school day commences and for thirty (30)
minutes after school begins, and for thirty (30) minutes prior to the end of
the school day and for thirty (30) minutes after school shall have been
dismissed. (Ord. 0-22-10, 12-27-2010)
5-2-6: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 1
:
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 600/2, 635.
5-2-6-1: DEFINITION:
   A.   Definition: As used in this section, the following term shall have the
meaning ascribed to it in this subsection:
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which
are used or intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing.,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 600/1 et seq, The state criminal penalty for possession of drug
paraphernalia was amended to exclude cannabis paraphernalia from the offense.
As such, the penalty for possession of drug paraphernalia now applies only to
paraphernalia used or intended to be used with controlled substances other than
cannabis. It includes but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits used, intended for use in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;
      2.   Isomerization devices used or intended for use in increasing the
potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      3.   Testing equipment used or intended for use in identifying or in
analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances;
      4.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used or intended for use, in cutting controlled
substances;
      5.   Separation gins and sifters used or intended for use in removing
twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana;
      6.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used or intended for
use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;
      7.   Objects used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the
human body, such as:
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal
bowls;
         b.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         c.   Water pipes;
         d.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         e.   Roach clips; meaning paper clips, alligator clips, hairpins, or
other similar objects that have been altered so that there exists a handle
attached to said object at an angle between forty five degrees (45°) and one
hundred thirty five degrees (135°) so that the alteration would facilitate a
person's hold of burning materials such as a marijuana cigarette that has
become too small or too short to be held by the fingers and so that the
alteration prohibits the use of said object for its normal function;
         f.   Cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
         g.   Chamber pipes;
         h.   Carburetor pipes;
         i.   Electric pipes;
         j.   Air-driven pipes;
         k.   Chillums;
         l.   Bongs;
         m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   B.   Additional Considerations: In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all
other logically relevant factors, the following:
      1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      2.   Prior convictions, it any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      3.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation, by the object's owner or person in control of the object, of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq.;
      4.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances owned by the
object's owner or person in control of the object;
      5.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
      6.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he/she knows
intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq.; the innocence of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq., shall not prevent a
finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug
paraphernalia;
      7.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      8.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      9.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      10.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      11.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; and
      12.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(1997 Code; amd. Ord. O-20-04, 1-27-2020)
5-2-6-2: POSSESSION:
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq. (1997 Code)
5-2-6-3: MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY:
It is unlawful for any person to deliver or possess with intent to deliver drug
paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., and 570/100 et seq. (1997 Code)
5-2-6-4: ADVERTISEMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or
other publication offered for sale within the City, any advertisement, knowing
that the purpose of the advertisement is to promote the sale within the City of
objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. (1997 Code)
5-2-6-5: PENALTY:
A. Individual: Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells, or
delivers for any commercial consideration any item which that person knows, or
under all of the circumstances reasonably should have known, to be drug
paraphernalia, commits a business offense shall be subject to penalty as
provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Business: Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of
drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for
any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance and the City
Attorney may commence an action in the Circuit Court, in the name of the People
of the City of Colona, to abate a public nuisance as described in this
subsection B, and request that the Court enter: 1) temporary and permanent
restraining orders to enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance, and
2) preliminary and permanent injunctions restraining any defendant from
removing or interfering with any property used in connection with the public
nuisance.
C. Forfeiture: All drug paraphernalia is subject to forfeiture.
D. Seizure: Property subject to forfeiture under this Section may be seized by
any peace officer and may be made without process:
1. If there is probable cause to believe that the property is directly
dangerous to health or safety and existing circumstances do not allow
reasonable time for the office to obtain lawful process; or
2. In accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, as
amended.
The presence of items which are deemed violative of this Chapter or are
otherwise subject to its forfeiture provisions in an inventory shall not
subject the entire inventory to seizure or forfeiture. (1997 Code)
5-2-7: DRUGS:
   A.   Cannabis: It shall be unlawful to use, or possess cannabis in an
unlawful manner. A person violates this act when he or she uses (smokes,
ingests, vapes, possesses) cannabis, cannabis concentrate, or cannabis product
in any of the following circumstances:
      1.   Using Cannabis
         a.   In any “public place,” where the person can be “reasonably
expected to be observed by others”;
         b.   In any motor vehicle;
         c.   On school grounds, or within a school bus, unless the person has
an Illinois medical cannabis card;
         d.   In a correctional facility;
         e.   In a residence used to provide licensed child care;
         f.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child-care or other similar social service care on the premises;
         g.   Knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone under 21 years of
age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act;
      2.   Cannabis Possession
         a.   In a school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program
Act;
         b.   On school grounds, or within a school bus, unless the person has
an Illinois medical cannabis card;
         c.   In a correctional facility;
         d.   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide
licensed child-care or other similar social service care on the premises;
         e.   Persons 18-20 years old are not allowed to possess any amount of
cannabis;
         f.   Juveniles under 18 are subject only to civil law violations for
simple possession of any amount of cannabis, but cannot be cited with a
municipal violation for use or possession;
         g.   A driver from possessing cannabis within any area of a motor
vehicle upon a highway, unless the cannabis is in a container that is:
            (1)   Sealed
            (2)   Odor-proof, and
            (3)   Child-resistant
         h.   A passenger from possessing cannabis within the passenger area of
a motor vehicle upon a highway, unless the cannabis is in a container that is:
            (1)   Sealed
            (2)   Odor-proof, and
            (3)   Child-resistant
         i.   Juveniles under 18 are subject only to civil law violations for
simple possession of any amount of cannabis, but cannot be cited with a
municipal violation for use or possession;
      3.   It shall be unlawful to possess 0 - 10 grams of cannabis in
violation of state law, or city ordinance, [0-7.5 grams for out of state
residents. ($250.00 fine).
      2.   It shall be unlawful to possess 10-30 grams of cannabis in violation
of State law, city ordinance, [7.5 - 15 grams for out of state residents].
($500.00 fine).
      3.   It shall be unlawful to possess more than 30 grams of cannabis in
violation of state law, city ordinance, [15 grams for out of state residents].
($750 fine).
      4.   It shall be unlawful to possess more than 500 mg of THC - infused
products, [250 for out of state residents]. ($500 fine).
      5.   It shall be unlawful to possess more than 5 grams of cannabis
concentrate, [2.5 grams for out of state residents]. ($500 fine).
      6.   It shall be unlawful to use cannabis in violation of any conditions
listed above. ($250 fine).
(Ord. 98-05, 7-13-1998; amd. Ord. O-20-05, 1-27-2020)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Curfew
5-3-2: Cigarette Or Tobacco Sales
5-3-3: Delivery Of Alcohol To Minors
5-3-1: CURFEW 1
:
A. Age And Hour Restrictions: It is hereby declared unlawful for a person less
than seventeen (17) years of age to be present at or upon any public assembly,
building, place, street or highway at the following times unless accompanied
and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or other responsible companion at
least eighteen (18) years of age and approved by a parent or legal guardian or
unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of Illinois authorize
a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to perform:
1. Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M. Friday and Saturday.
2. Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction,
be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
B. Parent, Guardian Responsible: It is hereby declared unlawful for a parent,
legal guardian or other person to knowingly permit a person in his or her
custody or control to violate any provision of subsection A of this section.
Any parent, legal guardian or other person violating the provision of
subsection A of this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-1-5.
5-3-2: CIGARETTE OR TOBACCO SALES 1
:
   A.   Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or give
away, directly or indirectly, to any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
years any cigarettes, tobacco, electronic cigarettes, vaping devices,
alternative nicotine devices, or any compounds of tobacco used in filling up or
making up of a cigarette or to give or sell any cigarette papers to minors.
   B.   Possession By Minors: It shall be unlawful by anyone under the age of
twenty-one (21) years to use or possess tobacco, electronic cigarettes, vaping
devices, alternative nicotine, or any compounds of tobacco products within the
city limits.
(1997 Code; amd. Ord. O-19-12, 11-11-2019; Ord. O-20-02, 1-27-2020)
 
Notes
1 2. 720 ILCS 675, 680, 685/4(a).
5-3-3: DELIVERY OF ALCOHOL TO MINORS:
A. It shall be illegal and a violation of Colona ordinance for any person or
business to deliver alcohol to a minor.
B. If a business within the city of Colona is accused or prosecuted by the
state liquor commission or through a citation from the Colona police department
for the offense of delivery of alcohol to a minor, such business shall be
required to appear before the Colona liquor commission for an administrative
hearing on such charges.
C. Any hearing before the city of Colona liquor commission to be had in
accordance with subsection B of this section is to proceed prior to any
administrative hearing which is to be done by the city of Colona liquor
commission.
D. If the Colona administrative hearing finds that alcohol has been delivered
to a minor, the business or person who is found guilty shall be subject to a
fine being imposed against such person or business.
E. Penalty for a finding of violation of this section shall carry a fine to be
imposed of a minimum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) with a maximum of two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) which shall be the limits for a first
time offense. Any hearing involving a second offense for violation of this
section shall carry a fine which will be at the reasonable discretion of the
state liquor commission. (Ord. 0-21-12, 12-10-2012)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL 1
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5/1.
ARTICLE A. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
5-4A-1: Animal Control Officer
5-4A-2: Funds
5-4A-3: Use Of Local Veterinarian
5-4A-1: ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER:
A. Position Created: The Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the consent of the City Council.
B. Badge Of Office: While on duty, the Animal Control Officer shall wear a star
engraved "Animal Control Officer" as an emblem of his/her authority.
C. Residency: The Animal Control Officer shall reside within the City limits or
within ten (10) miles of any City boundary line during the term of employment.
D. Bond: The Animal Control Officer shall be bonded 1
.
E. Compensation: The salary of the Animal Control Officer shall be determined
from time to time by a majority vote of the Mayor and City Council.
F. Powers And Duties:
1. Supervision Of Animal Pound And Other Facilities: The Animal Control Officer
shall have the care, custody, control, and supervision of the animal shelter of
the City and of animals confined and impounded, and shall have the care,
custody, and control of all trucks and equipment used by the Animal Control
Officer or his/her assistants for the impounding of animals.
2. Remittance Of Fees: The Animal Control Officer shall deliver all fees and
funds collected by the Animal Control Officer or his/her assistants to the City
Clerk at the end of each and every workday; excepting Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays.
3. Impoundment Of Animals; Records: The Animal Control Officer shall impound,
or cause to be impounded, and shall dispose of according to the provisions of
this Chapter, all animals running at large within the City and shall keep a
record of every animal so impounded, describing the kind of animal, the breed,
color, and sex, together with the time and place the animal was captured or
received and the final disposition made of each animal, together with such
other information as may come to his/her attention.
4. Reporting: The Animal Control officer shall furnish a report to the City
Council each month concerning the activities and financial status of the animal
control program. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. See Section
  1-7-1 of this Code.
5-4A-2: FUNDS:
A. Funds Collected: All redemption fees, fines and license fees collected in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be used exclusively for
animal control purposes, such as operations, salaries and for construction and
maintenance of facilities necessary for provisions of this Chapter.
B. Appropriation Of Funds: The City Council shall annually appropriate funds
for the purpose of sustaining animal control activities. (1997 Code)
5-4A-3: USE OF LOCAL VETERINARIAN:
The services of a local or nearby veterinarian may be sought for the medical
care and/or necessary humane destruction of animals specified in this Chapter
and impounded in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The
veterinarian shall be licensed in and by the State. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL PROTECTION AND CONTROL
ARTICLE B.  ANIMALS 1
SECTION:
5-4B-1: Running At Large Prohibited
5-4B-2: Keeping Certain Animals Prohibited
5-4B-3: Animal Yards
5-4B-4: Dangerous Animals
5-4B-5: Biting Animals
5-4B-6: Diseased Animals
5-4B-7: Cruelty To Animals
5-4B-8: Animal Fights
5-4B-9: Indecent Exhibition
5-4B-10: Trapping
5-4B-11: Animals Owned By Nonresidents; Exception
5-4B-12: Unclaimed Animals
5-4B-13: Animal Wastes
5-4B-14: Burial Of Dead Animals
5-4B-15: Animals In Festival Areas
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9, 510 ILCS 5/1.
5-4B-1: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to
run at large within the City. Exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae
naturae in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit
from the Chief of Police. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall
be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-2: KEEPING CERTAIN ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
A. Disturbing The Peace: It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal
which disturbs the peace by loud or unusual noises 1
at any time.
B. Prohibited Animals: No person shall keep any cattle, sheep, goats, horses,
mules, swine including potbellied pigs, or domestic fowl of the species of
geese, ducks, turkeys, guinea hens, or chickens at any place or upon any
premises in the City, nor shall any such animals be permitted to run at large
within the City.
C. Beekeeping: No person shall keep or maintain any bees, beehives, or apiaries
within the City. (1997 Code)
D. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
 
Notes
1 2. "Loud and unusual noises" defined at section
  5-2-2-2 of this title.
5-4B-3: ANIMAL YARDS:
A. Definition: As used in this section, the following words and terms shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection:
    POULTRY OR ANIMAL YARD: Includes every enclosure, shed or structure used to
house two (2) or more rabbits, or other domestic animals.
B. Location: It shall be unlawful to maintain in the City any animal within
twenty five feet (25') of any building used for residence purposes by anyone
other than the one maintaining such animal yard or his/her immediate family, or
within twenty five feet (25') of any public way, other than an alley, or within
one hundred feet (100') of any church or school building.
C. Sanitary Condition: Every person maintaining an animal yard shall keep the
same clean and sanitary, and free from all refuse. Such yards shall be
thoroughly swept at least once every twenty four (24) hours, and it shall be
unlawful to permit any decaying food or other refuse of any kind to remain in
such yard. Refuse from such yards shall, when swept up or collected, be kept in
airtight containers until disposed of in accordance with this Code, and it
shall be unlawful to permit any such refuse to remain recovered.
D. Enclosure Of Yard: Every animal yard shall be adequately enclosed so as to
be impenetrable against rats or other rodents. The presence of any rats in the
animal yard shall be prima facie evidence that such yard is maintained in
violation of the provisions of this section.
E. Limitation Of Number Of Domestic Animals Other Than Dogs And Cats: No person
shall harbor or keep over six (6) animals. (1997 Code)
F. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-4: DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
A. Prohibited: No person shall permit any dangerous animal to run at large nor
shall any person lead such an animal with a chain or rope or other appliance,
whether the animal is muzzled or unmuzzled, in any street, avenue, lane or
highway or public place or building within the City, except for public
exhibition authorized by the Chief of Police.
B. Nuisance Declared: In addition to any other remedies, and except as
expressly authorized in the City by the City Council, dangerous animals are
declared to be nuisances.
C. Disposition: If any dangerous, fierce or vicious animal cannot safely be
taken up and impounded, the animal may be slain by any police officer or animal
control officer of the City. Any member of the Police Department, or any other
person in the City, is hereby authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any
kind which threatens the safety of any person or property. However, in all
cases where any animal so slain has bitten any person or caused an abrasion of
the skin of a person, it shall be the duty of the police officer slaying the
animal to immediately deliver the carcass and the head of the animal to the
State Laboratory. Police officers shall not shoot a rabies suspect in the head.
(1997 Code)
D. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-5: BITING ANIMALS:
A. Report Of Animal Bites: All bites or attacks on human beings by any animal
within the City shall be immediately reported to the Chief of Police. In the
event of a bite by an animal, a detailed report shall be made out by the
receiving officer, including the complainant's name, address and phone number;
the name and address of the owner of the animal; a description and location of
the wound, and the name of the doctor treating the wound.
B. Administrative Search Warrant: In the event that the owner of any animal
which has bitten a human refuses to turn the animal over to the animal control
officer, the animal control officer may obtain an administrative search warrant
to enter the premises of the owner and take possession of the animal. (1997
Code)
C. Penalty: Any person owning or keeping an animal that, without provocation or
justification, bites or attacks a human being within the City shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-6: DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. Exposure: No domestic animal infected with a contagious or infectious
disease shall be allowed to run at large or to be exposed in any public place
whereby the health of man or beast may be affected.
B. Shipping Or Removal From Premises: Such diseased animal shall not be shipped
or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision
of the Chief of Police or proper health official. (1997 Code)
C. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-7: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
No person shall be cruel to any animal. Cruelty to an animal shall consist of
one of the following acts:
A. By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating, or cruelly killing any animal or causing or knowingly
allowing the same to be done.
B. By unnecessary failing to provide any animal in his/her charge or custody as
owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shelter and air.
C. By abandoning any animal in a pound, veterinary clinic, or on the premises
of another. (1997 Code)
Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-8: ANIMAL FIGHTS:
No person shall instigate, cause or procure any dog fight, cock fight, or any
public or private fighting of animals within the City. Anyone found guilty of
violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-9: INDECENT EXHIBITION:
No person shall in any manner instigate, cause, or procure or assist in any
indecent or immoral show or exhibition of any animal within the limits of the
City. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-10: TRAPPING:
No person shall use any type of leg-hold animal trap or other animal trap that
could cause cruelty to animals within the City limits without the written
approval, guidance and direction of the Health and Sanitation Department.
Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-11: ANIMALS OWNED BY NONRESIDENTS; EXCEPTION:
A. Prohibited: No person who is not a resident of the City is permitted to keep
any animal in the City. This prohibition shall not apply to persons remaining
in the City for thirty (30) days or less or who are passing through the City
but shall apply to any nonresident who habitually allows his/her animal to run
at large within the City.
B. Disposition: Any animal found within the City which is not owned by a
resident of the City or by a person passing through or temporarily in the City
shall be impounded by the animal control officer and disposed of as provided in
this chapter for dogs or cats not wearing a current inoculation tag.
C. Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to veterinary
clinics, institutions and licensed dealers. (1997 Code)
D. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-12: UNCLAIMED ANIMALS:
A. Unlicensed, Uninoculated Animals:
1. Whenever any reputable institution of learning, hospital, research
laboratory, or their allied institutes which have been duly licensed by the
State in which the institution, hospital, laboratory or institute is located,
and which is within a reasonable distance of the City makes application to the
animal control officer with consent of proper authority for permission to use
humanely, unclaimed and impounded animals for the good of mankind and the
increase of knowledge relating to the cause, prevention, and control and cure
of disease, the animal control officer with consent of proper authority on
being satisfied that the animals will be so used, shall from time to time
release such acceptable unclaimed, impounded animals for the purposes
specified.
2. In order to give the owner/keeper of impounded animals time within which to
reclaim them, no animal shall be surrendered pursuant to subsection A1 of this
section until such animal has been impounded for a period of at least seven (7)
days.
B. Licensed, Inoculated Animals: No impounded animal wearing an unexpired
rabies inoculation tag or a County license tag shall be released for the
purposes of medical research. (1997 Code)
C. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-13: ANIMAL WASTES:
A. Control Required: No person owning, harboring, keeping or controlling any
dog or other domestic animal or pet shall cause, suffer or allow such animal to
soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park, or any place where people
congregate or walk or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private
property without permission of the owner of said property. The restriction in
this section shall not apply to public property when the owner or person in
control of such animal complies with the following conditions:
1. The person who so curbs such animal shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such animal by any sanitary method.
2. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall be disposed
of by the person owning, harboring, keeping, or controlling any animal curbed
in accordance with the provisions of this section in a sanitary manner approved
by the local health authority.
B. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
5-4B-14: BURIAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
No owner or keeper of any animal which may die within the City shall leave the
animal unburied for more than twelve (12) hours after its death, or shall
anyone bring and leave the carcass of any dead animal within the City. Anyone
found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4B-15: ANIMALS IN FESTIVAL AREAS:
A. It shall be unlawful for anyone to have present a dog, cat, or other animal
at any festival area except pursuant to a permit in the City.
B. This section shall not apply to:
1. Seeing eye dogs.
2. Horses or dogs used by law enforcement agencies in performance of their law
enforcement duties.
3. Animals in a parade within the City.
4. Carnival vendors who bring in animals as part of their carnival and register
the animals and obtain a permit from the City Clerk. Said animals allowed by
permit in this section may only be allowed in areas designated by the Colona
Police Chief or his designee.
C. "Festival area" is defined as that area providing or set up to provide
entertainment, food, beverages, contests, carnival midways, or any area within
fifty feet (50') of the foregoing areas.
D. The "no contest" fine shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) pursuant to the
no contest ordinance.
E. The fine for violating this section shall be up to five hundred dollars
($500.00). (Ord. 99-08, 8-9-1999)
ARTICLE C.  DOGS AND CATS 1
SECTION:
5-4C-1: Running At Large Prohibited
5-4C-2: License Required
5-4C-3: License Tags, Collar Required
5-4C-4: Fees
5-4C-5: Limitation On Number
5-4C-6: Inoculation
5-4C-7: Impoundment; Redemption
5-4C-8: Injured Animals
5-4C-9: Animals In Estrus
5-4C-10: Disturbing The Peace
5-4C-11: Animal Bites
5-4C-12: Vicious Animals
5-4C-12-1: Definitions
5-4C-12-2: Determined Dangerous
5-4C-12-3: Licensing
5-4C-12-4: Confinement
5-4C-12-5: Reporting Requirements Of Licensee
5-4C-12-6: Sign Required
5-4C-12-7: Fighting Prohibited
5-4C-12-8: Impoundment
5-4C-12-9: Revocation Of License
5-4C-12-10: Exceptions
5-4C-12-11: Penalty
5-4C-13: Procedure For Suspected Rabies
5-4C-14: Destroying Animals
5-4C-15: Monthly Report
5-4C-16: Kenneling Dogs In Front Yards
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-9; 510 ILCS 5/1.
5-4C-1: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
A. Definition: "Owner" or "keeper" as used herein shall mean any person having
a right of property in a dog or cat or who keeps or harbors a dog or cat or who
has a dog or cat in his or her care or acts as a custodian of a dog or cat or
who knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises occupied
by him or her.
B. Animals At Large:
1. Prohibited: No dog or cat shall be permitted or allowed to run at large
within the city and shall be confined at all times on the owner's or keeper's
premises, or on a leash or on the owner's or keeper's premises under the
control of a person physically able to control such dog or cat.
2. Declared Nuisance: If found running at large, the dog or cat is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be taken up and impounded by the
animal control officer or member of the police department in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
3. Subject To Impoundment: Every dog or cat running at large within the city is
subject to impoundment by the animal control officer.
4. Prima Facie Evidence: When any dog or cat shall be found running at large in
violation of the provisions herein, it shall be prima facie evidence that the
owner or keeper of said dog or cat allowed and permitted the animal to run at
large.
C. Penalty: Any person owning or keeping and permitting any dog or cat to run
at large and not keeping such animal confined at all times, except as otherwise
provided herein, on the owner's or keeper's premises shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1997 Code)
5-4C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A. Purchase Required: No dog or cat shall be permitted to be or remain in the
city without being licensed as herein provided.
B. Annual Registration; Tag: Every owner of or person who keeps or harbors a
dog or cat within the limits of the city shall report to the clerk annually,
within thirty (30) days after May 1 each year, his/her name and address, and
shall give the name, breed, month of birth, color and sex of each and every dog
or cat owned, kept and harbored by such person and shall pay such license fee
as required in section
5-4C-4 of this article for male or female dogs or cats owned, kept or harbored,
and shall cause such dogs or cats to be registered in the Office of the City
Clerk or animal control officer, who shall furnish the person paying the
license therefor with the metal tag or check as hereinafter provided.
C. Rabies Certificate: Every owner or person who harbors or keeps a dog or cat
within the limits of the City shall, before securing registration tags, exhibit
to the Clerk or animal control officer a current County rabies certificate.
D. Penalty: Any person owning a dog or cat shall purchase a license as herein
provided or be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
5-4C-3: LICENSE TAGS, COLLAR REQUIRED:
A. Registry: The City Clerk or animal control officer shall keep a complete
registry in a book kept for that purpose, of all licensed dogs or cats
describing the same by name, breed, color and sex, and shall also enter the
name and address of the owner or keeper as given, and the number of the City
license, tag or check.
B. Tags Provided By City: The City Clerk or animal control officer shall also
provide each and every year, such number of metal tags or checks as may be
necessary, having stamped thereon the year for which the license is issued, the
letters "C.A.T.", and also the number of the tag or check, and it shall be the
duty of the City Clerk or animal control officer to deliver one of such tags or
check numbered to correspond with the registry of the animal, to the person
having paid the license tax upon any such animal. The owner of each animal
being of the age of four (4) months or over must have a tag for such animal.
C. Collar Required: Every dog or cat over the age of four (4) months shall be
provided by its owner or keeper with a collar to which shall be securely
attached and kept the license registration tag furnished by the City Clerk or
animal control officer as hereinabove provided.
D. Removal Of Collars, Tags Or Leashes: No person, other than the animal
control officer, a police officer, or an owner shall remove the collar,
inoculation tag or leash from any dog or cat within the City without the
consent of the owner or keeper of the dog or cat. Any such removal shall
subject the dog or cat to impoundment. (1997 Code)
E. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-4: FEES:
A. License Fee: An annual license fee for dogs and cats shall be established by
the City Council as may be necessary.
B. Violation Fees:
1. Failure To License Or Display License: The animal control officer shall
issue to the owner or keeper of any unlicensed dog or cat or the owner of any
dog or cat failing to display the license tag a notice of ordinance violation.
2. Notice Of Ordinance Violation: A person receiving a notice of ordinance
violation may, at his/her discretion, pay to the animal control officer within
seven (7) working days a sum established by the administrative fee schedule in
subsection C of this section.
3. Failure To Comply: In the event no payment is received within the time
period prescribed by the animal control officer, a formal Municipal ordinance
violation complaint shall be initiated in the Circuit Court.
C. Administrative Fee Schedule: The animal control officer is authorized to
accept in full satisfaction of any notice of ordinance violation the payment of
the following administrative fees:
1. Twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first offense and forty dollars ($40.00) for
each offense thereafter.
2. Proof of payment of fees imposed by section
5-4C-7 of this article.
3. The penalty for violating this section shall be a fine of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for the first offense and a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) for
each offense thereafter. (1997 Code)
5-4C-5: LIMITATION ON NUMBER:
A. Number Allowed At Residence: No person in charge of a residence shall keep,
harbor or control more than four (4) dogs, four (4) cats, or a combination of
four (4) at his/her residence. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 08-05, 6-13-2005)
B. Unoccupied Residence: It shall be illegal and improper for any resident or
nonresident of the City of Colona to house or keep animals or pets of any
nature at a residence which is unoccupied. (Ord. 08-05, 6-13-2005)
C. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-6: INOCULATION:
A. Inoculation Required: Each owner or keeper of any dog or cat within the City
shall cause the dog or cat to be inoculated by a licensed veterinarian and
shall maintain a current rabies inoculation for such dog or cat at all times.
Current status shall be determined by the rules and standards of the State
Department of Agriculture and by the United States Department of Agriculture.
B. Inoculation Tag: The animal control officer shall be the official
responsible for and charged with the duty of issuing the inoculation tag
evidencing the administration of a valid rabies inoculation required by
subsection A of this section.
C. Attachment To Collar: Each dog or cat kept within the City shall be provided
by its owner or keeper with a good and substantial collar, and shall cause to
be attached in a secure manner a current inoculation tag. The owner or keeper
shall at all times cause the dog or cat to wear the collar with inoculation tag
attached.
D. Removal Of Tag: Any dog or cat found within the City, but off of the
premises occupied by the owner of the dog or cat and not wearing a collar with
inoculation tag attached as required under this section shall be impounded and
disposed of as provided in this chapter. (1997 Code)
E. Penalty: Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-7: IMPOUNDMENT; REDEMPTION:
A. Impounding: It shall be the duty of the animal control officer or the
officers of the Police Department to take up and impound, in such place as
shall be provided by the City Council for that purpose to be known as the
"animal pound", any dog or cat running at large within the City in violation of
section
5-4C-1 of this article.
B. Capture, Transporting:
1. Method Of Capture: The animal control officer and his/her assistants shall
be allowed the use of leashes, nets and tranquilizer guns as means of taking up
and impounding animals specified in this chapter. The use of a tranquilizer gun
shall be allowed only after an authorized individual has been properly
instructed in its use by a qualified instructor previously approved by a
majority vote of the City Council.
2. Transporting: The Animal Control Department shall provide means of
transporting impounded animals specified in this article from place of capture
to the pound. Transportation may include the use of:
a. A portable pen temporarily or permanently mounted in a vehicle which is
property of the animal control officer or his/her assistants; or
b. A portable pen temporarily or permanently mounted in a City- owned vehicle
assigned temporarily or permanently for animal control purposes; or
c. A specially designed City-owned vehicle assigned for animal control
purposes.
C. Notice Of Impoundment:
1. Determination Of Ownership: When any dog or cat displaying an inoculation
tag, license tag, or tattoo registered with the City shall be impounded, the
animal control officer shall make a search of the City records or contact the
veterinarian who issued the inoculation tag to determine the owner thereof and
shall immediately provide the apparent owner thereof, if any, with written
notice. The notice shall be delivered by certified, return receipt requested
mail.
2. Notice: The notice provided for in subsection C1 of this section shall be in
the following or a similar form:
   NOTICE
You are hereby notified that a ( ) male ( ) female dog/cat ( ) believed to be
owned by you ( ) of which you are the registered licensed owner, has been
impounded by the Animal Control Officer of the City of Colona because the dog/
cat was found to be running at large ( ) with ( ) without a proper license.
As the owner of the dog/cat, you are liable for a fine up to seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for violation of Title 5, Chapter 4, Article C of the
City Code.
You may redeem the dog/cat upon showing the Animal Control Officer that the
dog/cat has been inoculated and upon payment of a redemption fee of $20.00 for
the first offense and $40.00 for each offense thereafter and the current tax if
the same is unpaid. Such fees shall be paid to the Animal Control Officer.
If redemption of the dog/cat is not made within seven (7) days from the time of
impoundment or by       A.M./P.M. on                 , the dog/cat shall be
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-4C-7H of the City
Code.
You are hereby notified that if you do not appear within five (5) days of the
date of this notice, I will appear before the Circuit Court of Henry County and
sign a complaint formally charging you with violation of Title 5, Chapter 4,
Article C of the City Code.
                                           
         Animal Control Officer
D. Care Of Impounded Animals:
1. Shelter: Sufficient shelter shall be furnished in which to cause retention
and in which to sustain or improve the health of impounded animals.
2. Food: Sufficient feeding shall be furnished to sustain or improve the health
of impounded animals.
3. First Aid; Medical Care: Necessary first aid and medical care shall be
furnished to sustain or improve the health of impounded animals.
E. Redemption: Any dog or cat taken up and confined in the City- authorized
animal pound may be redeemed by the owner or keeper thereof any time within
seven (7) days from the time the same was impounded, upon payment of the
following fees:
1. A redemption fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first offense and forty
dollars ($40.00) for each offense thereafter;
2. The amount of the current veterinarian inoculation fee unless current
inoculation is proven;
3. The license fee imposed by section
5-4C-4 of this article unless valid license is proven;
4. Both the redemption fee and impoundment fee shall be waived for animals
which were licensed at the time of impoundment and which have not previously
been impounded.
F. Removal Without Paying Fees: Any owner or keeper who shall take said dog or
cat from such animal pound without payment of the fees prescribed herein shall
be subject to the penalties provided for in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
G. Exempt Animals: It shall be the discretion of the animal control officer to
exempt animals violating the provisions of this article after being shown by
the owner or keeper proof of restraint or failure.
H. Disposition Of Unclaimed Animals: All dogs or cats not redeemed within seven
(7) days from the time the same was impounded shall, under the direction of the
Chief of Police or animal control officer be destroyed by a qualified employee
or veterinarian.
I. Liability Of Owners Or Keepers: Owners or keepers identified of unclaimed
animals will be held liable for all expenses incurred including pickup fees,
boarding fees, euthanasia and disposal of such animal. Owner or keeper will
also be held liable for any other expenses such as attorney fees that may arise
due to the animal remaining unclaimed. (1997 Code)
5-4C-8: INJURED ANIMALS:
A. Picked Up By Animal Control Officer: The animal control officer shall remove
from any street or public place within the City any injured dog or cat not
being attended and properly cared for by the owner and shall, if the animal
control officer deems it advisable, impound and confine the dog or cat with
some veterinarian within the City.
B. Veterinary Costs: If the veterinarian shall treat the injured dog or cat,
the veterinarian shall advise the animal control officer of the cost of the
treatment and in the event such dog or cat is redeemed as provided in this
article, the person redeeming the dog or cat shall pay the charges of the
veterinarian.
C. Unredeemed Animal: If the dog or cat is not redeemed, it shall be disposed
of in the manner provided in this article. (1997 Code)
5-4C-9: ANIMALS IN ESTRUS:
No owner or keeper of any female dog or cat shall permit the dog or cat to run
at large within the City while in "heat". Any female dog or cat found running
at large should be taken up and impounded in the animal pound and the dog or
cat shall be disposed of, or may be redeemed upon the payment of the same fees
and in the same manner as dogs and cats may be redeemed which have been
impounded. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-10: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
No person shall permit, allow, keep, or harbor in such a way as to permit or
allow any dog or cat to unduly disturb the quiet of a neighborhood within the
City. Any dog or cat that unduly disturbs the quiet of a neighborhood is
declared to be a nuisance. (1997 Code)
5-4C-11: ANIMAL BITES:
A. Notification Of Bite; Leaving City Prohibited: No owner or keeper of any dog
or cat, when notified that such dog or cat has bitten any person or has so
injured any person as to cause an abrasion of the skin, shall sell or give away
such dog or cat or permit or allow the dog or cat to be taken beyond the limits
of the City. (1997 Code)
B. Confinement; Cost: It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper, upon
receiving notice of such an injury caused by the dog or cat, from the animal
control officer, or otherwise, to surrender possession of the dog or cat to the
animal control officer for confinement at a licensed veterinary clinic in the
City for not less than ten (10) days, the cost of such confinement to be paid
by the owner or keeper. Anyone found guilty of violating this section shall be
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-12: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
5-4C-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this section
5-4C-12, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in
this section:
BITE: To seize or cut with the teeth.
CONFINEMENT STRUCTURE: A securely locked pen, kennel or structure designed and
constructed for the keeping of a vicious dog shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with the standards herein. Such pen, kennel or
structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All
structures used to confine a City registered and licensed vicious dog must be
locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the
structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the
sides of the pen or the sides must be embedded in the ground no less than two
feet (2'). All structures erected to house vicious dogs must comply with all
zoning and building regulations of the City. All such structures erected to
house vicious dogs must be adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in a clean
and sanitary condition.
FIGHT: A prearranged conflict between two (2) or more animals but does not
include a conflict that is unorganized or accidental.
K-9 PATROL OR POLICE DOG: A professionally trained dog used by law enforcement
officers for law enforcement and activities.
LEASH: A cord, chain, rope, strap, or other such physical restraint having a
tensile strength of not less than three hundred (300) pounds.
MUZZLE: A device constructed of strong, soft material or a metal muzzle. The
muzzle must be made in a manner which will not cause injury to the dog or
interfere with its vision or respiration, but must prevent it from biting any
person or animal.
NIP: To pinch or squeeze with teeth with no breaking of skin or tissue.
RUNNING AT LARGE: The failure to confine a vicious dog in accordance with
section
5-4C-1 of this article.
VICIOUS DOG: Any dog that has, without provocation attacked a human being or
other animal, or a dog that by its behavior or physical condition constitutes
an immediate and serious physical or health threat to human beings or animals,
or any dog which has previously attacked or bitten any human being or other
animal on two (2) or more reported occasions, or a dog that has been determined
to be a vicious or dangerous dog as set forth in section
5-4C-12-2 of this article. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-2: DETERMINED DANGEROUS:
A. Notice Of Determination: When in the judgment of the animal control officer
a dog may pose a danger or threat to the safety of the residents of the city by
reason of the dog's actions or past conduct, the animal control officer may
issue to the owner or keeper of such dog a written notice stating that the
animal control officer has deemed such dog to be a threat or danger to the
residents of the city and set forth the reasons for that judgment.
B. Failure To Comply: Failure of the owner or keeper of such dog to comply with
the requirements of this section
5-4C-12 in the time set by the animal control officer shall constitute a
violation of this section
5-4C-12 and each day the owner or keeper of such dog fails to comply with the
requirements of this section
5-4C-12 shall constitute a new violation. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-3: LICENSING:
A. License Required: No person shall possess any vicious dog for a period of
more than forty eight (48) hours without having first obtained a license
therefor from the city.
B. Application; Fee: An application for a license to possess a vicious dog
shall be filed with the Colona police department on a form prescribed and
provided by the Colona police department and shall be accompanied by all of the
following:
1. Verification Of Identity Of Owner: Verification of the identity of the owner
and current address by providing a photostatic copy of the owner's driver's
license.
2. Proof Of Ownership: Proof of ownership of the vicious dog.
3. Current Immunization And Health Records: A copy of the current immunization
and health record of the vicious dog by a veterinarian licensed to practice in
the state.
4. Certificate Of Insurance: A certificate of insurance evidencing coverage in
an amount not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) providing
coverage for any injury, damage or loss caused by the vicious dog.
5. Photographs: Two (2) photographs of the vicious dog to be licensed taken not
less than one month before the application. One photograph shall provide a
front view of the vicious dog and shall clearly show the face and ears of the
vicious dog. One photograph shall show a side view of the vicious dog.
6. License Fee: A license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
7. Additional Information: Such other information as may be required by the
animal control officer.
8. Annual Submittal: All fees, inspections and licensing requirements of this
subsection B are due annually.
C. Inspection Of Premises: Upon receipt of an application, the police
department shall forward such application to the animal control officer who
shall cause an inspection of the premises on which the vicious dog shall be
kept to determine that all provisions of this section
5-4C-12 relating to the confinement and posting of signs have been complied
with by the applicant. Upon completion of the inspection, the animal control
officer shall notify the Colona police department in writing of the results of
his/her inspection.
D. Approval/Denial Of Application: Upon receipt of the results of the animal
control officer's inspection the animal control officer shall notify the
applicant of the approval or denial of the license. In the event the animal
control officer is not available the chief of police will designate another
employee of the Colona police department who shall notify the applicant of the
approval or denial of the license. In the event that the license is denied, the
notification shall be provided in writing and the reasons for such denial shall
be stated. Upon approval, the Colona police department shall issue a license to
the applicant. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-4: CONFINEMENT:
No person shall possess any vicious dog unless the vicious dog is confined in
accordance with this section.
A. Indoors: No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a
house or structure that would allow the vicious dog to exit the structure when
the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only
obstacle preventing the vicious dog from exiting the structure.
B. Exterior Yard: No person shall confine a vicious dog in an exterior area
unless such vicious dog is confined in a confinement structure constructed and
maintained in accordance with this section
5-4C-12, except that a vicious dog may be confined outside of a confinement
structure in a manner set forth in subsection C of this section.
C. Leash: No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside a confinement
structure, house or other structure unless the vicious dog is securely
restrained with a leash no longer than three feet (3') in length and fitted
with a muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog to be kept on a leash
unless a person is in physical control of the leash. No leash restraining any
vicious dog shall be attached to any inanimate object including, but not
limited to, trees, posts, stakes, and buildings. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-5: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS OF LICENSEE:
Any person holding a license pursuant to this section
5-4C-12 shall report the incidence of any of the following events:
A. Change In Ownership; Death: The sale, barter, exchange, gift or death of any
vicious dog shall be reported within forty eight (48) hours.
B. Escape; Theft: The escape from confinement or theft of any vicious dog shall
be reported upon discovery of the escape or theft.
C. Biting Or Nipping: Biting or nipping of any person or animal by a vicious
dog shall be reported upon occurrence.
D. Birth Of Offspring: The birth of any offspring of a vicious dog shall be
reported within forty eight (48) hours of the birth of the offspring.
E. Permanent Removal: The permanent removal of any vicious dog from the
territorial limits of the city shall be reported within forty eight (48) hours
of such removal by surrender of the license of the owner to the city clerk.
Except as provided in this section, the report of any incident required to be
reported under this section shall be made to the animal control officer. (Ord.
0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-6: SIGN REQUIRED:
All persons possessing a vicious dog shall display in a prominent place on the
premises where the vicious dog is to be kept a sign which is readable by the
public from a distance of not less than one hundred feet (100') using the words
"Beware Of Vicious Dog". A similar sign shall be posted on a confinement
structure. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-7: FIGHTING PROHIBITED:
No person shall fight or bait, conspire to fight or bait, or keep, train, or
transport for the purpose of fighting or baiting, any pit bull dog and/or
vicious dog. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-2014)
5-4C-12-8: IMPOUNDMENT:
A. Vicious Dog: Any dog which by its actions is a "vicious dog" as defined
herein shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the animal control officer
in a humane facility for the keeping of dogs. If the incident giving rise to
the impoundment has resulted in an injury to a person, upon impoundment by the
animal control officer, the chief of police or his/her designee shall notify
the rabies control administrator of the county pursuant to 510 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12, and shall transfer control of the vicious dog to the
administrator in accordance with 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/13.
B. Running At Large: Any known vicious dog found to be running at large by the
animal control officer or any member of the police department shall be presumed
to be in violation of this section
5-4C-12 and shall be subject to impoundment by the animal control officer in a
humane facility for the keeping of dogs.
C. Redemption: An owner of a vicious dog holding a license pursuant to this
section
5-4C-12 may redeem an impounded vicious dog if: 1) a vicious dog has been
impounded pursuant to this section, or 2) a vicious dog has not caused injury
to a person subject to the following conditions:
1. Proof of a valid license issued by the City under this section
5-4C-12.
2. Payment of the cost of keeping the vicious dog during the period of
impoundment.
An owner of a vicious dog which has caused an injury to a person resulting in
the impoundment of the vicious dog shall be entitled to redeem the vicious dog
in accordance with 510 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12. (Ord. 0-11-14, 7-14-
2014)
5-4C-12-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
A license granted pursuant to this section
5-4C-12 shall be automatically revoked upon any violation by the licensee of
any provision of this section
5-4C-12. In the event of a revocation of the license, the license fee shall be
retained by the City. Upon revocation of license, owner of said animal shall
have twenty four (24) hours to remove the animal from the City. (1997 Code)
5-4C-12-10: EXCEPTIONS:
This section
5-4C-12 shall not apply to any "K-9 patrol dogs" or "police dogs" as defined
herein. (1997 Code)
5-4C-12-11: PENALTY:
A. Violation: Upon conviction of a violation of any section or subsection of
this section
5-4C-12, the court shall assess a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
B. Court Order: Upon a finding by the court that a licensee has violated
section
5-4C-12-4,
5-4C-12-5 or
5-4C-12-7 of this section
5-4C-12, the City shall enter an order revoking the license and ordering the
former holder of the license to remove the pit bull dog and/or vicious dog from
the City. (1997 Code)
5-4C-13: PROCEDURE FOR SUSPECTED RABIES:
Any dog or cat having symptoms of the disease known as rabies shall be confined
under the supervision of a veterinarian for a period of ten (10) days. Any dog
or cat having any symptoms of rabies when impounded by the animal control
officer shall be immediately placed in the care of a veterinarian. If it shall
be deemed that the dog or cat is suffering from rabies, the animal may not be
destroyed without specific authorization of the veterinarian. Anyone found
guilty of violating this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-14: DESTROYING ANIMALS:
Whoever wilfully and maliciously abandons, kills, wounds, maims, disfigures or
poisons any dog or cat or exposes poisonous substances with the intent that the
life of any dog or cat should be destroyed thereby, such dog or cat being the
property of another or said owner or keeper himself/herself, shall be subject
to the penalties provided for in this Code. Anyone found guilty of violating
this section shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code; amd. Ord. 0-19-01, 2-25-2019)
5-4C-15: MONTHLY REPORT:
The animal control officer shall, on a monthly basis, make a report to the City
Council of all fees, fines, and warrants; and shall keep a log of all calls and
further report said calls on said log. (1997 Code)
5-4C-16: KENNELING DOGS IN FRONT YARDS:
A. It shall be unlawful to kennel, house, chain, tie up, or otherwise keep a
dog or dogs in any part of the front yard of a property being used as a
residence.
B. "Front yard" shall be defined as an open space extending the full width of a
lot between a building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from
the ground upward.
C. The property owner, all occupants of the residence, and the owners of the
dog or dogs shall each be jointly and/or severally liable for compliance with
this section.
D. Any property not in compliance with this section shall be brought into
compliance within sixty (60) days after the effective date hereof.
E. Should any portion of this section be deemed illegal, then only that portion
of the section that is illegal shall be stricken and all other portions shall
remain in full force and effect.
F. Each day the violation exists is a separate offense.
G. The fine for violating this section is not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
H. Violation of this section shall also be part of the "no contest" procedure
and ordinance previously enacted. The "no contest" fine shall be seventy five
dollars ($75.00). (Ord. 98-10, 11-9-1998)
I. Any property owner, occupant of the residence or the dog owner may petition
the Colona Police Commission for a variance from this section if the layout or
construction of the residence makes compliance with this section impossible or
impractical. The Colona Police Commission shall conduct a hearing on the
petition at which time the petitioner may informally present evidence. If the
commission finds the compliance is impossible or impractical then a variance
may be granted under such terms and conditions as it sees fit. The commission
shall issue a written decision and mail a copy to the petitioner when issued.
Any notice of appeal to the Police Commission's decision must be filed with the
City Clerk within ten (10) days of issuance of the written decision of the
Police Commission. The appeal will be scheduled for review by the full City
Council within forty (40) days of the filing of the notice of appeal. The City
Council will review the findings of the Police Commission and issue written
findings and decision. The decision will be final and appealable upon signing
by the Mayor. (Ord. 98-10, 11-9-1998; amd. Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
CHAPTER 5
FINES
SECTION:
5-5-1: No Contest Fine
5-5-2: Geometric Progression Of Fine
5-5-1: NO CONTEST FINE:
   In the event that a person is accused of a violation and does not wish to
contest said allegation, then said person so accused may pay to the City at
police headquarters or pay online within fourteen (14) days from the date of
the citation (the date of issuance included) for and in full satisfaction of
said violation a fine in the amount of the minimum penalty, which minimum
penalty shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) unless otherwise listed in this
Code1. In the event the accused person avails himself or herself of the
foregoing provisions of this section, then no court appearance, court costs,
administrative hearing appearance or administrative hearing costs shall be
required.
(Ord. 0-18-04, 1-22-2018; amd. Ord. O-20-06, 1-27-2020)
5-5-2: GEOMETRIC PROGRESSION OF FINE:
Ordinance violation fees and/or fines assessed under no contest offenses shall
be doubled for repeat offenders during the period of twelve (12) months
following the date of their last ticket for the same offense. Every violation
fee continues to double until a twelve (12) month period of being violation
free of the same offense.
Example: A March 2010 ticket followed by a September 2010 ticket for the same
offense: If March fine was twenty five dollars ($25.00) the September fine
would be fifty dollars ($50.00) and if a third ticket is incurred within twelve
(12) months the September ticket and fine would be one hundred dollars
($100.00) and the doubling of the last fine shall continue until the arrested
person is free of such offense for a twelve (12) month period following their
last ticket for the offense. (Ord. 0-15-10, 5-10-2010)
TITLE 6
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL TRAFFIC PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
6-1-1: Definitions
6-1-2: Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted
6-1-3: Speed Limit
6-1-4: Obedience To Police
6-1-5: Scene Of Fire
6-1-6: Signs And Signals
6-1-7: Animals Or Bicycles
6-1-8: Exemptions
6-1-9: Drivers
6-1-10: Penalty
6-1-11: Snowmobile Regulations
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-2.
6-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
ALLEY: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots
or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices.
CROSSWALK: A. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with such extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway;
B. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface
placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the
department of transportation.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of fire department, ambulances,
vehicles carrying a state, county or municipal officer or employee in response
to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service corporations on
emergency call.
INTERSECTION: A. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
B. Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
C. The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not constitute an
intersection.
METAL TIRES: Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is
wholly or partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
PARK: To stand a vehicle whether occupied or not, for a period of time greater
than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PNEUMATIC TIRES: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support the
load.
PROPERTY LINE: The line making the boundary between any street and the lots or
property abutting thereto.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the City, the County, any park district,
school district, the State, or the United States government.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles
and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of
the vehicle and load so drawn.
SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a
public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization
solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
SEMI-TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons
or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some
part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another
vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines
of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians.
SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines or every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter or right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances
whether singly or together while using any highway for the purpose of travel.
TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers or
property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part
of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which is
built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of a
quarter (1/4) mile or more.
VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved by human power.
YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign, means the act of
granting the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to
traffic within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or
left; provided, that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the
intersection. (1997 Code)
6-1-2: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
In order to establish rules and regulations for the movement of traffic in and
about the city, the city council does hereby adopt the provisions of the
Illinois vehicle code as presented in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5 and as
hereafter amended. (1997 Code)
6-1-3: SPEED LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street in the city, not
under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois or Henry County, at a speed in
excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour, unless otherwise posted. (1997 Code)
6-1-4: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
Members of the police department, and special police assigned to traffic duty,
are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in accordance with the provisions
of this title, or in emergencies as public safety or convenience may require,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any
lawful order, signal or direction of a policeman. Except in case of emergency,
it shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by law to direct or attempt
to direct traffic 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-203.
6-1-5: SCENE OF FIRE:
The fire department officer in command, or any fireman designated by such fire
department officer, may exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in
directing traffic at the scene of any fire or where the fire department has
responded to an emergency call for so long as fire department equipment is on
the scene in the absence of or in assisting the police. (1997 Code)
6-1-6: SIGNS AND SIGNALS:
A. Obedience To: It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey
the instructions of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of
the mayor and city council or in accordance with the laws of the state,
excepting on direction of a police officer. All signs and signals established
by direction of the governing body shall conform to the state manual of uniform
traffic control devices for streets and highways.
B. Unauthorized Signs: No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in
view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic, nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of
traffic or effectiveness of any traffic- control device or any railroad sign or
signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal
bearing thereon any commercial advertising 1
.
C. Interference With Signals Or Signs: It shall be unlawful for any person to
deface, injure, move or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal 2
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-310.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-311.
6-1-7: ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:
Every person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those provisions which can have
no application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding animals; provided,
that, except in business districts, bicycles may be ridden on sidewalks 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 3. 625 ILCS 5/11-206.
6-1-8: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Emergency Vehicles: The provisions of this title regulating the movement or
parking of vehicles shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency
vehicle when responding to an emergency call, but such driver, upon approaching
a red or stop signal or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety
but may proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At other times
drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign
or signal.
B. Assumption Of Special Privileges: No driver of any authorized emergency
vehicle shall assume any special privileges under the act except when such
vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate
pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
C. Street Improvements: The provisions of this title regulating the movement
and parking of vehicles shall not apply to equipment or vehicles while actively
engaged in installing, repairing, or otherwise improving streets or street
pavement. (1997 Code)
6-1-9: DRIVERS:
A. Liquor Or Drugs: It shall be unlawful for the habitual user of narcotic
drugs to operate any motor vehicle on any street; and it shall be unlawful for
any intoxicated person, or any person under the influence of alcohol or of a
narcotic drug, to operate or attempt to operate any motor vehicle on any street
1
.
B. Accidents: The driver of a vehicle which has collided with, or been in an
accident with any vehicle, person or property in such a manner as to cause
injury or damage, shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be
possible, and to give his/her true name and residence to the injured person or
any other persons requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or to
the owner of the property damaged, and to a policeman, if one is present. A
report of each such accident shall be given by the driver of each vehicle
concerned in it to the chief of police within twenty four (24) hours after the
accident 2
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/11-401.
6-1-10: PENALTY:
A. Bail, Arrest Ticket: Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of
this title regulating traffic, with the exception of those provisions
concerning parking, shall be released from custody upon posting bail, as may be
required by statute or by order of the court of the fourteenth judicial
district. Excepting those provisions hereof concerning parking, all persons
arrested shall be supplied with a copy of a uniform arrest ticket advising such
arrested party of the charge against him/her.
B. Fine, General: Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this title, with the exception of those provisions regarding parking
violations, shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1997 Code)
6-1-11: SNOWMOBILE REGULATIONS:
A. The snowmobile regulations act set out in the Illinois Compiled Statutes is
incorporated into this code by reference. Said snowmobile regulations are cited
as 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1-1 through 11-1.
B. Violations of this section may be paid through the city's no contest
sections of this code. All violations which go to trial shall be governed by
the general penalty clause of this code.
C. Designated snowmobile route within the city limits is as follows:
The snowmobile route shall consist of the bike trail from Interstate 80 to
Route 84, then stay on the trail to the 5th and 6th Street bridge crossing,
then the trail shall cross over the south side of the canal and the trail shall
consist of the shoulder of the bike trail to the locks.
D. Designated parking areas are:
1. The parking area on the corner of Water Street and Maple,
2. The parking lot at Galliaerts field off Colona Road,
3. The canal area along 5th Avenue between 3rd Street and 4th Street,
4. The Hennepin Drive parking area just off 5th Avenue,
5. The open field at the end of 9th Street, and
6. The boat ramp parking lot.
E. City roads to travel on:
1. Maple Street from Water to Broadway Street.
2. Broadway Street from Maple to Warren Street.
3. Warren Street from Broadway to High Street.
4. High Street from Warren Street to Cleveland Road.
5. 1st Street from 5th Avenue to 7th Avenue.
6. 6th Street from 5th Avenue to 1st Avenue.
F. The designated snowmobile route, parking areas and city roads will be open
the same times as the Hennepin Trail. (Ord. 11-02, 11-11-2002)
CHAPTER 2
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING 1
SECTION:
6-2-1: Parking Rules; No Parking Places
6-2-2: Signs Posted
6-2-3: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-2; 625 ILCS 5/11-207, 5/11-208, 5/11-303, 5/11-304.
6-2-1: PARKING RULES; NO PARKING PLACES:
It shall be unlawful at any time to permit any vehicle to stand in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
A. In any intersection.
B. In a crosswalk.
C. Upon any bridge or viaduct, or in any subway or tunnel or the approach
thereto.
D. Within thirty feet (30') of a stop sign, or on the approaching side.
E. Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
F. At any place where the standing of a vehicle will reduce the usable width of
the roadway for moving traffic to less than sixteen feet (16').
G. Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
H. At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
I. Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade crossing.
J. Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire department
station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station
within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly signposted.
K. On any sidewalk or parkway.
L. At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
M. On the side of any street against the flow of traffic. (1997 Code)
N. On 9th Avenue between 8th and 9th Streets on both sides of 9th Avenue. (Ord.
10-06, 5-8-2006)
6-2-2: SIGNS POSTED:
The chief of police or any other person authorized by the mayor and city
council shall cause signs to be posted in all areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (1997 Code)
6-2-3: PENALTY:
Persons who receive a parking ticket shall have the option of a no contest fine
as established in section
5-5-1 of this code.
A. A person who determines to take a parking ticket to trial shall no longer be
able to avail themselves of the no contest fine but would be subject to the
general penalty clause of this code.
B. The no contest fine may apply to tickets issued during time of snowfall.
(Ord. 0-17-10, 5-10-2010)
CHAPTER 3
STREETS AND INTERSECTIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Through Streets
6-3-2: One-Way Streets Or Alleys
6-3-3: Stop Streets
6-3-4: Yield Right Of Way
6-3-5: Limited Load Streets
6-3-6: Posting Signs
6-3-7: Access Limitations
6-3-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the city designated by ordinance as through
streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a vehicle
shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the right of way
to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching
so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate hazard, unless
directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic control signal. (1997
Code)
6-3-2: ONE-WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street or alley designated
as a one-way street or alley by ordinance in any direction other than that so
designated. (1997 Code)
6-3-3: STOP STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where a stop sign is erected at one or more entrances thereto, and
shall proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so obliged to stop which
are within the intersection or approaching so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is controlled by a police
officer on duty, in which event the directions of the police officer shall be
complied with. (1997 Code)
6-3-4: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY:
The driver of a vehicle shall, in obedience to yield right of way signs, yield
the right of way in accordance with the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-904(c). The intersections and streets where a driver of a vehicle
shall stop shall be designated by an appropriate stop sign. (1997 Code)
6-3-5: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any street in the city when the
gross weight on the surface of the road exceeds twenty thousand (20,000)
pounds, and on any street where the weight of vehicles permitted on such street
is limited by ordinance and signs indicating such limitations are posted. It
shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of such weight on such street,
except for the purpose of making delivery or picking up a load, in which case
vehicle may be driven on such street after first securing the consent of the
police department. (1997 Code)
6-3-6: POSTING SIGNS:
The chief of police or any other person designated by the mayor and city
council shall post or cause to be posted suitable signs for all such through
streets, one-way streets or alleys and stop intersections. (1997 Code)
6-3-7: ACCESS LIMITATIONS:
A. Travel is prohibited at any time on county designated road E550 Street in
the city of Colona for vehicles weighing twenty (20) tons or more. The speed
limit for all vehicles shall be no more than thirty (30) miles per hour.
B. The restrictions placed on vehicles described in subsection A of this
section shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on such highways by the
city of Colona and such restrictions shall not be effective unless and until
such signs are erected and maintained. (Ord. 04-02, 5-28-2002)
CHAPTER 4
PEDESTRIANS 1
SECTION:
6-4-1: Pedestrian Regulations
6-4-2: Pedestrians In Crosswalks
6-4-3: Crossing Streets
6-4-4: Driver's Responsibility
6-4-5: Pedestrians On Roadway
6-4-6: Soliciting Rides Or Business
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-1101 et seq.
6-4-1: PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS:
A. Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as
provided in the provisions of this Title, but all other places pedestrians
shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions
stated in this Chapter.
B. A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control
device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a police
office. (1997 Code)
6-4-2: PEDESTRIANS IN CROSSWALKS:
A. Right Of Way At Crosswalks: When traffic-control signals are not in place or
not in operation, the driver of the vehicle shall yield the right of way,
slowing down or stopping if need be, to yield to a pedestrian crossing the
roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway
which the vehicle is traveling upon, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger; but no
pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run
into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the
driver to yield. This provision shall not apply under the conditions stated in
subsection 6-4-3B of this Chapter.
B. Passing Prohibited: Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or
at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the roadway, the driver of any vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
C. Stay To Right: Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right
half of crosswalks. (1997 Code)
6-4-3: CROSSING STREETS:
A. Unmarked Crosswalk Or Other Point: Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at
any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk
at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the
roadway.
B. Pedestrian Tunnel Or Overhead Crossing: Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at
a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been
provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
C. Use Of Marked Crosswalk Required: Between adjacent intersections at which
traffic-control signals are in operating, pedestrians shall not cross at any
place except in a marked crosswalk.
D. Diagonal Crossing: No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection
diagonally unless authorized by official traffic- control devices; and, when
authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with
the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
(1997 Code)
6-4-4: DRIVER'S RESPONSIBILITY:
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any
person operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power upon any
roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon any roadway. (1997 Code)
6-4-5: PEDESTRIANS ON ROADWAY:
A. Sidewalks Present: Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for
any pedestrian to walk along and upon adjacent roadways.
B. Absence Of Sidewalks: Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian
walking upon a roadway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of
the roadway on its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite
direction. (1997 Code)
6-4-6: SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS:
A. Prohibited: No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting
a ride, employment, or business from the occupant of any vehicle 1
.
B. Watching Or Guarding Vehicle: No person shall stand on or in proximity to a
street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any
vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also Section
  5-2-5-4 of this Code.
CHAPTER 5
VEHICLE CONDITION; EQUIPMENT 1
SECTION:
6-5-1: Clear Vision
6-5-2: Gas And Smoke
6-5-3: Projecting Loads; Width And Height
6-5-4: Spilling Loads
6-5-5: Driving Unsafe Vehicles
6-5-6: Lug Wheels, Nonskid Devices Prohibited
6-5-7: Required Equipment
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-1001 et seq.
6-5-1: CLEAR VISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is loaded or in such a
condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the
roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. Any view of the roadway
to the rear so obstructed shall be equipped with a mirror so attached as to
give the driver a view of the roadway behind such driver. (1997 Code)
6-5-2: GAS AND SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an
amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as to
endanger the drivers of other vehicles. (1997 Code)
6-5-3: PROJECTING LOADS; WIDTH AND HEIGHT:
A. Maximum Width And Height: The maximum width and height of any vehicle and
its load shall not exceed the limits expressed in the State traffic law.
B. Maximum Load Width: No passenger type vehicle shall be operated on the
streets with a load extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side
of the vehicle nor extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the
fenders on the right side thereof.
C. Maximum Length, Single Vehicle: No vehicle, unladen or with load, shall
exceed a length of forty two feet (42') extreme overall dimensions.
D. Maximum Length, Combination Of Vehicles: No combination of vehicles coupled
together shall consist of more than two (2) units, and no such combination of
vehicles, unladen or with load, shall exceed a total length of fifty feet
(50'); but such length limitations shall not apply to vehicles operated in
daytime when transporting pipes, poles, machinery and other objects which
cannot be readily dismembered, nor to such vehicles operated at nighttime by a
public utility when engaged in emergency repair work; but such loads carried at
night shall be clearly marked with sufficient lights to show the full
dimensions of the load.
E. Maximum Extension In Front Of Vehicle: No part of the load of a vehicle
shall extend more than three feet (3') in front of the extreme front portion of
the vehicle. (1997 Code)
6-5-4: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any
street or alley in the City. (1997 Code)
6-5-5: DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause or
knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any
person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with such lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required in this Chapter, or which is equipped in any manner in
violation of this Code 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-101(a).
6-5-6: LUG WHEELS, NONSKID DEVICES PROHIBITED:
A. Lug Wheels: It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to
pavement to be permitted upon the public thoroughfares unless the operator of
such vehicle shall first plank such streets.
B. Nonskid Devices: It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor
vehicle equipped with any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or
nonflexible portion thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway.
(1997 Code)
6-5-7: REQUIRED EQUIPMENT:
A. Horns And Warning Devices:
1. Horn: Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under
normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200'), but
no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound
or a whistle. The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when reasonably necessary to
ensure safe operation, give audible warning with his/her horn but shall not
otherwise use such horn when upon a highway.
2. Siren, Whistle, Bell: No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person
use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle, or bell, except as otherwise permitted
in this subsection. Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1 may be equipped with a siren, whistle, or bell, capable
of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less
than five hundred feet (500'), but such siren, whistle or bell, shall not be
used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or
in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in
either of which events the driver of such vehicle shall sound such siren,
whistle or bell when necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the
approach thereof.
B. Brakes: It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless
such vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working
condition, as required by the state traffic law, or to operate any vehicle
which is so loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the
mechanics operating the brakes of such vehicle 1
.
C. Lights:
1. Operation Or Parking On Street: It shall be unlawful to operate or park on
any street any vehicle not equipped with adequate lights conforming to the
requirements of the state law; provided, that vehicles may be parked at
nighttime without lights on any street or portion thereof, designated by
ordinance as a place where vehicles may so park at nighttime 2
.
2. Volunteer Fireman: Any motor vehicle owned or usually operated by a
volunteer fireman may be equipped with not to exceed two (2) lamps which shall
emit a blue light without glare. One such lamp may be mounted on the rear of
any such vehicle. A flashing blue light may be used only when such fireman is
responding to a fire call 3
.
D. Tires: It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which
is not equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the state traffic
law 4
.
E. Mufflers; Unnecessary Noise: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
a motor vehicle which shall not at all times be equipped with a muffler upon
the exhaust thereof in good working order and in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise and it shall be unlawful for any person operating
any motor vehicle to use a cutout, bypass or similar muffler elimination
appliance 5
. (1997 Code)
F. Adoption Of Statutes: That equipment of vehicles set out in Illinois
Compiled Statutes be incorporated into this code by reference. Said equipment
of vehicles is cited as 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/12-101 through 5/12-
902. Violations of this section may be paid through the city's no contest
sections of this code. All violations which go to trial shall be governed by
the general penalty clause of this code. (Ord. 12-02, 11-11-2002)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-301.
2 2. 625 ILCS 5/12-203.
3 3. 625 ILCS 5/12-215(c)1.
4 4. 625 ILCS 5/12-401 et seq.
5 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-602.
CHAPTER 6
BICYCLES 1
SECTION:
6-6-1: Equipment
6-6-2: Forfeiture
6-6-3: Parental Responsibility
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-1501 et seq.
6-6-1: EQUIPMENT:
A. Lights: Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a
type which shall be visible from all distances from one hundred feet (100') to
six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from
a distance of five hundred feet (500') to the rear may be used in addition to
the red reflector. (1997 Code)
1. It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle upon any public street, road,
highway or sidewalk from dusk to dawn without a light and reflector as required
by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1507.
2. The penalty for violating this subsection shall fall under the general
penalty provisions.
3. This offense shall also be included as a no contest option. The no contest
fine is twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 00-10, 2-28-2000)
B. Brake: Every bicycle shall be equipped with good and adequate brakes. (1997
Code)
6-6-2: FORFEITURE:
A. Violation: Any bicycle operated with the knowledge and consent of the owner
in violation of any State statute or City ordinance shall be subject to
confiscation as follows:
1. First Violation: Warning upon first violation.
2. Second Violation: Forfeiture for a period of not less than seven (7) days
upon second violation.
3. Third Violation: Forfeiture for a period of not less than thirty (30) days
upon the third violation.
B. Order Of Forfeiture: Any officer confiscating a bicycle under subsections A2
and A3 of this Section shall have the City Attorney apply to the associate
judge for an order of forfeiture.
C. Prima Facie Evidence: The operation of a bicycle in violation of State
statutes or City ordinance shall be prima facie evidence that such operation is
with the knowledge and consent of the owner. (1997 Code)
6-6-3: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
The parent or legal guardian of a minor found operating a bicycle within the
City in violation of State statute or City ordinance on three (3) occasions
shall be given a written warning on each occasion. On the fourth occasion, the
parent or legal guardian shall be issued a notice to appear for violation of
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130/2a. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 7
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE VEHICLES 1
SECTION:
6-7-1: Abandoned; Unattended Vehicles
6-7-2: Abandonment Generally
6-7-3: Notification Of Police; Towing Vehicle Away
6-7-4: Towing Away
6-7-5: Records
6-7-6: Obtaining Registration Information
6-7-7: Redemption
6-7-8: Public Sale Notice
6-7-9: Disposal Of Vehicles
6-7-10: Report By Police Department
6-7-11: Proceeds Of Public Sale
6-7-12: Immunity From Damages
6-7-13: Derelict And Abandoned Vehicles
6-7-14: Current Valid License Tags
6-7-15: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-40-3, 625 ILCS 5/4-201.
6-7-1: ABANDONED, UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No person shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building, or
structure or any vacant lot, or within any unoccupied dwelling, building, or
structure, or any vacant lot, under his/her control, in a place accessible to
children any abandoned, stored, discarded, elevated, or propped or unattended
motor vehicle. (1997 Code)
6-7-2: ABANDONMENT GENERALLY:
A. Abandoned On Highway: The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or
any part thereof on any highway in the City is unlawful and subject to
penalties as set forth herein.
B. Abandoned On Public Or Private Property: The abandonment of a motor vehicle
or other vehicles or any part thereof on private or public property, other than
a highway, in view of the general public anywhere in the City is unlawful
except on the property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle.
C. Removal: A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned
on private property may be authorized for removal by or upon the order of the
Chief of Police after a waiting period of seven (7) days or more has expired.
(1997 Code)
6-7-3: NOTIFICATION OF POLICE; TOWING VEHICLE AWAY:
A. Notifying Police Required: When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed
motor vehicle or other vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody
of a person in this State, not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall
immediately notify the Police Department when the vehicle is within the
corporate limits of the City.
B. Towing; Maintenance Of Vehicle And Contents: Upon receipt of such
notification, the Chief of the Police Department shall authorize a towing
service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen, or
unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep
the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow until the
vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to
possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this Chapter.
(1997 Code)
6-7-4: TOWING AWAY:
A. Abandoned Ten Hours Or More: When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is
abandoned on a highway in the City, on City property or public property for ten
(10) hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by order
of the Chief of Police.
B. Traffic Hazard: When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially
dismantled motor vehicle or other vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because
of its position in relation to the highway or its physical appearance, removal
from the highway by a towing service may be authorized by order of the Chief of
Police.
C. Towing Costs: When a vehicle removed from either public or private property
is authorized by order of the chief of police, the owner of the vehicle will be
responsible for all towing costs. (1997 Code)
D. Storage Charge: In the event that the police should impound a vehicle on
city property, a storage charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per day shall be
levied. The same shall become due before such property will be returned to the
owner. (Ord. 06-05, 4-11-2005)
6-7-5: RECORDS:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the
police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed,
listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number, and
license plate year, and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also
include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to,
reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. (1997 Code)
6-7-6: OBTAINING REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
A. Vehicle Registration Search: When the police department does not know the
identity of the registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will
cause the state motor vehicle registration to be searched by a direct
communication to the secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
B. Search Of Stolen Motor Vehicle Files:
1. State Police: The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle
files of the state police to be searched by direct communication to the state
police for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle.
2. National Crime Investigation Center: When the state police files are
searched with negative results, the information contained in the National Crime
Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the state police.
3. Use Of Information: The information determined from these record searches
will be used by the city police department in sending a notification by
certified mail to the owner or legally entitled person advising where the
vehicle is held, requesting a disposition be made and setting forth public sale
information.
C. Unidentified Owner: When the registered owner or other person legally
entitled to the possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle cannot be
identified from the registration files of the state or from the registration
files of a foreign state, if applicable, the police department shall notify the
state police for the purpose of identifying the vehicle's owner or other person
legally entitled to possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the
state police will be immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having
custody of the vehicle for notification of the owner. (1997 Code)
6-7-7: REDEMPTION:
At any time before a motor vehicle or other vehicle is sold at public sale or
disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other person legally entitled to
its possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department
proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under this section until
all towing and storage charges have been paid. (1997 Code)
6-7-8: PUBLIC SALE NOTICE:
A. Sale Of Vehicle: Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed motor
vehicle or other vehicle, seven (7) years of age or newer, remains unclaimed by
the registered owner or other person legally entitled to its possession for a
period of thirty (30) days after notice has been given as provided herein, the
police department having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at
public sale to the highest bidder.
B. Notice Of Sale:
1. Posting Of Notice: Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted
in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on the
premises where the vehicle has been impounded.
2. Mailing Of Notice: At least ten (10) days prior to the sale, the police
department shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by
certified mail to the registered owner or other person known by the police
department or towing service to be legally entitled to possession of the
vehicle.
3. Contents Of Notice: Such notice shall contain a complete description of the
vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any legally entitled person
to reclaim a vehicle.
C. Second Notice: In those instances where the certified notification specified
herein has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department due
to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address obtained from
the registration records of this state, the sending of a second certified
notice will not be required. (1997 Code)
6-7-9: DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES:
A. Vehicle Seven Years Old Or Newer: When the identity of the registered owner
or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost, or
unclaimed vehicle of seven (7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by
any means provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided
herein or disposed of in the manner authorized by this chapter without notice
to the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of
the vehicle.
B. Vehicle Older Than Seven Years: When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven
(7) years of age is impounded as specified by this chapter, it will be kept in
custody for a minimum of ten (10) days for the purpose of determining
ownership, the contacting of the registered owner by mail, public service or in
person for a determination of disposition, and an examination of the state
police stolen motor vehicle files for theft and wanted information. At the
expiration of the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of disposition
information being received from the registered owner, the chief of police will
authorize the disposal of the vehicle as junk only.
C. Antique Vehicle: A motor vehicle or other vehicle classified as an antique
vehicle is excluded from this chapter. (1997 Code)
6-7-10: REPORT BY POLICE DEPARTMENT:
When a motor vehicle or other vehicle in the custody of the police department
is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled person, or when
the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this
chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police
department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
(1997 Code)
6-7-11: PROCEEDS OF PUBLIC SALE:
When a vehicle located within the corporate limits of the city is authorized to
be towed away by the chief of police and disposed of as set forth in this
chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of
towing, storage and processing charge shall be deposited in the municipal
treasury. (1997 Code)
6-7-12: IMMUNITY FROM DAMAGES:
Any police officer, towing service owner, operator or employee shall not be
held to answer or be liable for damages in any action brought by the registered
owner, former registered owner, or his/her legal representative, or any other
person legally entitled to possession of a motor vehicle or other vehicle when
the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of as provided by this chapter.
(1997 Code)
6-7-13: DERELICT AND ABANDONED VEHICLES:
A. City Policy:
1. Findings: The city council finds that derelict and abandoned vehicles
constitute a safety hazard and a public nuisance; are detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the general public by harboring disease,
providing breeding places for vermin, inviting plundering, creating fire
hazards, and presenting physical dangers to children and others; produce scenic
blights which degrade the environment and adversely affect land values and the
proper maintenance and continuing development of the city; represent a resource
out of place and an energy loss to the city economy, and require municipal
government attention, in order to assure the expeditious removal and recycling
of the derelict and abandoned vehicles.
2. Declaration: The city council declares, therefore, that it is the policy of
the city to:
a. Prohibit the abandonment of vehicles and the retention of derelicts, and to
enforce such prohibition by law while reminding vehicle owners of their own
individual responsibility to dispose of such vehicles.
b. Encourage the development of procedures and techniques to facilitate the
expeditious removal of derelict and abandoned vehicles from public or private
premises.
B. Nuisance Declared; Exception:
1. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have
the meaning ascribed to them as follows:
    ABANDONED VEHICLE: All vehicles in a state of disrepair rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any vehicle that has not
been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently
deserted.
   DERELICT VEHICLE: Any inoperable, unregistered or discarded motor vehicle,
regardless of title, having lost its character as a substantial property and
left unattended without justification on the owner's land contrary to the
public policy expressed in subsection A of this section.
2. Storing, Parking Or Leaving:
a. Prohibited: No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking,
storing or leaving of any motor vehicles of any kind which as defined in
subsection B1 of this section, is a "derelict vehicle" or an "abandoned
vehicle", whether attended or not, upon any property, private or public, within
the city for a period of time in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
b. Statute Authority: This section relating to the declaration and abatement of
nuisances is enacted pursuant to the powers vested in this city by and through
the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-60-2 entitled "definition
and abatement of nuisances".
c. Declared Nuisance: The presence of a derelict or abandoned vehicle, or parts
thereof, on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance
which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this section.
d. Applicability: This section shall also apply to abandoned or derelict
vehicles covered with a tarp, canvas, plastic or other such soft covering.
There is a rebuttable presumption that probable cause exists to believe an
abandoned or derelict vehicle exists under a tarp, canvas, plastic or other
such soft covering if a person of reasonable intelligence observes a tarp,
canvas, plastic, or other such soft covering, covering items that a person
reasonably believes to be personalty.
e. Exception: This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a
building on private property or to any vehicle stored or parked on the premises
of a business enterprise, actively operated with an office on the subject
premises, and being properly operated in the appropriate business zone,
pursuant to the zoning and licensing ordinances of the city or to any motor
vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on
drag strips or raceways.
3. Notice To Remove: Whenever it comes to the attention of the police
department that any nuisance as defined in subsection B1 of this section exists
in the city, a notice in writing giving notice of the existence of the nuisance
and demanding its removal shall be given as provided in subsection B5 of this
section.
4. Responsibility For Removal: Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard,
the owner of the derelict or abandoned vehicle and the owner or occupant of the
private property on which the same is located, whichever party having been so
notified, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and
disposition by the city, the owner or occupant of the private property where
same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
5. Notice Procedure: The police department, or agent thereof, of the city shall
give notice of removal to the registered owner of the vehicle, if said owner
can be ascertained and to the owner or occupant of the private property where
said vehicle is located at least seven (7) days before the time of compliance.
It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of same is posted upon the
vehicle itself or on a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the
vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the
registered owner of said vehicle if said owner can be ascertained and to the
owner or occupant of the private property at his/her last known address.
6. Content Of Notice: The notice shall contain the request for removal within
the time specified in this section, and the notice shall advise that upon
failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall
undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner
or occupant of the property. (1997 Code)
7. Request For Hearing: The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their
duly authorized agents, may file a written request for hearing before the
derelict vehicle appeals committee, within the seven (7) day period of
compliance, prescribed in subsection B5 of this section for the purpose of
defending the charges by the city. The derelict vehicle appeals committee shall
be composed of the person requesting notice and police commission to be
appointed by the mayor for a period of one year for each term. (1997 Code; amd.
Ord. 0-15-001, 3-24-2015)
8. Procedure For Hearing: The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable
after the filing of the request and the persons to whom the notices are
directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least three
(3) days in advance thereof. At any such hearing the city and the persons to
whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence
as either party deems necessary.
9. Removal Of Vehicle: If the violation described in the notice has not been
remedied within the seven (7) day period of compliance, or in the event that a
notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had, and the
existence of the violation is affirmed by the derelict vehicle appeals
committee, then the chief of police or his/her designee shall have the right to
take possession of the derelict or abandoned vehicle and remove it from the
premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or
refuse to allow such person to enter upon private property for the purpose of
removing a vehicle under the provisions of this section.
10. Notice Of Removal: Within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of such
vehicle, the chief of police shall give notice to the registered owner of the
vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property
from which the vehicle was removed that said vehicle has been impounded and
stored for violation of this section. The notice shall give the location of
where the vehicle is stored and the costs incurred by the city for removal.
11. Disposition Of Vehicles: Removed vehicles shall be impounded until lawfully
claimed or disposed of in accordance with the disposal procedures of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-203.
12. Penalty: Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code and ordered to make restitution for the vehicle removal and
storage costs. Each act in violation of any of the provisions hereof shall be
deemed a separate offence. A violation of this section shall be charged by the
issuance of a citation by the police department, as with other motor vehicle
violations. (1997 Code)
6-7-14: CURRENT VALID LICENSE TAGS:
A. Nuisance Declared: All operable motor vehicles on private property and in
view of the general public not displaying a current valid license tag in a
manner in accordance with the statutes and regulations of the state for the
display of license tags are hereby declared a nuisance.
B. Application For Exemption; Fee: Upon notice by the tagging of a vehicle, any
person who is the owner or keeper of an operable motor vehicle not displaying a
current, valid license tag shall, within seven (7) days after such vehicle is
tagged, either obtain and display a current valid license tag or make
application to the city clerk requesting exemption from the requirement of this
section and stating the reasons for such exemption. Such application shall be
accompanied by an application fee set by the city council.
C. Presentation To Council: Upon receiving an application for exemption, the
city clerk shall present the application to the city council or to such body
designated by the city council to consider such applications.
D. Request To Appear: On considering the application, city council or its
designated body may request that an applicant appear before it for further
information.
E. Approval/Rejection Of Application: After due consideration of an
application, the city council or its designated body shall approve or reject
such application. Their determination shall be final.
F. Procurement Of Valid Tags: Upon rejection of an application, an applicant
shall have seven (7) days from the date of rejection to display current valid
license tags or be in violation of this section.
G. Exception: This section does not apply to any vehicle that is kept within a
building or to a vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
H. Penalty: Any person in violation of the requirements of this section shall
be subject to the penalty provided for in this chapter. (1997 Code)
6-7-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating this chapter shall be subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code for each violation thereof. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 8
CAR OWNERS RESPONSIBILITY ACT:
ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY AND VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
6-8-1: Violations
6-8-2: General Regulations
6-8-3: Notice
6-8-4: Administrative Hearing
6-8-5: Bonding Procedure
6-8-6: Unclaimed Vehicles
6-8-1: VIOLATIONS:
A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner
of record, that is used in connection with the following violations shall be
subject to seizure and impoundment by the City of Colona, and the owner shall
be liable to the City for an administrative penalty in the amount of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), in addition to any towing and storage fees as
hereinafter provided.
   A.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 (Criminal Code of
1961); or
   B.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501(a); or
   C.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony, or in violation of the Cannabis Control Act 1
; or
   D.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act 2
; or
   E.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1, 24-1.5, or 24-3.1 (Criminal Code of 1961); or
   F.   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-303; or
   G.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/3 (Cannabis Control Act) or 570/102
(Illinois Controlled Substances Act); or
   H.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license,
in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, if the period of
expiration is greater than one year; or
   I.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
101, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's
license or permit due to a person's age; or
   J.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, 6-303, or 11-
501; or
   K.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
16, et seq., or 5/16A, et seq., (Criminal Code of 1961); or
   L.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 1961, when so provided by local ordinance.
   M.   Any other circumstances under which the vehicle may be towed pursuant
to this Code or the Colona Police Department policies and procedures.
(Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017; amd. Ord. 0-18-18, 12-10-2018; Ord. O-20-14, 11-23-
2020)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS 550/4(d), (e), (f), (g).
2 2. 720 ILCS 570/402.
6-8-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing State
or Federal laws or City ordinances pertaining to vehicle seizure and
impoundment, and these penalties shall be in addition to any penalties that may
be assessed by a court for any criminal charges.
   B.   The administrative penalty under this chapter shall be waived if the
vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time, a police report was
filed, and there is verifiable proof that the vehicle was stolen.
   C.   The references to provisions of State law shall not be interpreted to
require that prosecution of the specific charge is a necessary prerequisite to
enforcement of this subsection, nor shall this subsection require proof of the
violation beyond a reasonable doubt.
   D.   All administrative fees, and towing and storage fees, shall be imposed
on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of that owner.
(Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
6-8-3: NOTICE:
   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the
City. At the time the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall notify the
owner, or if the owner is not present, the person in control of the vehicle, of
the owner's right to request an administrative hearing. The officer shall also
provide notice that the motor vehicle will remain impounded pending the
completion of an administrative hearing, unless the owner or lessee of the
vehicle or a lienholder waives the administrative hearing by paying the
administrative impoundment fee and all towing and storage fees.
(Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
6-8-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
A. The City shall appoint an attorney licensed to practice law for at least
three (3) years to serve as an Administrative Hearing Officer.
B. The owner of record may contest the impoundment by filing a written request
for an administrative hearing with the Administrative Hearing Officer. The
request must be filed no later than ten (10) business days after the seizure.
C. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, a hearing shall be scheduled and
convened no later than forty five (45) days after receipt of said request.
D. Interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
Formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing, and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible. (Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
E. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of
the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in violation of this chapter, the
Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record of the motor
vehicle liable to the City for the amount of the administrative impoundment
fee, plus an additional administrative fee as set from time to time by the City
Council, and towing and storage fees. (Ord. 0-17-23, 11-27-2017)
F. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer does not determine by a
preponderance of the evidence that the motor vehicle was used in such a
violation, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and
for release of the vehicle, with no administrative impoundment fee due, and
after towing and storage fees have been paid. (Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
G. If, after the Hearing Officer makes a ruling of guilty, and allows for a
time to pay; the owner and driver, if not present, will be notified by U.S.
mail that they were found guilty in default, otherwise if at the hearing they
will be immediately notified. If the owner or operator of the vehicle found in
violation has not paid the determined fines and penalties by the time allotted
from the Hearing Officer, the City of Colona will turn the unpaid fees over to
collections to be collected. (Ord. 0-17-23, 11-27-2017)
6-8-5: BONDING PROCEDURE:
   Whenever the owner, or an authorized agent of the owner, of a vehicle seized
pursuant to this chapter wishes to retrieve their vehicle prior to the
evidentiary hearing, and without waiving the evidentiary hearing, they may do
so by posting a cash bond at the Colona Police Department. The cash bond will
be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus towing and storage
fees. The vehicle will be released once the bond has been paid.
(Ord. 0-18-18, 12-10-2018; Ord. 0-21-13, 12-13-2021)
6-8-6: UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility within
thirty five (35) days after the Administrative Hearing Officer issues a written
decision shall be deemed abandoned, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this Code.
(Ord. 0-17-2, 1-23-2017)
CHAPTER 9
GOLF CARTS AND NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-9-1: Definitions
6-9-2: Policy Statement
6-9-3: Rules And Regulations
6-9-4: Permits
6-9-5: Enforcement
6-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY STREETS: Any of the streets within the boundaries of the City of Colona,
Illinois except for state and county roads.
GOLF CART: A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purposes of
transporting one or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment
while engaged in the playing of golf, supervising the play of golf, or
maintaining the condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course.
Golf carts utilized by the Colona Police Department shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
NEIGHBORHOOD VEHICLE: A self-propelled, electronically powered fourth-wheeled
motor vehicle (or a self-propelled, gasoline powered four-wheeled motor vehicle
with an engine displacement under 1,200 cubic centimeters) which is capable of
attaining in one mile a speed of more than 20 miles per hour, but not more than
25 miles per hour, and which conforms to federal regulations under Title 49
C.R.F. Part 571.500. Neighborhood vehicles or other similar vehicles utilized
by the Colona Police Department shall be exempt from the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. O-20-08, 5-11-2020)
6-9-2: POLICY STATEMENT:
   This chapter is adopted in the interest of public safety. Golf carts and
neighborhood vehicles are not designed or manufactured to be used on public
streets and roads, hereinafter “street(s)” and the City of Colona in no way
advocates or endorses their operation on streets. The City, by regulating such
operation is merely addressing safety issues. This chapter is not to be relied
upon as determination that operation on streets is safe or advisable even if
done in accordance with this chapter. All persons operating golf cards and
neighborhood vehicles must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of
themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists,
and pedestrians. All persons who operate or ride golf carts and neighborhood
vehicles on streets inside the City of Colona do so at their own risk and
peril. The City of Colona has no liability under any theory of liability for
permitting golf carts to be operated on City streets. Golf carts, neighborhood
vehicles, or similar vehicles utilized by the Colona Police Department shall be
exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. O-20-08, 5-11-2020)
6-9-3: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles may only be operated on streets within the
City of Colona in accordance with the following rules and regulations:
   A.   Any person who operates a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle in the City
of Colona takes full responsibility for all liability associated with operating
the golf cart or neighborhood vehicle.
   B.   Any person who operates a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle must be at
least eighteen (18) years of age and possess a valid driver’s license to
operate a motor vehicle issued by Illinois or any other state.
   C.   Any person who operates a golf cart must possess proof of liability
insurance, meeting Illinois statutes requirements.
   D.   Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles may be driven on streets only from
sunrise to sunset.
   E.   A golf cart or neighborhood vehicle shall have its headlight and tail
lamps lighted at all times when operated on City streets.
   F.   Golf carts or neighborhood vehicles may not be operated when visibility
is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions or at any time when
there is insufficient light to clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway
at a distance of 500 feet.
   G.   Golf carts or neighborhood vehicles may not be operated on sidewalks or
City parks other than parking areas. This chapter does not apply to Colona
Scott Family Park. (See Colona Scott Family Park Rules for their regulations.)
   H.   Golf carts or neighborhood vehicles may be operated on City streets
which have a posted speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour or less, but golf
carts may never exceed twenty (20) miles per hour.
   I.   Golf carts or neighborhood vehicles may not be operated on the
following state highways or County Roads except to cross said highways at
intersections in a path of ninety (90) degrees to said highways:
      1.   Illinois Route 84.
      2.   Poppy Garden Road.
      3.   Cleveland Road.
      4.   US Route 6.
   J.   Golf carts and neighborhood vehicles must be equipped as follows:
      1.   Horn.
      2.   Brakes and brake lights.
      3.   Turn signals.
      4.   A steering wheel apparatus.
      5.   Tires.
      6.   Rearview mirror.
      7.   Approved “Slow Moving Vehicle” emblem on the rear of the vehicle
(625 ILCS 5/12-709).
      8.   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of five
hundred (500) feet to the front which must illuminate when in operation.
      9.   Tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least one hundred
(100) feet from the rear which must be illuminated when in operation.
      10.   The City of Colona issued permit, being at least 3 ½” x 3 ½”, shall
be displayed in the middle of the slow-moving vehicle emblem on the rear of
said vehicle.
      11.   Any additional requirements of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
   K.   Any person who operates a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle on the
streets in the City of Colona must adhere to all applicable state laws
concerning the possession and use of alcoholic beverages, and all other illegal
drugs, as well as all other state traffic laws.
   L.   The registered owner of the golf cart or neighborhood vehicle, or the
operator of the vehicle if not a minor, will be responsible for any
unauthorized operation of said vehicle.
   M.   Operation of golf cart or neighborhood vehicles is not allowed on the
Hennepin Canal Bike Path.
   N.   Golf cart or neighborhood vehicle drivers must yield the right-of-way
to overtaking vehicles at all times.
   O.   The maximum occupancy of golf carts or neighborhood vehicles traveling
on City streets will be one person per bucket seat or two people per bench
seat.
   P.   Children must be properly seated, with seatbelts for children under 6
years of age, while said golf cart or neighborhood vehicle is in motion, and
may not be transported in a negligent manner.
   Q.   Golf carts or neighborhood vehicles are only allowed to park in
handicapped parking spaces if the driver or at least one passenger has a valid
handicap parking sticker.
   R.   No unsafe modifications may be made to the vehicle’s suspension.
   S.   All golf carts and neighborhood vehicles on the streets must be
inspected by the person(s) or entity(s) designated by the City of Colona, and
must have valid permit documentation from the City of Colona visibly displayed
on the back rear of the cart on the driver’s side.
   T.   Neighborhood vehicles with motors in excess of 900 cc shall not be
permitted under this chapter.
(Ord. O-20-08, 5-11-2020)
6-9-4: PERMITS:
   A.   No person shall operate a motorized golf cart or neighborhood vehicle
without obtaining a permit from the City of Colona as provided in this section.
   B.   Every application for a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the
City and shall include the following information:
      1.   Name and address of applicant.
      2.   Name of liability insurance carrier.
      3.   The serial number, make, model and description of golf cart or
neighborhood vehicle.
      4..   Signed Release or Waiver of Liability by applicant releasing the
City and agreeing to indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all
future claims resulting from their operations on City streets.
      5.   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit.
      6.   A permit application fee will be $50 for each permit issued.
      7.   Such other information as the City may require.
      8.   Permits shall be granted for the period May 1st to April 30th of the
following year and must be renewed annually, for the period May 1st to April
30th. Permit application fee shall not be pro-rated for partial years.
   C.   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be inspected by designated representative to ensure
that the vehicle is safe to operate on City streets and is in compliance with
this Article and with the State of Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
      2.   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a certificate signed
by the physician, certifying that the applicant is able to safely operate a
qualified golf cart on City Streets.
      3.   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance with
the provisions of the Illinois Statutes regarding minimum liability insurance.
   D.   Insurance coverage will be verified as in effect by the City of Colona
when issuing or renewing a permit.
   E.   The City may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a
finding that the holder thereof has violated any provision of this Article or
there is evidence that permittee cannot safely operate a qualified golf cart on
the designated roadways.
   F.   The Colona Police Department shall monitor the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
   G.   Permits shall be granted for the period of May 1 to April 30 of the
following year and must be renewed annually. Permit application fee will be
pro- rated at twenty-five ($25.00) dollars if purchased February 1 through
April 30.
(Ord. O-20-08, 5-11-2020; Ord. O-21-04, 5-10-2021)
6-9-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than $100.00 nor more than $750.00 for each violation. Violations double with
each occurrence per calendar year.
   B.   A second violation of this chapter shall, in addition to being subject
to time, be grounds for the revocation of the vehicle’s permit issued for a
period up to one (1) year.
   C.   Upon investigation by and the recommendation of the City of Colona, the
City Council may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon a finding
that there is evidence that the permittee cannot safely operate the motorized
golf cart or neighborhood vehicles on the designated streets.
   D.   The City of Colona reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter
at any time, and if such amendment or repeal affects the rights of permit
holders, all permit holders will be notified thereof by the City by certified
mail.
   E.   No person receiving a permit pursuant to the terms of this chapter
shall have any legal right to the continuation of said Ordinance regardless of
the cost of rendering a golf cart or neighborhood vehicle in compliance with
this chapter for the purpose of its operation in the City of Colona pursuant to
this chapter.
   F.   The City of Colona shall not under any circumstances be liable for any
expenses incurred by an applicant or licensee for that applicant or licensee’s
cost for the acquisition and/or modification of such golf cart or neighborhood
vehicle to comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   G.   Golf carts, neighborhood vehicles or similar vehicles, utilized by the
Colona Police Department shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. O-20-08, 5-11-2020)
TITLE 7
PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS 1
SECTION:
7-1-1: Supervision Of Public Ways
7-1-2: Paving Construction
7-1-3: Openings In Streets, Permit Required
7-1-4: Injury To New Pavements
7-1-5: Repairs; Report Defects
7-1-6: Barricades
7-1-7: Private Use Of Streets
7-1-8: Encroachments
7-1-9: Obstructing Streets, Drains
7-1-10: Deposits On Streets
7-1-11: Snow Removal
7-1-12: Burning Leaves And Rubbish
7-1-13: Poles And Wires; Permission To Erect
7-1-14: Off-Road Vehicles
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-1 et seq.
7-1-1: SUPERVISION OF PUBLIC WAYS:
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, and other public ways
shall be under the supervision of the Public Works Director. (1997 Code)
7-1-2: PAVING CONSTRUCTION:
A. Permit Required: It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on
any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same,
without having first secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits
shall be made to the City Clerk and shall state the location of the intended
pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person who is to do the actual
construction work. No such permits shall be issued except where the work will
conform to the provisions of this Code.
B. Bond Required: Each applicant shall file a bond in the amount specified by
the City Council with surety to be approved by the Council conditioned to
indemnify the City for any loss or damage resulting from the work undertaken or
the manner of doing the same. (1997 Code)
7-1-3: OPENINGS IN STREETS, PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening in any public street
without a permit from the City Council. All such lawfully maintained openings
shall be guarded by a suitable strong cover or railing to the approval of the
Public Works Director. (1997 Code)
7-1-4: INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or
injure any newly laid street while the same is guarded by a warning sign or
barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft or newly laid surface. (1997 Code)
7-1-5: REPAIRS; REPORT DEFECTS:
A. Repairs; Supervision: All public streets shall be in good repair. Such
repair work, whether done by the City or by the abutting owner, shall be under
the supervision of the Public Works Director.
B. Report Of Defects: It shall be the duty of every City officer and employee
becoming cognizant of any defect in any street, or any obstruction thereof, to
report the same to the Public Works Director as soon as possible. (1997 Code)
7-1-6: BARRICADES:
A. Laying Or Repairing Street; Excavation: Any person laying or repairing any
street or other public place or making an excavation in the same shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury of any person or vehicle by reason of the
work. Such barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime.
B. Defects In Streets: Any defect in any such street or public way shall be
barricaded to prevent injury, and any person properly maintaining any opening
or excavation while the same remains open shall guard the same with proper
barricades and lights.
C. Disturbance Or Interference Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to disturb or
interfere with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any
new pavement or excavation or opening in any public street. (1997 Code)
7-1-7: PRIVATE USE OF STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street or other public place as
space for the display of goods or merchandise for sale; or to write or make any
sign or advertisement on any such street or public place 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-8.
7-1-8: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any building or structure which
encroaches upon any public street or property. (1997 Code)
7-1-9: OBSTRUCTING STREETS, DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. Streets: To cause, create or maintain any obstruction of any street or other
public way except as may be specified by ordinance or by the public works
director 1
.
B. Drains: To obstruct any drain in any public street or property. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-3.
7-1-10: DEPOSITS ON STREETS:
A. Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which
may be harmful to the surfacing thereof, or any waste material, or any glass,
or other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property 1
.
B. Exception: Coal or other materials may be deposited in streets preparatory
to delivery or use; provided, that such deposit does not reduce the usable
width of the roadway at that point to less than eighteen feet (18'), and
provided that such material or coal other than material to be used in actual
building construction, shall not be permitted to remain in such street for more
than three (3) hours. Any such material or coal shall be guarded by lights if
the same remains upon any street after nighttime. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-10.
7-1-11: SNOW REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful to park, continue to park or leave a vehicle on an avenue
or street when two inches (2") or more of snow has accumulated during a
snowfall to allow for city snow removal. It shall be unlawful for any resident
to cause any snow from their property to be removed, pushed, thrown, or
deposited onto any other property other than their own. It shall be unlawful to
push, throw, or deposit any snow onto a public way at any time. (Ord. 0-15-002,
3-9-2015)
7-1-12: BURNING LEAVES AND RUBBISH:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other
substances upon any of the public streets of the city 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-2-4-5 of this code for burning restrictions.
7-1-13: POLES AND WIRES; PERMISSION TO ERECT:
It shall be unlawful to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires
over any public place, street or other public way without first having secured
permission from the mayor and city council. (1997 Code)
7-1-14: OFF ROAD VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful to operate on any public street, road or highway within
the city any all-terrain vehicle; snowmobile; or motorcycle designed for off
road use.
A. The penalty for violating this section shall fall under the general penalty
provisions. (Ord. 00-07, 2-28-2000)
B. This offense shall also be included as a no contest option. The no contest
fine is fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 05-05, 2-28-2005)
ARTICLE A. CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Purpose And Scope
7-1A-2: Definitions
7-1A-3: Annual Registration Required
7-1A-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
7-1A-5: Action On Permit Applications
7-1A-6: Effect Of Permit
7-1A-7: Revised Permit Drawings
7-1A-8: Insurance
7-1A-9: Indemnification
7-1A-10: Security Fund
7-1A-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
7-1A-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
7-1A-13: General Construction Standards
7-1A-14: Traffic Control
7-1A-15: Location Of Facilities
7-1A-16: Construction Methods And Materials
7-1A-17: Vegetation Control
7-1A-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications
7-1A-19: Cleanup And Restoration
7-1A-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
7-1A-21: Variances
7-1A-22: Enforcement
7-1A-23: Penalties
7-1A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures
for constructing facilities on rights of way within the city's jurisdiction,
which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the
integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights of way and the
city as a whole.
B. Facilities Subject To This Article: This article applies to all facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way
within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established prior to
the effective date of this article may continue to be maintained, repaired and
operated by the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be
otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
C. Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The city, in its discretion and
as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license or
similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city rights of way. Utilities
that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that
the city enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the city may
provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this article.
D. Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
1. Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that a
utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
2. Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this article and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
3. Conflicts In This Code: This article supersedes all ordinances or parts
thereof adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of
such conflict.
4. Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable federal
or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this article,
the utility shall comply with the requirements of this article to the maximum
extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
5. Sound Engineering Judgment: The city shall use sound engineering judgment
when administering this article and may vary the standards, conditions, and
requirements expressed in this article when the city so determines. Nothing
herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city to regulate its
rights of way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American association of state highway and transportation officials.
ANSI: American national standards institute.
ASTM: American society for testing and materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this article.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber-optic devices.
CITY: The city of Colona.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO roadside design
guide.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the city of Colona.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of- way lines of a
right of way.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The city director of public works or his or her
designee.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this article, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The city engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track and
rails, wires, ducts, fiber-optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights
of way under this article, except those owned by the city.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
city director of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the
life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of
the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
ILCC: Illinois commerce commission.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under a right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
center line of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
7-1A-4 and
7-1A-5 of this article.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly
used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the city has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the city. "Right-of-way" shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous sentence and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
7-1A-10 of this article.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as defined in the Illinois telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the city
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the public right of way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this article.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 14-01, 8-
27-2001)
7-1A-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies a right of way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the director of public works providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section
7-1A-8 of this article, in the form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 14-01,
8-27-2001)
7-1A-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
A. Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this article) any
facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any city right
of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new facility,
3) disrupts the "right of way" (as defined in this article), or 4) materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above,
along, under, across or within the right of way, without first filing an
application with the city director of public works and obtaining a permit from
the city therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit
shall be required for installation and maintenance of service connections to
customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the right of way.
B. Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this article
shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in such number
of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may designate
those portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain
proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by
clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
C. Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made by
the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
1. The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
2. The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
3. The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail addresses
of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with respect to
the application;
4. A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of
the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The scope and
detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and character of
the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be
affected or impacted by the work proposed;
5. Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
a. A written traffic-control plan demonstrating the protective measures and
devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois manual on uniform
traffic-control devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and
to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
b. An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of potential
emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and hazardous
materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant. The intended
response shall include notification to the city and shall promote protection of
the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ILCC regulations for
emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this section unless the
city finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
6. Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed, including the
certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and specifications
comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
7. Evidence of insurance as required in section
7-1A-8 of this article;
8. Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
7-1A-10 of this article;
9. Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of section
7-1A-21 of this article; and
10. Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city.
D. Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities: In
addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
1. In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the applicant is
required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
2. In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size, design,
construction class, and operating pressures;
3. In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the Illinois
environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies, have been
satisfied;
4. In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and water
pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control, have been satisfied;
5. In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types of
petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
E. Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
F. Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall
be accompanied by a fee as set by the city council from time to time. No
application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that
is paying the municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to title 3, chapter 13 of this code or the optional state
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
telecommunications municipal infrastructure maintenance fee act, or by any
electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act.
(Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
A. City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the city director
of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does
not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the city director of public works shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the city director of
public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this article and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and
regulations, the city director of public works shall issue a permit therefor as
soon as practicable.
B. Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
1. Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it
intends to commence work governed by this article for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The city director of public works
shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may be
placed, used and constructed.
2. In the event that the city director of public works fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the city by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction, or
b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this article.
3. Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a permit is
required for work pursuant to section
7-1A-4 of this article the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection B1 of this
section. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
A. Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A permit
from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain activities in
accordance with this article on city rights of way, and does not create a
property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the rights
of others who may have an interest in the public rights of way.
B. Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the city does
not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the city and
all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. (Ord. 14-01,
8-27-2001)
7-1A-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within ninety (90) days
after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this article, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with section
7-1A-21 of this article. If the city denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right of way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-8: INSURANCE:
A. Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying a right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the city, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents,
and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in subsections A1
and A2 of this section:
1. Commercial general liability insurance, including premises- operations,
explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to as "X", "C",
and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage with limits not
less than:
a. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death to each
person;
b. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
c. Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of liability;
2. Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a combined
single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury and
property damage for each accident;
3. Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
4. Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
B. Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may be
in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
C. Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the policies
required by this section to the city within ten (10) days following receipt of
a written request therefor from the city.
D. Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the City Public Works Director of such intent to
cancel or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no event
later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
E. Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The legal
liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the matters that
are the subject of the insurance policies required by this section shall not be
limited by such insurance policies or self-insurance or by the recovery of any
amounts thereunder. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this article or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
article by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-10: SECURITY FUND:
A. Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in an
amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
1. The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of this
article;
2. Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by the
permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this article; and
3. The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs, or
expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this article including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this article to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this article or any other applicable law.
B. Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the city in the form,
at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable to the
city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the city.
Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this subsection shall,
at a minimum:
1. Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the city and
the permittee;
2. Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by the city
of any amounts covered by it; and
3. Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the state of
Illinois at which it can be drawn.
C. Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the city director of public works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are likely
to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the city director of
public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the security fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this subsection for any single phase.
D. Withdrawals: The city, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
1. Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee hereunder;
2. Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and unpaid;
3. Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs or expenses which
the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by the permittee; or
4. Fails to comply with any provision of this article that the city determines
can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
E. Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written notice
from the city that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in subsection
C of this section.
F. Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued on the
amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the city, upon
written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
G. Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work authorized
under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of the security
fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a reasonable time
after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate the city for
failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this article or other
applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit, the security
fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the property of
the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage
incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided that any amounts
in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
H. Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the city with respect to the
security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved
by this article or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect any other
right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be
entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which
may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
A. City Right To Revoke Permit: The city may revoke or suspend a permit issued
pursuant to this article for one or more of the following reasons:
1. Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete statements in
the permit application;
2. Noncompliance with this article;
3. Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
4. Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in accordance
with the permit and approved plans.
B. Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The city shall send written notice of
its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this article
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
C. Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension:
Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from the city, the
permittee shall have the following options:
1. Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for the
revocation or suspension;
2. Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the deficiencies
stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such correction to the
city within five (5) working days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation; or
3. Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across, or within the public rights of way and restore the rights of way
to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the
city within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this subsection.
D. Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation or
suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery of
any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of this
section.
E. Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to
comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the city or its
designee may, at the option of the city: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon
not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days' notice to
the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city
for all costs of removal. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
A. Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the city no less than thirty
(30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right of
way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the
facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, including this article, with respect to the work and facilities in
the right of way.
B. Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be amended
to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended
permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have accepted,
and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if the new
owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right of way.
C. Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must be
changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-
2001)
7-1A-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic-control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications:
1. Standard specifications for road and bridge construction;
2. Supplemental specifications and recurring special provisions;
3. Highway design manual;
4. Highway standards manual;
5. Standard specifications for traffic-control items;
6. Illinois manual on uniform traffic-control devices (92 Illinois
administrative code section 545);
7. Flagger's handbook;
8. Work site protection manual for daylight maintenance operations; and
9. Standard specifications for water and sewer main construction in Illinois.
B. Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
article, the city director of public works shall determine, in the exercise of
sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the city director of public works shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation
of a facility in the future. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
A. Minimum Requirements: The city's minimum requirements for traffic protection
are contained in IDOT's Illinois manual on uniform traffic-control devices and
this code.
B. Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is responsible
for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and flaggers,
when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local requirements
for protection of the public and the utility's workers when performing any work
on the public rights of way.
C. Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is minimum
interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
D. Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
7-1A-20 of this article, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
E. Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
A. Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
1. Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be located
within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a. Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way line and as
nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole alignment will
permit;
b. Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from the curb
with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face of the curb,
where available;
c. Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement edge as
practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
d. No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
e. Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of
the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
2. Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
a. The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the right-of-way line;
b. A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a highway only if
other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound engineering
judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit without
disrupting the pavement); and
c. In the case of an underground power or communications line, the facility
shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not more than
five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line or as near as practicable.
B. Facilities Crossing Highways:
1. No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing facilities
installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may require
the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
2. Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities shall
not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
3. Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at or as
near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the center line as practicable.
4. Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or communication
facility may cross a highway only if:
a. It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC's rules
entitled "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83 Illinois
administrative code 305);
b. Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right- of-way line of
the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
c. Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
5. Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
a. The design materials and construction methods will provide maximum
maintenance-free service life; and
b. Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is provided in
the initial installation.
6. Markers: The city may require the utility to provide a marker at each right-
of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or communication
facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type of facility,
the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be eliminated as
provided in current federal regulations. (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
C. Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
D. Freestanding Facilities:
1. The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding facility
located within a right of way.
2. The city may require any freestanding facility located within a right of way
to be screened from view.
E. Appearance Standards:
1. The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular locations
in order to preserve visual quality.
2. A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not require
extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the
highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
F. Aboveground Installation: Aboveground facilities may be installed only if:
1. No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
2. New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
3. The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will employ
suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of aesthetic
qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting safety.
Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting armless,
single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and cable.
G. Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
1. Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway structures
only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of accommodating
the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but are not
limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and
tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
2. A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
a. The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be transmitted and
an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in the event of
damage to or failure of the facility;
b. The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway structure in
the transportation system;
c. The alternative routings available to the utility and their comparative
practicability;
d. The proposed method of attachment;
e. The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the proposed
facility;
f. The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
g. The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
h. The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared to the risk
involved. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
A. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction Methods:
1. Boring Or Jacking:
a. Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the city
director of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or
jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
b. Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be permitted under
the roadway.
c. Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six inches (6")
(0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following pipe,
and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of the
following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
d. Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches (6") or
less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger, or
auger and following pipe method.
e. Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of any tree
designated by the city to be preserved shall be bored under or around the root
system.
2. Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or maintenance on
rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable portions of section
603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction".
a. Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the practicable minimum
consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only one-half (1/2) of any
intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special permission is
obtained from the city director of public works.
b. Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed excavated
material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois manual on
uniform traffic-control devices. Where practicable, the excavated material
shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added protection.
Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved portion of the
roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing excavated
material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material shall be
hauled to an off-road location.
c. Tree Drip Line To Be Preserved: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
3. Backfilling:
a. Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of facilities
shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using methods and
materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is unsuitable
for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
b. For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a facility is
completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the director of public works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the
director of public works.
4. Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair shall be
permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed to
traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in subsection A4d of this
section is permitted under section
7-1A-21 of this article, the following requirements shall apply:
a. Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as practicable
with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the
director of public works.
b. Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon as
practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
c. All saw cuts shall be full depth.
d. For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a concrete surface/
base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last three (3) years,
permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an emergency
repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the time of the
reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a JULIE locate.
5. Encasement:
a. Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the highway and any
other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either by one-piece
fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the city.
b. The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located in
the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the highway.
c. In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall be furnished
between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved jointed pipe is used
under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed prior to
highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical joints are of
a type approved by the city. Bell and spigot-type pipe shall be encased
regardless of installation method.
d. In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less, encasement may be
eliminated.
e. In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
f. If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products pipeline, the
facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does not disrupt
the right of way.
6. Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
Type Of Facility                           Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general)   30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed 24 inches (0.6 m)
method
Gas or petroleum products                  30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                                 Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                           protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage   Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                       protection
 
B. Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
1. Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
a. Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities within city
rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in conformity with
the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code 305 (formerly general order
160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the national electrical safety
code.
b. Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities shall use
single-pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles shall be
used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the installation
so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if there is no
feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards for maximum
visibility.
c. Underground Facilities:
(1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that special
consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when crossing
improved entrances and side roads.
(2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement shall be
provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated only if: a)
the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other
approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or b) the installation is by the open-trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
(3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national electrical safety
code.
2. Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines may be
installed by:
a. The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods which compress
the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
b. Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the ditch lines or
toes of slopes of the highway;
c. Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines or toes of
slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
d. Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not possible
by other means.
3. Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within rights of
way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city approved manner
and in conformance with the federal code of the office of pipeline safety
operations, department of transportation, part 192 - transportation of natural
and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety standards (49 CFR 192),
IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", and all
other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within rights of
way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code for pressure
piping. (Liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-B 31.4.)
5. Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or Drainage
Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines
within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
"Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
6. Ground-Mounted Appurtenances: Ground-mounted appurtenances to overhead or
underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall be provided
with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond
the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be provided by
an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy-duty plastic or similar material
approved by the director of public works. With the approval of the director of
public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of
vegetation- free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
C. Materials:
1. General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities within
rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the appropriate
industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the Illinois commerce commission,
or the standards established by other official regulatory agencies for the
appropriate industry.
2. Material Storage On Right Of Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be
obtained from the city.
3. Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the city shall
identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction of
the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
D. Operational Restrictions:
1. Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of the city,
be required to be discontinued when such operations would create hazards to
traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations may also be
required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such that
construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
2. These restrictions may be waived by the director of public works when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
3. Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction are eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. until four thirty o'clock (4:30) P.M. Monday through
Friday.
E. Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1
. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
7-1A-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
A. Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
article.
1. Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming permits
shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent workers
with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning practices. Tree
trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the interest of assuring
that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
2. Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or misshapen
trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of the tree
trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the international society of
arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
B. Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The city may require that
special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, sidearm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
C. Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the director of public works that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS:
A. Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city, a
utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate,
change or alter the position of any utility facilities within the rights of way
whenever the corporate authorities have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction,
repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the
operations of the city in or upon, the rights of way.
B. Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights of way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
1. Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or franchise,
unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
2. If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant of a
license or franchise, if required;
3. If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance of a
required permit in violation of this article; or
4. If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not permitted by
the permittee's license or franchise.
C. Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The city retains the right
and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of way of
the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in
response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the
municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to cutting or
removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after cutting or
removing a facility.
D. Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the public
rights of way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the city director of public works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility
shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in a timely
manner and to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the city director of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
A. General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
B. Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance with
normal procedures for securing a permit:
1. If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the right of
way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary protection
for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way including the use
of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does not exist on the
traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to require the parking
on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations, adequate signs and
lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an emergency will
only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility is available.
2. In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the city
director of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the city police shall be notified immediately.
3. In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete repairs
as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the traveling
public.
C. Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the city of a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-21: VARIANCES:
A. Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more of
the provisions of this article must do so in writing to the city director of
public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this article from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
B. Authority To Grant Variances: The city director of public works shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this article identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.
C. Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The city director of public works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
1. One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as terrain
features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship that
would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public purposes
to be achieved by the provision; and
2. All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that would
conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are impracticable
in relation to the requested approach.
D. Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the city director of public works may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this article but which carry
out the purposes of this article. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-22: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this article. (Ord.
14-01, 8-27-2001)
7-1A-23: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the city will
incur delay or other costs, including third-party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this article. Unless
the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the city's costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility who
does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 14-01, 8-27-2001)
CHAPTER 2
TREES AND SHRUBS 1
SECTION:
7-2-1: Permits Required
7-2-2: Dangerous Trees
7-2-3: Wire Near Trees And Shrubs
7-2-4: Excavations
7-2-5: Prohibited Acts
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-72-1.
7-2-1: PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. Planting: It shall be unlawful to plant any tree or bush in any public
street or parkway or other public place without having secured a permit
therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and
referred by the Clerk to the Public Works Director before issuance. All trees
and shrubs so planted shall be placed subject to the direction and the approval
of the City Council.
B. Removal: It shall be unlawful to remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any
such public place without having secured a permit therefor. Applications for
such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and shall be referred to and
approved by the City Council before issuance. (1997 Code)
7-2-2: DANGEROUS TREES:
Any tree or shrub which overhangs any street or other public place in the City
in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel, or within ten
feet (10') of a street shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises abutting
or of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction
shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or
across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on
which such tree grows or stands. The Public Works Director may trim any such
tree or shrub or remove any such tree or branch thereof so that the obstruction
or danger to traffic or passage shall be done away with. (1997 Code)
7-2-3: WIRE NEAR TREES AND SHRUBS:
A. Permission Required: It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to any
tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the
permission of the City Council.
B. Maintenance Of Poles And Wires: Any person who maintains poles and wires in
the streets or other public places, shall, in the absence of a provision in the
franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away
from any trees and shrubs in such places as far as may be possible, and keep
all such trees and shrubs near such wires and poles properly trimmed, subject
to the supervision of the Public Works Director, so that no injury shall be
done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs and trees by their contact.
(1997 Code)
7-2-4: EXCAVATIONS:
In making excavations in streets or other public places, proper care shall be
taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub wherever possible.
(1997 Code)
7-2-5: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. Injury: To injure any tree or shrub planted or growing in any such public
place.
B. Advertisements, Notices: To attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any
tree or shrub in any such public place. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
CITY PARKS 1
SECTION:
7-3-1: Prohibited Acts
7-3-2: Use By Organized Groups
7-3-3: Hours
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-100-1.
7-3-1: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
A. Destruction Of Property, Facilities: To wilfully mark, deface, disfigure,
injure, tamper with, or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables,
benches, fireplaces railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other
public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards,
whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary
markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
B. Pollution Of Water: To throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, stream or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing
into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid which will or
may result in the pollution of such waters.
C. Refuse: To dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper,
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or any other trash. No
such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any
park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the
proper receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not
provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
D. Vehicles, Speed Limit: To operate a motor vehicle in any area in such parks
in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour.
E. Alcoholic Beverages: To have in his/her possession, custody or control any
alcoholic beverage (including beer) of any kind whatsoever.
F. Sales Prohibited: To expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor
shall any person or business place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. It is further
unlawful to announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any
article or service for sale or hire.
G. Advertising, Notices: To paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign,
placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or
cause to be erected any sign whatever in any public park.
H. Fireworks, Weapons: To have in his/her possession in any parks in the City,
any firearm, fireworks, explosives, bow and arrow, or weapon of any other kind
and description.
I. Motorcycles: To operate any motorcycle in the City parks, except on an
improved road and in accordance with all City and State laws.
J. Definition: "Person" shall mean any individual seventeen (17) years of age
or older. (1997 Code)
7-3-2: USE BY ORGANIZED GROUPS:
A. Purpose: It is the desire of the City Council to provide for the use of City
parks by organized groups. The City wants to ensure that the groups take
responsibility for their actions to ensure that the parks are kept clean and
the health and safety of the public is protected.
B. Application For Use Permit: Those requesting to exclusively use all or a
portion of the parks shall make application to the City Council for a use
permit to reserve all or a portion of the park. Such application shall be on a
form provided by, or similar to forms provided by, the City Clerk and shall at
a minimum state the intended number of people expected to attend, the use of
the park, the area requested to be reserved, the date and hours of use, the
name of the organization, the responsible individual for the group, the groups
liability insurance carrier. The organizers may not charge any admission fees
and agree to abide by all state and local laws and regulations.
C. Groups Larger Than Fifty: At any event in which more than fifty (50) people
will be in attendance, whether all or a portion of the park will be used
exclusively or not, the sponsoring individual or group will provide the chief
of police and the city council with:
1. Parking Plan: Written plans for the parking of vehicles for those in
attendance, so as to assure the city council of adequate parking arrangements
for the event.
2. Traffic And Crowd Control:
a. Written Plan: Written plans for the providing of adequate security for
traffic control and crowd control. Such plans shall be subject to the review of
the chief of police.
b. Uniformed Law Enforcement: The chief may require that the sponsoring
individual or group hire a sufficient number of uniformed law enforcement
officers for traffic control and crowd control, depending upon the anticipated
size of the attending crowd, parking facilities available, and the proximity of
state highways or a heavily traveled or congested area.
c. Police Squad Car: The chief of police may require the use of a police squad
car to slow down and regulate traffic, if the planned event is in the vicinity
of a state highway or a heavily traveled or congested area.
d. Cash Deposit: The chief of police may require that a cash deposit be made by
the sponsoring individual or group, seven (7) calendar days in advance of the
planned event in order to adequately assure payment for the security force and/
or police squad car.
3. Sanitation:
a. Written Plan: Written plans for the providing of adequate sanitation
facilities in order to accommodate those in attendance at the planned event.
b. Toilet Facilities: Such plans shall provide for adequate portable toilet
facilities, as determined by the health inspector, considering the anticipated
size of the attending crowd.
c. Written Contract: The health inspector may require that a written contract
with a reputable company, providing portable toilet facilities by the
sponsoring individual or organization, be provided to the city at least seven
(7) calendar days prior to the event.
4. Attachment To Application: Such plans as required by this subsection C shall
be attached to the application for use permit submitted to the city council the
same as specified in subsection B of this section.
D. Use Fee: The council may from time to time, by resolution, set a usage fee
to reserve all or a portion of the parks.
E. Waiver Of Fee: The council, in its discretion, may waive the usage fee for
certain educational, civic, charitable groups or organized baseball or softball
groups.
F. Liability Insurance: The council, as a condition of the permit, can require
a liability insurance policy be taken out to cover the city prior to issuance
of a permit. (1997 Code)
7-3-3: HOURS:
Except as stated hereafter the parks shall be open to the public twenty four
(24) hours daily; however, the city council, by resolution or ordinance, has
the authority to change the closing hours at any time.
A. The closing and opening hours of all parks and the parkway leased by the
city of Colona on the Hennepin Canal shall be deemed to be one-half (1/2) hour
after sundown for closing and shall open one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise for
individuals under the age of eighteen (18).
B. Individuals under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to remain in the
recreation areas after the closing if accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
C. Individuals under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed to remain in
recreation areas after the closing on those occasions a designated area is used
for a special city sponsored activity. Individuals under eighteen (18) who are
attending such sponsored events shall be out of the area one-half (1/2) hour
after the event closes. (Ord. 0-08-10, 11-9-2009)
TITLE 8
WATER AND SEWER
CHAPTER 1
WATER REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
8-1-1: Water And Sewer Systems Combined
8-1-2: Water Department Established
8-1-2-1: Definitions
8-1-3: Application For Water; Deposit Required
8-1-4: Water Rates And Revenues
8-1-5: Rendition Of Bills; Payment
8-1-6: Water Rent Payable By Owner
8-1-7: Liability Of City
8-1-8: Unauthorized Use
8-1-9: Water Meters
8-1-10: Rules And Regulations
8-1-11: Right To Restrict Use Of Water
8-1-12: Service Connection Specifications
8-1-13: Connecting Two Premises; Stopcocks, Pipes
8-1-14: Water Use For Building Or Construction
8-1-15: Obstructing Water Flow
8-1-16: Violation Of Rules; Nonpayment Of Bills
8-1-17: Access To Records
8-1-18: Water Meter Reader
8-1-19: Tap-On Fees For New Connections
8-1-20: Service Line Extensions
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-125-3, 5/11-139-8.
8-1-1: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The city council hereby determines that the waterworks and sewer systems
operate in combination. (1997 Code)
8-1-2: WATER DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the city to be known as
the water department. The mayor and city council are hereby authorized to
appoint a public works director and all other necessary employees. The director
shall have the general management and control of the waterworks system,
subject, however, to the supervision of the mayor and city council. (1997 Code)
8-1-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
CHARGES:
   Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
water system.
   Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the waterworks.
   Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc., outstanding.
   Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
   User Charge: A charge levied on users of waterworks for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   Water Service Charge: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users of
the water facilities. The service charge shall be computed and shall consist of
the total of the basic user charge and the local capital cost if applicable.
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
CURB COCK: A shutoff valve attached to a water service pipe from a water main
to a building installed near the curb, which may be operated by a valve key to
start or stop flow in the water supply lines of a building. Also called curb
stop.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
GOVERNMENT:
   Federal Government: Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency.
Federal Act: The Federal 1996 Safe Drinking Water Act and amendments.
   Local Government: Approving Authority: The City Council of the City of
Colona.
City: The City of Colona.
   State Government: Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency.
State Act: The Illinois Antipollution Bond Act of 1970.
State Loan: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of waterworks as provided for by the Illinois Antipollution Bond
Act and for making such loans as filed with the Secretary of State of the State
of Illinois.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, institution,
enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
REPLACEMENT: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories,
or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the works to
maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were designed and
constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes replacement.
SERVICE BOX: A valve box used with corporation or curb cock.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which the waterworks will be operated.
WATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS: Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the
concentration of water constituent. It is 0.001 grams of the constituent in one
thousand milliliters (1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly
used commonly, parts per million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in
reporting the results of water analysis.
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen- ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
WATER FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received in
the operation of the water system. (Ord. 03-01, 3-12-2001)
8-1-3: APPLICATION FOR WATER; DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
A. Application For Service: No water shall be turned on for use on or in any
premises until an application in writing has been made for that purpose and
filed with the City Clerk stating the purpose for which the water is to be
used. (1997 Code)
B. Deposit Required: If the applicant is not the owner in fee simple of the
recorded title to the property where the applicant desires the water to be
turned on, applicant shall deposit with his/her application the sum approved by
the City Council before any water is turned on. Such deposit shall be held by
the City as security for payment of water used by the applicant and may be so
applied when any default is made in payment of a water bill. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-
27-2017)
8-1-4: WATER RATES AND REVENUES:
A. Meters Required; Rates: All premises using the City water supply must have
meters installed, and shall pay current rates and charges as set from time to
time by the City Council, as prescribed by law.
B. Purchase Of Meters: All water meters must be purchased from the City by the
homeowner or builder at the current rate established by the Council.
C. Fire Hydrants: In addition to the foregoing rates, there shall be charged to
the City the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) per hydrant per annum, payable from
a direct tax levied against all taxable property within the City limits.
D. Right To Change Rates: The City reserves the right to make such reasonable
changes in rates and in conditions herein established and to establish further
rules and regulations from time to time as may be found expeditious or
necessary. (1997 Code)
E. Duties Of Treasurer: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of
the water system shall be deposited in the water account of the Water Fund. All
such revenues and monies shall be held by the City Treasurer separate and apart
from his private fund and separate and apart from all other funds of the City
Treasurer not more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same or at such more
frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Mayor and
Council.
The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water system and
all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same
may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the account of the fund
designated as the "Water Fund of the City". Said Treasurer shall administer
such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the "Revised
Cities and Villages Act", effective January 1942.
F. Accounts: The City Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water system, and at
regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit of the books by an
independent auditing concern to show the receipts and disbursements of the
water system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water facilities,
including a replacement cost. The financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the
current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of nonmetered users.
G. Review: The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed, not less
often than annually, by certified public accountants for the City of Colona in
their annual audit. (Ord. 03-01, 3-12-2001)
8-1-5: RENDITION OF BILLS; PAYMENT 1
:
A. Responsibility For Payment: The owner(s) of the premises shall be jointly
and severally liable for payment of the water service to such premises and the
water services are furnished to the premises by the City only upon the
condition that the owner(s) of the premises are jointly and severally liable to
the City. Non receipt of the water bill by the owner(s) does not exempt such
person(s) from responsibility to pay for water services furnished to the
premises by the City. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-27-2017)
1. Billing Of Duplexes, Apartments, Condominiums And Single- Family Home
Rentals:
a. Water and sewer bills for duplexes having two (2) separate meters shall be
sent to the owner of the duplex and the owner of the duplex shall be
responsible for payment of the bill. In addition, it is the owner's
responsibility to register with the City Clerk's Office. (Ord. 0-07-14, 7-28-
2014)
b. Bills for apartments with more than two (2) units shall be sent to the owner
of the property and the owner shall be responsible for payment of the bill.
Registration by the owner with the City Clerk's Office is required. (Ord. 0-16-
14, 2-27-2017)
c. All apartment buildings and condominium buildings with single units or other
water/sewer customers usually using over eight thousand (8,000) cubic feet per
month shall be considered and billed as commercial accounts. The meters shall
be read monthly and the bill sent to the owner monthly.
d. Property owners of single-family homes who rent out the property shall be
responsible for payment of any water and sewer bills. (Ord. 0-07-14, 7-28-2014)
e. If property owner(s) want tenant(s) to receive a copy of the bill, they must
complete the proper agreement form which states the property owner remains
liable for use of services. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-27-2017)
B. Delinquent Bills; Late Payment Penalty: Bills for water service shall be
rendered monthly and shall be considered delinquent twenty (20) days after
their rendition. In the event of failure to pay the bills within the twenty
(20) day period, an additional charge of ten percent (10%) of the present bill
shall be added as a late payment penalty to arrive at the total bill with
delinquency charges. (Ord. 0-15-22, 11-23-2015)
1. Shutoff Notice: On all bills not paid by the following due date, the City
shall prepare or cause to be prepared a shutoff notice to the billing address
and mailed by regular mail to same. This shall be a final ten (10) day warning
from the date of issuance. Once a shutoff notice is issued, all past due
balances, penalties, and red tag fees must be paid, or a proper payment
arrangement made to avoid shutoff. (Ord. 0-16-11, 8-8-2016)
2. Termination/Reinstatement Of Service: If the bill has not been paid within
the ten (10) day warning period, the City shall turn off the water supply and
shall not be compelled again to supply water to the building, place, premises
or dwelling until all such bill or past bills and past liens, together with the
cost of bookwork and mailing and the expenses of turning the water off and on
have been paid in full.
3. Additional Charges: The following rates and charges shall be in full force
and effect hereafter:
a. There shall be a fee charged that is determined by City Council and set
forth in written policy, which is due the City for each mailing sent after the
usual bill in a delinquency case. (Ord. 0-15-012, 9-14-2015)
b. There shall be a fee assessed that is determined by the City Council and set
forth in written policy to turn the water off/on at a residence when the
resident fails to provide sufficient payment within the time period allotted
for shut-off notices. (Ord. 0-18-01, 1-22-2018, eff. 1-22-2018)
4. Failure To Receive Bill: Failure to receive a bill will not entitle the
owner, consumer or user to a remission of penalty. (Ord. 0-15-012, 9-14-2015)
5. Authority To Require Advance Payment: The City shall have full power and
authority to require payment in advance for use of water furnished in
accordance with policy established by the Public Works Committee and approved
by the City Council. If water is shut off three (3) times in a one year period,
then a deposit of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) will be required. Once
the customer has been making on-time payments for a period of two (2) years
then the deposit will be returned. (Ord. 0-16-14, 2-27-2017)
6. Authority To Shut Off Water Supply: The City Collector, Public Works
Director, or Water Superintendent, the Mayor or the Chairman of Public Works
Committee may authorize an employee of the City to shut off the water supply to
any dwelling where the best interest of the City is served. (Ord. 0-15-012, 9-
14-2015)
C. Lien; Notice Of Delinquency: Whenever a bill for water and sewer service
remains unpaid after sixty (60) days from date rendered, the City Collector may
file with the Recorder of Deeds of Henry County a statement of lien claim. The
statement shall set forth the legal description of the premises served, and the
amount of the unpaid bill, together with the amount of the late charges and any
other charges due, plus interest on the amount of the lien at the rate of
eighteen percent (18%) per annum, which runs from the date of the lien and a
notice that the City claims a lien on the described real estate.
1. User Not Owner: If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the
premises, and the City Collector has notice of this, the City Collector shall
mail a notice to the owner that a lien has been filed on such premises.
2. Right To Foreclose: The failure of the City Collector to record such lien or
to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall
not affect the rights to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned above
in this subsection.
3. Release Of Lien: If the City Collector shall have filed the statement of
lien claim with the County Recorder of Deeds, then, before the City will
execute and file release of the lien claim with the County Recorder of Deeds,
there shall be paid to the City Collector all outstanding amounts due to the
City, including the late charge, all service charges, interest and the sum of
thirty dollars ($30.00) to cover the City's expenses in recording the releases
of the lien claim; provided, however, if the lien claim for unpaid water
services forms a part of the lien claim for unpaid sewer services, then there
shall be only one (1) $30.00-charge to cover the City's expenses in recording
and releasing the combined lien claim.
D. Water Hearing Committee: The Water Hearing Committee of the City shall
consist of the City Collector, the Public Works Director and Superintendent of
the Water Department. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 10-6-4B of this Code.
8-1-6: WATER RENT PAYABLE BY OWNER:
In all cases where one service pipe supplies two (2) or more separate consumers
in a building, one meter may be placed at the service connection for either or
all of the said consumers and the water rent, as registered by such meters,
shall be charged to and be payable by the owner of such premises or building.
(1997 Code)
8-1-7: LIABILITY OF CITY:
All connections and water applied for hereunder, and all the water used
hereunder, shall be upon the express condition that the City shall not be
liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused by
reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or
appurtenances connected with said system or plant, or any part or portion of
said plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of
machinery, or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals. (1997
Code)
8-1-8: UNAUTHORIZED USE:
A. Prohibited: No person, not duly authorized by the City, shall turn the water
on at any fire hydrant or service cock, or use water from that hydrant or
service cock when turned on.
B. First Offense: A violation of this Section shall result in a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00) for the first offense.
C. Second Or Subsequent Offense: A second or subsequent offense shall result in
a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
D. Additional Cost: In addition to other penalties, the person using said water
without authorization shall be liable for payment of same. (1997 Code)
8-1-9: WATER METERS:
A. Repair: Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair or for any
cause, fails properly to register the water passing through the same, the
consumer shall be charged at the rate shown for the corresponding time of the
previous year under like conditions. If no record of the previous year exists,
then it shall be the duty of the Public Works Director to estimate or determine
so far as the Director can the amount of water consumed during the time such
meter failed to operate, and the consumer shall pay the amount so estimated.
B. Access To Meters: The City and its employees shall have ready access to the
premises, place or buildings where meters are located for the purpose of
reading, examining, testing and repairing the same, and examining and testing
the consumption, use and flow of water, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to interfere with, or obstruct the City, or its duly authorized agent, in its
duties hereunder. Every consumer of water shall take the same upon the
conditions prescribed in this Section. (1997 Code)
8-1-10: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The following rules and regulations for the consumers of water and plumbers are
hereby adopted and established:
A. Application Required: No water shall be furnished or supplied to any
consumer for any purpose whatever until such consumer shall make application
therefor. Such application shall state the location of the premises to be
served and the use to which the water will be put.
B. Subletting Of Water Illegal: No water consumer may supply water to other
families or allow them to take water, except for use on the premises and for
the purpose specified in the application, nor after water is introduced into
any building or upon any premises shall any person make or employ any other
person to make any tap or connection with the work upon the premises for
alterations, repairs, extensions or attachments without a written permit
therefor to be issued by the Public Works Director.
C. Interrupted Service: The City reserves the right to shut off water in the
mains at any time for the purpose of repairing, cleaning, making connection
with or extensions to same, or for the concentrating of water in any part of
the City in case of fire, and for restricting the use of the water in case of
deficiency in supply. No claim shall be made against the City by reason of the
breaking of any service pipe or service cock or damage arising from shutting
off water for repairing any part of the water system, or from other connections
or repairing any part of the water system, or from failure of the water supply,
or by increasing the water pressure at any time, or from concentration or
restricted use of water as set forth in this Chapter. (1997 Code)
8-1-11: RIGHT TO RESTRICT USE OF WATER:
The right is reserved to suspend the use of lawn fountains, hoses for
sprinkling lawns and gardens and swimming pools whenever, in the opinion of the
Mayor and City Council, public exigencies require it. (1997 Code)
8-1-12: SERVICE CONNECTION SPECIFICATIONS:
A. Domestic Water Service: All domestic water service shall be constructed in
the city of type K copper from the curb stop into the building and shall be
laid at a minimum depth of four feet (4'). The service entrance to the building
shall be protected from freezing by the property owner, or his/her agent.
B. Commercial Service: All commercial service shall be of type K copper or cast
iron class 150 of size appropriate to the water demand, or as may be determined
by the public works director.
C. Valve: At the distribution point within the building, a valve shall be
installed to stop all water flow from said service.
D. Inspection: The connection of any service shall be inspected at the time of
connection by the public works director, or other duly authorized
representative of the city. No cross-connections to any private water service
shall be permitted. All connections shall be in strict accord with all
regulations of the state sanitary water board of the state of Illinois 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 70 ILCS 1810/3.1 et seq.
8-1-13: CONNECTING TWO PREMISES; STOPCOCKS, PIPES:
No owner or plumber shall be permitted to connect water pipes into any two (2)
distinct premises or tenements unless separate and distinct stopcocks shall be
placed on the outside of such premises along the sidewalk opposite the same,
nor shall any pipe be allowed to cross lots or buildings to adjoining premises.
(1997 Code)
8-1-14: WATER USE FOR BUILDING OR CONSTRUCTION:
Any and all persons desiring to use city water for building or construction
purposes shall make application therefor in writing and file the same in the
office of the city clerk on a form to be provided for that purpose. Upon a
permit being granted (permits shall be issued in writing and signed by the
public works director) the service pipe shall be carried at the expense of the
applicant to the inside of the curb line, where a service cock and meter shall
be placed, with pipe leading to the surface and a faucet at the end thereof
above said surface. When the building or construction work is completed, the
faucet and meter shall be removed and the water shut off, unless permanent
connection hereunder is made. Charge for the use and connecting of meters shall
be as prescribed by the mayor and city council. (1997 Code)
8-1-15: OBSTRUCTING WATER FLOW:
A. Immediate Access Ensured: No person shall in any manner obstruct the access
to any stopcock, hydrant or valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking
water in any street, alley, public ground or place connected with or part of
said water system, nor pile or place any lumber, brick or building material or
other article, thing or hindrance whatsoever within twelve feet (12') of the
same, or so as to in any manner hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the
fire department in reaching the same.
B. Protection Of System: It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to
interfere with or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of
water in said water system, reservoir or plant, or any part thereof, or to
injure, deface remove or displace any water main, hydrant, service pipe, water
meter, shutoff box, public fountain, valve, engine or building connected with
said water system, or plant, or to cause, suffer or permit any of said things
to be done.
C. Liability For Damages: Any person who shall perform any act in violation of
this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, in addition,
be liable for the actual damage done or caused. (1997 Code)
8-1-16: VIOLATION OF RULES; NONPAYMENT OF BILLS:
For violation of any of the foregoing rules or for nonpayment of water bills,
the city reserves the right to turn off the water after notice and opportunity
for hearing and to forfeit any payments made. After the water has been turned
off from any service pipe on account of nonpayment of water bills, or
violations of rules, the same will not be turned on until all delinquent bills
and penalties are paid, together with expense of turning off and on such meter,
as provided in subsection 8-1-5B3b of this chapter. No water will be furnished
to any person who is indebted to the city on account of water consumed,
material or repairs. (1997 Code)
8-1-17: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any books,
documents, papers and records of the city which are applicable to the city
system of user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts
and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the loan
agreement and any state grant. (Ord. 03-01, 3-12-2001)
8-1-18: WATER METER READER:
The job consists of reading the entire meter system. The job will be performed
within the latter two (2) weeks of each month, and the person appointed to the
job as water meter reader shall obey the city rules and regulations.
The salary for the job of water meter reader shall be four hundred dollars
($400.00) per month, and when the job is started, it must be finished within
the time frame hereinbefore allotted.
The city clerk of the city of Colona will decide on any different reading
schedule.
The person appointed to the job of water meter reader shall provide his or her
own transportation and fuel, and if the person appointed to the job of water
meter reader is unable to perform this job for any reason, the city clerk's
office must be notified as soon as possible.
There will be no clothing allowance for the person appointed to the job of
water meter reader. (Ord. 08-01, 5-14-2001)
8-1-19: TAP-ON FEES FOR NEW CONNECTIONS:
There shall be established as a tap-on (hookup) fee for water of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) to be assessed on all new connections in the following areas
of the city of Colona:
A. Any lot existing in the area of the city limits of the city of Green Rock on
May 1, 1997.
B. Any lot existing in the area of the village limits of the village of Colona
on May 1, 1997.
The owner shall be responsible for completion of tap-on to city of Colona water
line and the extension of service to owner's property at owner's expense.
All connections made to city of Colona water system must be done through a
licensed plumber who is bonded and insured. Any connections shall also comply
with all plumbing codes and building ordinances of the city of Colona.
All tap-on connections must be inspected and approved by the city of Colona at
the time of connection and must not be covered until such inspection is
completed. (Ord. 15-04, 9-13-2004)
8-1-20: SERVICE LINE EXTENSIONS:
A. Any property owner seeking water service after the date hereof for future
annexed or existing property which does not have a water line adjacent to their
property which requires extension of service line to their property shall be
required to pay the city of Colona all expenses incurred to bring the necessary
service to the property.
B. The public works department or engineering firm will establish the extension
costs and no hookup to water shall be allowed until full payment of any hookup
charge and reimbursement of extension cost have been received by the city of
Colona.
C. In addition to the payment to the city of Colona for extension costs the
property owner shall pay a hookup fee as required under existing city
ordinance. (Ord. 11-08, 8-11-2008)
CHAPTER 2
SEWER REGULATIONS 1
SECTION:
8-2-1: Water And Sewer Systems Combined
8-2-2: Definitions
8-2-3: Sewer Use Regulations
8-2-3-1: General Provisions
8-2-3-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-2-3-3: Private Sewage Disposal
8-2-3-4: Building Sewers And Connections
8-2-3-5: Use Restrictions; Prohibited Discharges
8-2-3-6: Protection Of Sewage Works From Damage
8-2-3-7: Sewer Construction And Materials
8-2-3-8: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-2-4: Wastewater Service Charges; Industrial Waste Cost Recovery
8-2-4-1: Wastewater Service Charges
8-2-4-2: Industrial Cost Recovery
8-2-4-3: Effective Date Of Rates
8-2-5: Billing; Accounts; Revenues
8-2-5-1: Bills; Delinquencies
8-2-5-2: Unpaid Bills; Lien
8-2-5-3: Revenues
8-2-5-4: Accounts
8-2-5-5: Notice Of Rates
8-2-5-6: Access To Records
8-2-5-7: Penalty
8-2-6: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-139-8, 5/11-141-2.
8-2-1: WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The City Council hereby determines that the waterworks and sewer systems
operate in combination. (1997 Code)
8-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this Chapter shall be as follows:
CLARIFICATION OF WORD USAGE: Shall is mandatory; may is permissible.
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
   Administrator: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   Federal Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et
seq.) as amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972
(Pub. L. 92-500) and (Pub. L. 93-243).
   Federal Grant: The U.S. Government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
   Approving Authority: The City Council or Public Works Director of the City.
   City: The City of Colona, Henry County, Illinois.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirement issued by the
Administrator, or where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Amendments of 1972, to regulate the discharge
of pollutants pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
SEWER TYPES AND APPURTENANCES:
   Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
   Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
City. It shall also include sewers within or outside the City boundaries that
serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the City sanitary sewer
system even though those sewers may not have been constructed with City funds.
   Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwaters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
   Director: The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   State Act: The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
   State Grant: The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
   Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or
"pollution control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
   Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of loan, which includes payments to be made
in the various reserve accounts as required by the bond ordinance and shall be
computed by dividing the annual debt service by the number of users connected
to the wastewater facilities.
   Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance" includes
replacement.
   Sewerage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in Section
8-2-4-1 of this Chapter.
   Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated and shall be thirty (30) years from the date
of start up of any wastewater facilities constructed with a State grant.
   User Charge: A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation and maintenance.
   Wastewater Service: The charge per quarter or month levied on all users
charge of the wastewater facilities. The service charges shall be computed as
outlined in Section
8-2-4-1 of this Chapter and shall consist of the total of the basic user
charge, the debt service charge and a surcharge, if applicable.
USER TYPES:
   Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the City representative
to sample and/or measure discharges.
   Industrial User: Nongovernmental user of publicly-owned treatment works
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the following
divisions:
Division A - Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing Division B - Mining
Division D - Manufacturing
Division E - Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary
Services
Division I - Services
A user in the divisions listed may be excluded if it is determined by the City
that it will introduce primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from
sanitary conveniences.
   Residential, Commercial Or Nonindustrial User: Any user of the treatment
works not classified as an industrial user or excluded as an industrial user as
provided in this Chapter.
   User Class: The type of user either "residential or commercial"
(nonindustrial) or "industrial" as defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
   BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C) expressed in milligrams per
liter.
   Effluent Criteria: Defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   Floatable Oil: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial manufacturer, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly-owned
treatment works that: a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more
per average work day; or b) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the
flow carried by the Municipal system receiving the waste; or c) has in its
waste a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under
section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or d) is found by the permit issuance
authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly-
owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment
works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
   Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in one thousand (1,000) ml of
water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to
which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and
wastewater analyses.
   pH: The logarithm (base 10) or the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in "Standard
Methods".
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day containing 0.167 pounds of BOD and
0.209 pounds of suspended solids.
   Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
   Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
   Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
   Standard Methods: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the
most recent edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater" published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   Suspended Solids: The solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solid
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".
   Unpolluted Water: Water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
ground water, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   Water Quality Standards: The water pollution regulations of Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
   Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (1997 Code)
8-2-3: SEWER USE REGULATIONS:
8-2-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Administration: The construction, maintenance and repair of all sewage
disposal systems, sewers and sewer service lines including the connection to
all sewers within the City shall be under the direction of and subject to the
approval of the City whether constructed or maintained by the City or by
private firms, individuals or utilities.
B. Separate Systems: The sewer systems of the City shall consist of a separate
storm water system and a sanitary sewer system. (1997 Code)
8-2-3-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
A. Prohibited Deposits: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit
or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private
property within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any
human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
B. Discharge Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural
outlet within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any
sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been
provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
C. Construction Of Privy, Septic Tank, Cesspool: Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of
sewage.
D. Connection Required: The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used
for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within
the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the
City, is hereby required at owner's expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein and to connect such facilities therein and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter, within ninety (90) days after date of official
notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is within two hundred feet
(200') (61 meters) of the property line. (1997 Code)
E. Inspection Fee; Sanitary Sewer System: All individuals, businesses and
industry shall pay for an inspection fee by the City, or its successors, prior
to the hookup of said individual, business or industry connection to the
sanitary sewer. The fees for such inspections shall be set or amended from time
to time by the City Council. Initially the fee shall be thirty dollars ($30.00)
for each residential, business and commercial hookup. (Ord. 04-97, 9-8-1997)
F. Improved Property: Property owners of improved property within the City
shall be required to hook on to City sewer at the property owner's expense
within ninety (90) days of sewer service being available to the property or
sixty (60) days after passage of this subsection if sewer is available when
this subsection is passed. The Public Works Director shall determine when sewer
is available to improved property.
1. The property owner shall be required to pay any inspection fees, permit
fees, or hook-up fees required by ordinance and all connections shall be
pursuant to applicable codes.
2. Any property owner who violates this subsection F shall be liable for a fine
of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day the violation
exists. (Ord. 97-06, 10-13-1997)
8-2-3-3: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
A. Public Sanitary Sewer Unavailable: Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available under the provisions of subsection 8-2-3-2D of this Chapter, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying
with the provisions of this Section.
B. Permit Required:
1. City And County Health Department: Before commencement of construction of a
private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit
signed by the City and the County Health Department.
2. Application: The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the City (reference Appendix No. 2, on file with the City Clerk)
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as are deemed necessary by the City.
3. Permit And Inspection Fee: A permit and inspection fee of thirty five
dollars ($35.00) shall be paid to the City at the time the application is
filed.
C. Inspection: A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Public
Works Director. The Public Works Director shall be allowed to inspect the work
at any stage of construction; in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the City when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty
eight (48) hours of the receipt of written notice by the City.
D. Specifications: The type, capacities, location and layout of a private
sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State Environmental
Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the
lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet (1,858 square meters). No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
E. Public Sanitary Sewer Becomes Available: At such time as a public sewer
becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as
provided in subsection 8-2-3-2D of this Chapter, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer in compliance with this Chapter, and any septic tanks,
cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned.
F. Maintenance: The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage
disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the
City.
G. Prohibited Locations: It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or
maintain any cesspool, privy vault or septic tank under any of the following
circumstances:
1. Within two hundred feet (200') of the public sewer system or on property
abutting such system;
2. Within forty feet (40') of any school, church or public building;
3. Within ten feet (10') of any dwelling;
4. Within five feet (5') of any side lot line;
5. Within fifty feet (50') of any well, cistern or water main;
6. On property which contains an area of less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet; or
7. On property which violates any of the requirements of the County Health
Department.
H. Additional Requirements: No statement contained in this Section shall be
construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
the County Health Department.
I. Abandonment Of System: When a public sewer becomes available, the building
sewer shall be connected to said sewer within ninety (90) days and the private
sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and all steel septic tanks
shall be filled with sand, bank run gravel or dirt; all other tanks shall be
filled if they create a nuisance. (1997 Code)
8-2-3-4: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
A. Permit Required: No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection
with, or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the City.
B. Application: All applications for permits required by subsection A hereof
shall be submitted in duplicate on blanks furnished by the City for that
purpose and shall include complete details of the nature and location of the
work to be done, the name of the person contracting to have the work done and
the name of the person who is to do the actual work. Where any sewer or water
service connections are to be made, a scale drawing showing the location of
proposed and existing water and sewer lines, together with the accurate
elevations and slope of sewer lines shall accompany the application. A stamped,
approved set of drawings and the permit shall be kept on the job site at all
times.
C. Compliance Required: All disposal by any person into the sewer system is
unlawful except those discharges in compliance with Federal standards
promulgated pursuant to the Federal Act and more stringent State and local
standards.
D. Classes Of Permits; Fees: There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer
permits: 1) for residential and commercial service, and 2) for service to
establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or
owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City
(reference Appendix No. 2, on file in the office of the City Clerk). The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the City. Fees for permits
shall be in accordance with the schedule of fees approved from time to time by
the City Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk. The industry, as
a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.
E. Adequacy Of System: A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer
connection shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream
sewerage facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
F. Bond Required: Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter for work
on public property shall file a bond in the amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00), with surety to be approved by the City Council,
conditioned to indemnify the City for any loss or damage resulting from the
work undertaken or the manner of doing the same.
G. Insurance Required: Each applicant for a permit required by this Chapter for
work on public property shall carry adequate public liability and property
damage insurance to indemnify the City in case of any accident or damage
occurring in conjunction with or as a result of the work being done under the
permit. The City shall be named coinsured in any policy.
1. Form: The form of insurance required herein shall be subject to the approval
of the City Attorney.
2. Policy Limits: Limits of liability shall be at least three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for injury to any one person and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) for injury resulting from any one accident and one hundred
fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for injury to any property.
3. Cancellation: The insurance required herein may not be canceled until
completion of the work for which a permit is issued and following final
inspection and approval of the work by the City. Cancellation or lapse of the
insurance required shall terminate any permit for which the policy provides
coverage.
H. Costs And Expense; Indemnification: All costs and expense incident to the
installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer and
connection.
I. Separate Sewer Required; Exception: A separate and independent building
sewer shall be provided for every building, except that where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
J. Old Building Sewers: Old building sewers may be used in connection with new
buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the City, to
meet all requirements of this Chapter.
K. Construction Specifications: The size, slope, alignment, materials of
construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the requirements of Section
8-2-3-7 of this Chapter.
L. Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which
is approved by the City and discharged to the sewer service line.
M. Surface Runoff, Ground Water Prohibited: No person shall make connection of
roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, sump pumps, areaway drains, or
other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building
drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
N. Connection: The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of Section
8-2-3-7 of this Chapter. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight.
Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by
the City before installation.
O. Supervision; Inspection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall
notify the Public Works Director when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Public Works Director or Public Works Director's
representative.
P. Excavations:
1. Barricades 1
: All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
2. Restoration Of Improvements: Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the City.
3. Separate Permit Required: A street excavation permit separate from the sewer
construction permit shall be obtained and the required inspection fees shall be
paid.
Q. Indemnification Of City: Each applicant for a permit required by this
Chapter for work on public or private property shall bear the responsibility
for accidental injury or death, property damage, or any other litigation that
may arise in connection with this work and shall in any case hold the City
harmless from all damages. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  7-1-6 of this Code.
8-2-3-5: USE RESTRICTIONS; PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
A. Protection Of Sewage System: It shall be unlawful to introduce or make any
sewer connection designed to or which could permit the introduction of any
storm water, rain water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer.
B. Unpolluted Drainage: Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to
a natural outlet approved by the Public Works Director. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Public
Works Director to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
C. Prohibited Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
3. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5) or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage
grinders.
D. Harmful Materials/Substances: No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if
it appears likely in the opinion of the Public Works Director that such wastes
can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an
adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb,
public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his/her opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the Public Works Director will give
consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation
to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant,
degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and maximum
limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which
may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees and
one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (32° and 150°F) (0° and 65°C).
3. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Public Works Director.
4. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
5. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or similar
objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine
requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite
sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the City
for such materials.
6. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-producing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by
the City as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the
requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for
such discharge to the receiving waters.
7. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may
exceed limits established by the City in compliance with applicable State or
Federal regulations.
8. Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths (9.5).
9. Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at any
time as permitted by the City in compliance with applicable State and Federal
regulations.
10. Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted by the
City in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
11. Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations or inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited
to, fuller's earth, lime slurries), and lime residues or of dissolved solids
(such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
b. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions);
c. Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such
quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works.
d. Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting "slugs" as
defined herein.
12. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment
or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to
treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot
meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters.
E. Authority To Reject; Require Pretreatment, Or Control Quantity: If any
waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public
sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in subsection D of this Section, and/or which are in violation of
the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA Rules and
Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment Standards,
federal register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and any
amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the city may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the city may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes
not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of section
8-2-4-2 of this chapter.
If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design
and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances and laws. (1997 Code)
F. Discharge Of Certain Substances Prohibited:
1. Prohibited Substances: It shall be unlawful to permit or cause the flow of
any of the following substances into the city sanitary sewer system:
a. Any grease, fatty material, offal or garbage;
b. Any stone, dust, sand, dirt, gravel, sawdust, metal filings, broken glass or
any material that may cause or create an obstruction in the sewer;
c. Gasoline, benzene, fuel oil or any petroleum products or volatile liquids,
pesticides, paint or other chemical products;
d. Milk or any liquid milk waste products in quantities in excess of ten (10)
gallons during each twenty four (24) hour period;
e. Any cyanide, phenols, or any other chemical or substance that interferes
with or prevents the functioning of the sewage treatment plant.
2. Catch Basins, Grease Traps And Interceptors Required: Each building or
premises used or occupied by any sewer user where any commercial or industrial
operations are conducted or permitted which result in the discharge into the
sanitary sewer system of any of their products, waste products or other
substances in the manner and to the extent prohibited in this subsection shall
be equipped with an adequate and suitable catch basin, grease trap, filter or
other interceptor installed in such a manner that such products or other
substances will not flow into or be discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
It shall be unlawful to permit the flow of waste from such buildings or
premises into the sanitary sewer system unless such interceptor is installed
and in good working order.
a. Cleaning; Inspections: One time a week on Mondays, owners shall wipe the
grease interceptors, grease traps and catch basins and shall use for reporting
purposes the forms for such inspection supplied by the city of Colona. Once per
month copies of the inspections shall be sent to city hall.
b. Servicing Of Containers: Additionally the owner must be able to show proof
of grease containers being serviced (dumped) on a regular basis. In no event
should such services be less than once every two (2) weeks.
c. Grease Interceptors: Where it has been determined that a grease interceptor
is not being maintained and serviced as intended by this code and the
manufacturer's instructions, an approved interceptor monitoring system shall be
provided or a maintenance program shall be established with documentation
submitted to the code official. The city inspector, public works director or
his designee shall be allowed to inspect at any time premises covered by this
subsection. (Ord. 0-10-14, 7-28-2014)
G. Owner Expense: Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at owner's expense.
H. Control Manhole Required: When required by the city, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall be
required to install a control manhole and, when required by the city, the owner
of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and
other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly
and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved
by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at owner's expense,
and shall be maintained by owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
When agreed upon by the city and the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes, a water meter approved by the city
shall be installed, at the expense of the owner if none exists for the purpose
of measuring the volume of water consumed by said user and subsequently
discharged to the sewer system. The volume of water consumed as measured by the
water meter shall be used to compute the volume portion of the surcharge to be
charged said owner in lieu of the requirement of the necessary meter for
measurement of actual wastes discharged. However, the requirement for a control
manhole, and the necessary appurtenances required to facilitate observation and
sampling of wastes, shall not be construed as to be waived by the installation
of said water meter unless so stipulated by the city.
I. Requirements For Oil Separators:
1. Every garage or other storage, repair or servicing area where solid material
or flammable liquids could be introduced into the sewer system shall be
equipped with oil or gasoline separators constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the city.
2. All oil or gasoline separators shall be cleaned at such regular intervals as
required to prevent the material from entering the sewer system.
3. A list of all separators required by subsection I1 of this section shall be
furnished to the fire chief who shall cause regular periodic inspections to be
made of the units to determine and assure their proper cleaning and
maintenance.
J. Waste Sampling: At the request of the city, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall provide
laboratory measurement tests and analyses of waters and wastes to illustrate
compliance with this chapter and any special conditions for discharge
established by the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge.
The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the city but no less than once per year, the
industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater
discharge to assure that compliance with the Federal, State and local standards
are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analyses to the City at such times and in such manner as prescribed
by the City. The owner shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses and
reporting required by the City. At such times as deemed necessary, the City
reserves the right to take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside
laboratory service.
K. Measurement Of Water Characteristics: All measurements, tests and analyses
of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this
Chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole
provided or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event
that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the
point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out
by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and
property. (The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24-hour
composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample
or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids
analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
L. Special Agreement And/Or Arrangements Authorized: No statement contained in
this Section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or
arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial
waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for
treatment, subject to payment therefor in accordance with Section
8-2-4-1 of this Chapter, by the industrial concern, provided such payments are
in accordance with Federal and State guidelines for user charge system and
industrial cost recovery system. (1997 Code)
8-2-3-6: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this Section shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct or as a
violation of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
8-2-3-7: SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND MATERIALS:
A. Compliance Required: All sanitary sewers, including sewer service lines,
installed in the City or installed outside the City and connected to the City
sanitary sewer system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
B. Materials; Size:
1. Materials: All sanitary sewers, including sewer service lines, shall be
constructed of vitrified clay sewer pipe manufactured in accordance with and
conforming to American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) Standards for clay
sewer pipe (ASTM designation C-700 [extra-strength] pipe with joints conforming
to ASTM designation C425, or latest revisions); approved cast-iron or ductile-
iron pipe conforming to American Standard Association (ASA) specifications A21-
6 or A21-8, Class 150, with mechanical or rubber ring joints; or approved
composite pipe formed by extruding ABS resin into a truss shape forming inner
and outer walls supported by webs and then filling the voids with lightweight
concrete, all meeting ASTM specification D-2680-70 (latest revisions). Sewer
service lines only may also be extra-strength solid wall polyvinyl chloride
pipe (PVC) ASTM designation D-3034 (latest revision) bearing National
Sanitation Foundation Seal having a minimum SDR of 35.
2. Size: Sewer service lines shall be either four inches (4") or six inches
(6") in diameter.
C. Sewer Service Line Defined: A sewer service line or building sewer shall
consist of the sewer line from the City sewer to the building or improvement
being served.
D. Individual Service Lines Required: No property owner will be permitted to
construct a sewer service line to serve more than one parcel of property, but
shall construct individual sewer service lines connecting each parcel of
property to the public sewer line abutting and serving said property.
E. Joints And Couplings: All pipe installed on private property and in any
location adjacent to trees and subject to root exposure shall be equipped with
root-resistant joints as in subsection E1 below:
1. All joints in vitrified clay pipe shall be approved, factory made, precast
joints, conforming to and meeting the requirements of ASTM standards C-425
(latest revisions), using material Type I or III.
2. All joints in cast-iron pipe shall be either mechanical or rubber ring
joints.
3. All joints in plastic pipe shall be chemically welded conforming to ASTM
specification D-2680-72.
4. When two (2) sections of sewer pipe are to be joined where the bell and
spigot has been removed or where two (2) pipes of the same inside diameter but
made of different materials are to be joined, a pipe coupling with stainless
steel clamps, properly sized transition bushing and shear ring must be used
(equal to Clow adjustable repair coupling, ASTM specification C594 [latest
revisions] for compression couplings).
Where pipes of different sizes are to be joined, such as four inch (4") cast
iron to six inch (6") clay, a reducer coupling must be used (equal to Clow
Mission couplings ASTM C594, latest revisions), concrete or other types of
sealing are not acceptable.
F. Construction Of Lines:
1. All sewer lines shall be laid in trenches, the bottom of which are
undisturbed soil. Approved granular backfill, properly compacted, shall be used
immediately under and up to the center line of all sewer lines. Additional
granular backfill shall then be placed to a depth of at least two (2) pipe
diameters over the top of the pipe and additional backfill material sufficient
to fill the trench shall be added. For sewers on private property, the type of
the last backfill material shall be at the option of the owner. Within a street
or alley right of way and within areas of present or future pavement or
sidewalks as designated on the approved permit, thoroughly compacted, approved,
granular backfill shall be placed up to the surface. This backfill, unless
otherwise approved by the Public Works Director, shall be placed in the
presence of an inspector of the City. Approved granular backfill shall be
material meeting the requirements of section 20-2.21C of Standard
Specifications for Water Main and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois.
2. All sanitary sewer service lines serving a one-family unit shall have a
minimum internal diameter of four inches (4"), shall slope a minimum of one-
fourth inch per foot (1/4" per 1'). All sanitary sewer service lines serving
units greater than one-family shall have a minimum internal diameter of six
inches (6"), shall slope a minimum of one-eighth inch per foot (1/8" per 1')
with a slope of at least one-fourth inch per foot (1/4" per 1') being
preferable.
3. No sanitary sewer line shall be constructed in the same trench with or
within ten feet (10') of a water or storm sewer line.
4. If a sewer service line is constructed with changes in direction of the line
approximately ninety degrees (90°), any such change shall be constructed using
"loop sweep bends" of not greater than forty five degrees (45°) change in
direction. If an abrupt ninety degree (90°) bend cannot be avoided, a manhole
or cleanout shall be constructed at that point to make possible rodding the
sewer in case of blockage.
G. Inspection, Approval Of Service Lines: No part of a sewer service line shall
be covered until inspected and approved by an authorized inspector of the City.
H. Service Lines Property Of Owner: Sewer service lines shall be and shall
remain the property of the owner of the lot or parcel or real estate being
served, and any required repairs, maintenance or cleaning shall be the
responsibility of said property owner. Should, at some future time, the sewer
service line be found to be defective, permitting the introduction of storm or
ground water into the system, the line shall be repaired at the property
owner's expense so that such entry is stopped.
I. Method Of Connecting Sewer Lines: Connection of sewer service lines to the
City sewers shall be at the tee or wye connection in the line. Indiscriminate
breaking into the sewer main will not be allowed. If there is no tee or wye set
in the main line, one of the following methods shall be used:
1. Circular saw-cut of sewer pipe by proper tools ("sewer-tap" machine or
similar), and proper installation of hub wye saddle or hub tee saddle in
accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.
2. Remove an entire section of pipe and replace with a wye or tee branch
section. Pipe section shall be removed by breaking only the top of one bell.
After the wye or tee branch is inserted, the connection shall be completed by
the use of a pipe coupling with stainless steel clamps as defined above.
3. Using pipe cutter, neatly and accurately cut out desired length of pipe for
insertion of proper fitting. After the proper fitting is inserted, the
connection shall be completed by the use of a pipe coupling with stainless
steel clamps as defined above.
4. Actual tapping of the line shall only be done when an inspector of the
Public Works Department is present. If, in making a tap, a section of sewer
pipe is cracked, that section shall be replaced or, at the option of the
inspector, shall be entirely encased in not less than six inches (6") of
Portland cement concrete.
J. Separate Connections Required: Separate connections shall be made for storm
sewer lines and sanitary sewer line.
K. Cutting, Removing Pavement; Replacing; Notice: When an existing pavement or
sidewalk is cut or removed in the course of making a sewer connection, the
sections shall be restored to meet the original condition in accordance with
the requirements of the City. Such street cuts shall be made only at such times
and in such manner as approved by the City following at least twenty four (24)
hours' notice to the City.
L. Connection Of Property Contiguous To City And Not Located In Another
Municipality: No property contiguous to the City limits and not located within
the corporate limits of another municipality shall be permitted to connect to
the City sewer lines until said property shall have been annexed to the City.
After annexation, said property may be connected to the sanitary sewer lines of
the City upon the following conditions:
1. Connection At Owner's Expense: The owner of any such property which does not
front on a street in which a City sewer line is located shall be required to
install, at owner's own expense, the necessary lateral sewer lines in
accordance with City specifications and requirements, and in addition thereto
shall comply with all of the requirements hereinafter set forth.
2. Fees: For each property improved by a single-family residence, the fee for
connecting to the City sewer line shall be in accordance with the schedule of
fees adopted from time to time by the City Council and on file in the office of
the City Clerk.
3. Agreement In Lieu Of Annexation: If a property owner has made every effort
possible to effect annexation to the satisfaction of the City Council, the
owner of the premises may secure sewer service to the premises if owner shall
execute an agreement with the City, providing that owner, owner's successors
and assigns shall execute a petition to annex immediately when legal barriers
are removed, and the premises are or become contiguous to the City limits. The
agreement shall provide that sewerage service may be terminated upon failure to
annex to the City when possible.
4. Special Arrangement, Agreement Or Contract: No provision of this Chapter
shall be construed as preventing any special arrangement, agreement or contract
between the City and any municipality, person or industrial concern for
sewerage service, subject to the rate, cost or conditions as established by the
City.
M. Connection Of Property Not Contiguous To City But Located In Another
Municipality: Provided that the property to be served is within two hundred
feet (200') of a City sanitary sewer line and not contiguous to the City but
located within the corporate limits of another municipality, said property may
be connected to the sanitary sewer lines of the City upon payment of a
connection fee and upon compliance with the following conditions:
1. Connection At Owner's Expense: The owner of any such property which does not
front on a street in which a City sewer line is located shall be required to
install, at owner's own expense, the necessary lateral sewer lines in
accordance with City specifications and requirements, and in addition thereto
shall comply with all of the requirements hereinafter set forth in subsection
M2, 3 and 4 of this Section.
2. Fee: For each property improved by a single-family residence, the fee shall
be in accordance with the schedule of fees adopted from time to time by the
City Council and on file in the office of the City Clerk.
3. Building Other Than Single-Family Residence: For each property improved by
any building other than a single-family residence, the fee shall be such amount
as may be determined by the City Council.
4. Sewer Rental Fee: The owner of each such property shall pay to the City, in
addition to said connection fee, a sewer rental fee assessed in accordance with
the schedule of fees adopted from time to time by the City Council and on file
in the office of the City Clerk. (1997 Code)
N. Sewer Lateral Responsibility: The following list is adopted for the purpose
of problem solving. This subsection is to provide conduct and responsibilities
of homeowners and that of the city of Colona.
1. The homeowner shall call the city on any problems noticed with the sewer
system.
2. The city will inspect the sewer mains to see if there are any blockages or
problems.
3. The city will contact the homeowner to inform homeowner of what the
inspection reveals.
4. The homeowner then shall bear the responsibility of proving that any problem
exists beyond their sewer pipe into the city's lateral or main. To do this, a
visual inspection must be conducted by the city.
5. If a problem does exist from the end of the riser to the main, then it would
be the city's responsibility to fix the problem.
6. The city shall not be responsible for the cost or damage done to any
property or service rendered by any other contractor if the problem was on the
city's part of the main. (Ord. 03-02, 4-8-2002)
8-2-3-8: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
A. Protection Of Processing Trade Secrets: The public works director and other
duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois environmental protection
agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency, bearing proper
credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The public works director or
public works director's representative shall have no authority to inquire into
any process, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or
other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste
treatment.
B. Safety Rules Observed: While performing the necessary work on private
properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the public works
director or duly authorized employees of the city, the Illinois environmental
protection agency, and the U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the
company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and
the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by
city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection 8-2-3-5H of
this chapter.
C. Right Of Entry: The public works director and other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly
negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (1997
Code)
8-2-4: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES; INDUSTRIAL WASTE COST RECOVERY:
8-2-4-1: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Basis For Wastewater Service Charges:
1. Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service charge for the use of and
for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of
a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus replacement, a debt
service charge, and a surcharge if applicable.
2. Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge shall be the amount to be paid
each billing period for payment of interest, principal and coverage of bond
which includes payments to be made in the various reserve accounts as required
by the bond ordinance and shall be computed by dividing the annual debt service
by the number of users connected to the wastewater facilities.
3. Basic User Charge: The basic user charge shall be a monthly rate for each
sanitary sewer connection having the following normal concentrations:
- A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD) of two hundred milligrams per liter (200 mg/l).
- A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter
(250 mg/l).
It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus replacement and
depreciation and shall be computed as follows:
- Estimate the projected annual revenues required to operate and maintain the
wastewater facilities, including a replacement and depreciation fund for the
year, for all works categories.
- Proportion the estimated costs to wastewater facility categories by volume,
suspended solids and BOD, if possible.
- Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to be treated.
- Proportion the estimated costs to nonindustrial and industrial users by
volume, suspended solids and BOD.
- Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal sewage strength.
- Compute surcharge costs per pound of BOD and SS in excess of normal sewage
strength.
4. Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed the
normal concentrations for BOD (200 mg/l) and SS (250 mg/l). The surcharge will
be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or concentration for
BOD and SS respectively. Subsection 8-2-4-2G of this chapter specifies the
procedure to compute a surcharge.
5. Annual Review: The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed annually by certified public accountants for the city in their annual
audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in debt service or a change in operation and maintenance
costs, including replacement and depreciation costs.
B. Measurement Of Flow (When Applicable): The volume of flow used for computing
surcharges shall be metered water consumption read to the lowest even
increments of one hundred (100) gallons.
1. If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any part,
or all, of his/her water from sources other than the public waterworks system,
all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person shall
install and maintain, at his/her expense, water meters of a type approved by
the city for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from these
other sources.
2. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the
city if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered water
consumption records.
3. Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be installed,
owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and installation, such
meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled, without the consent of
the city.
C. Debt Service Charge: A debt service charge of five dollars ($5.00) per month
to each user of the wastewater facility of the city is hereby established.
D. Connection Fee:
1. Connection Fee Shall Be Paid: Any person connecting to the city sewer system
shall pay a connection fee as established herein.
2. Amount Set By City Council: There shall be a connection fee for connection
of any sewer service to the city sewer system, the amount of which shall be set
from time to time by the city council. (1997 Code)
3. 1996 Sanitary Sewer Project: All individuals, businesses or industry being
assessed the special assessment fee with respect to the 1996 sanitary sewer
project shall pay no fee for the sewer hook on permit and inspection. Those
individuals, businesses or industry that were capable of hooking on and being a
part of the 1996 Colona sanitary sewer project, but who chose not to be part of
such project or be involved in the assessment for same shall pay a hook on
permit and inspection fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the
privilege of hooking onto Colona's sanitary sewer. That those lots that become
subdivided for future development, subsequent to the construction of the 1996
sanitary sewer project and thus were not individually in existence at the time
of said project, shall pay a sewer hook on fee and inspection fee per lot in
such an amount as set from time to time by the council for individuals,
businesses and industry for the privilege of hooking onto said sewer system.
(Ord. 98-12, 12-14-1998)
4. Costs Of Construction: In addition to the above connection fee, any person
connecting to the city sewer shall also pay all costs of construction across
any street or roadway necessary to effect connection to the city sewer system.
E. Basic User Rate: All premises using city sewer service shall pay current
rates and charges as established from time to time by the city council. (1997
Code)
8-2-4-2: INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY:
A. Industrial Cost Recovery Required: Each industrial user shall pay that
portion of any state grant which has been obtained for the financing of the
construction of wastewater treatment works allocable to the treatment of the
wastewater from such user. Such user's share shall not include an interest
component.
B. Basis For Industrial Cost Recovery Charges: The ICR charge for the use of
and for the service supplied by the wastewater facilities shall consist of a
unit charge for actual process flow (Vu); and unit charges for actual BOD (Bi)
and SS (Si) contained in the process flow.
The actual process flow shall be the volume of flow as determined in subsection
8-2-4-1B of this Chapter less an allowance for employee flow and water consumed
in production.
The actual concentration of BOD and SS used for computing the ICR charge shall
be established by waste sampling in accordance with subsections 8-2-3-5J and K
of this Chapter.
C. Determination Of Unit Charges: The ICR unit charges, for all industrial
users serviced by the wastewater facilities of the City shall be determined as
follows:
1. Allocate the EPA grant amount to the three (3) treatment parameters, flow,
BOD and SS.
2. Divide the total for each parameter by the recovery period.
3. Divide the totals obtained in subsection C2 above by their respective annual
element of plant design.
The ICR unit charges shall be as follows:
a. Unit Flow (Vu) ICR Charge:
$13,470.00/year
365,000,000 gal/yr
=
$0.037/1,000 gallons
b.
Unit BOD (Bi) ICR Charge:
$11,482.00/year
608,820 lbs/yr
=
$0.0190/lb.
c.
Unit SS (Si) ICR Charge:
$12,570.00/year
761,000
=
$0.0166/lb.
In addition to the above, the ICR unit charges, for all industrial users within
the corporate limits of the City serviced by the City's wastewater facilities
shall be determined as follows:
a. Federal Grant Annual Cost =
   $1,455,500.00 ÷ 30 years = $48,516.67
b. Federal Grant Daily Cost =
   $48,516.67 ÷ 365 days = $132.92
c. Design Load =
   Capacity of the 2 interceptor sewers are:
   .70 MGD + 1.00 MGD = 1.7 MGD
d. Design Capacity Unit Cost =
   $132.92 ÷ 1,700,000 = $0.078/1,000 gal
Summary: The overall industrial cost recovery charge for industry served within
the corporate limits of the City will, therefore, be:
Volume = $0.37/1,000 gal + $0.078/1,000 gal = $0.115/1,000 gal
BOD    = $0.0190/lb.
SS     = $0.0166/lb.
D.   Cost For Industrial User: The cost to be recovered from an industrial user
(ICR) shall be determined by the following formula:
       ICR   = Vu ($Qi) + Bi ($BODi) + Si ($SSi)
where: ICR   = Industrial cost recovery charge to each industrial user
       Vu    = Wastewater volume, in 1,000 gallons, from industrial user for
               monthly billing period
       Bi    = BOD in pounds from industrial user process wastewater
       Si    = SS in pounds from industrial user process wastewater
       $Q    = Industrial cost recovery rate per 1,000 gallons of process
               wastewater volume = $0.037/1,000 gallons
       $BODI = Industrial cost recovery rate per pound for BOD = $0.0190/lb.
       $SSi  = Industrial cost recovery rate per pound for SS = $0.0166/lb.
The BOD in pounds from process wastewater or "Bi" shall be computed as follows:
       Bi   = Vu x BODu x 0.00834
where: BODu = Total BOD in mg/l, from process wastewater as determined by waste
              sampling
The SS in pounds from process wastewater or "Si" shall be computed as follows:
       Si  = Vu x SSu x 0.00834
where: SSu = Total SS in mg/l, from process wastewater as determined by waste
             sampling
E. Charge For Industrial Cost Recovery: Each year during the industrial cost
recovery period, each industrial user of the treatment works shall pay the cost
recovery amount determined by subsection D above for such industry. Where an
industry is connected to a public sewer after the start up of the facilities
constructed under a State grant, such industry shall only pay its portion of
the State grant for each month remaining in the recovery period. Such industry
will not be required to pay for those months of the recovery period prior to
connection to a public sewer.
F. Length Of Industrial Cost Recovery Period: The industrial cost recovery
period shall be equal to the useful life of the treatment works which shall be
thirty (30) years after the start up of the wastewater treatment facilities.
G. Payments And Billing Periods For Industrial Cost Recovery: For the purpose
of industrial cost recovery, the year shall be divided into monthly periods,
such periods to correspond to the water billing periods and all industrial
users of the City shall pay the cost as determined by this Chapter for
industrial cost recovery and such payments shall be made monthly on the ninth
day of the month immediately following the expiration of the monthly period for
which service has been supplied, and such charge shall be payable within
fifteen (15) days after rendition thereof, and in the event such bills are not
paid within said fifteen (15) days, a service charge of ten percent (10%) shall
be added thereto.
H. Delinquency And Termination Of Service: In the event the charges for
industrial cost recovery are not paid within sixty (60) days after the
rendition of that bill, then such service charges shall be deemed and are
hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquent charge shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate for which such sewer services were
supplied. The City Clerk is hereby authorized and directed each month to file
sworn statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Henry County, Illinois, and the filing of such statements shall be
deemed notice of a lien for the payment of such charges for sewer service. If
the delinquency in the payment of the recovery cost continues for a period of
more than sixty (60) days, the sewer service shall be discontinued.
I. Time Of First Payment: The initial payment made by an industrial user which
is connected to a public sewer after the start up of the treatment works
constructed with a State grant shall be made by the next scheduled due date as
defined in subsection G of this Section.
J. Adjustment Of Charge Due To Strength Of Volume Changes: If there is a change
in the strength and/or volume introduced into the treatment works by an
industrial user as determined by waste sampling and/or the previous years'
records, the City shall adjust the user's waste characteristic used in
calculating the ICR charge accordingly.
K. Adjustment Of Charge Due To Plant Improvement Utilizing State Grant Funds:
If there is an expansion or upgrading of the treatment works utilizing a State
grant, each existing industrial user's share shall be adjusted accordingly.
L. No Charge For Unused Or Unreserved Capacity: An industrial user's portion of
any State grant shall not include any portion of the grant amount allocable to
unused or reserved capacity.
M. Commitment For Increased Use: An industrial user's portion of any State
grant shall include allowance for the cost of any firm commitment to the City
for any increased use by such user.
N. Payment To State Required: The City shall retain fifty percent (50%) of the
amounts recovered from industrial users. The remainder, together with any
interest earned thereon, shall be returned to the State Anti-Pollution Fund on
an annual basis.
O. Disposition Of Retained Amounts: Eighty percent (80%) of the retained
amounts, together with interest earned thereon, shall be used solely for
eligible costs of the expansion or reconstruction of treatment works associated
with the project and necessary to meet the requirements of the Federal Act and
the State. The City, prior to commitment of the retained amounts, shall obtain
written approval of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for any
expansion or reconstruction. The remainder of the retained amounts may be used
for such expenditures as the City deems appropriate.
P. Investment Of Retained Amounts Required: Pending use, the City shall invest
the retained amounts for reconstruction and expansion in:
1. Obligations of the U.S. Government; or
2. Obligations guaranteed as to principal and interest by the U.S. Government
or any agency thereof; or
3. Deposit such amounts in accounts fully collateralized by obligations of the
U.S. Government or by obligations fully guaranteed as to principal and interest
by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof.
Q. City Treasurer Responsibility:
1. The City Treasurer shall maintain the necessary records for determination of
user share of the cost and shall provide the billing and collection services as
required by subsection 8-2-4-1A and section
8-2-4-3 of this chapter.
2. The City Treasurer shall be responsible for the investment and expenditure
of all monies collected for industrial cost recovery in accordance with
subsections N, O and P of this section.
R. Monitoring Required: The City shall maintain a program of monitoring
industrial user discharges as the City deems necessary; provided, that any
major contributing industry shall be monitored no less than twelve (12) times
annually and all other industrial users shall be monitored no less than once
annually. The monitoring data collected shall be used to determine the ICR
charge in accordance with subsection D of this section. (1997 Code)
8-2-4-3: EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter for the purpose of the operation
of the sewerage system, the calendar year shall be divided into twelve (12)
monthly periods, such periods to begin on the fifteenth day of each month. The
rates or charges for service shall be payable bimonthly on or before the
twelfth day of the month immediately following the end of the bimonthly period
for which service has been supplied. (1997 Code)
8-2-5: BILLING; ACCOUNTS; REVENUES:
8-2-5-1: BILLS, DELINQUENCIES:
A. Payment Of Bills:
1. Bimonthly: (Rep. by Ord. 0-16-11, 8-8-2016)
2. Responsibility For Payment: The owner of the premises, whether or not the
user of the service, or the occupant shall be liable to pay for the service to
such premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the City.
3. Due Date; Penalty: All sewer bills are due and payable twenty (20) days
after being sent out. A penalty of ten percent (10%) shall be added to all
bills not paid by the twentieth day after they have been rendered.
B. Rendition Of Bills: Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the City
Clerk by the first day of the month succeeding the period for which the service
is billed.
C. Delinquent Bills: If the charges for such services are not paid within sixty
(60) days after the rendition of the bill for such services, water service
shall be discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated until
all past due balances, the current balance, penalties, red tag fees, and turn
on/off fees have been paid. (Ord. 0-16-11, 8-8-2016)
8-2-5-2: UNPAID BILLS; LIEN:
A. Lien; Notice Of Delinquency:
1. Statement Of Lien Claim: Whenever a bill for sewer services remains unpaid
for two (2) billing cycles after it has been rendered, the City Clerk shall
have the option to file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien
claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the premises
served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the City claims a lien
for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by
the bill.
2. Notice To Owner: If the utility bill is unpaid after twenty (20) days, the
City Clerk shall send notice to the owner of the premises. (Ord. 0-16-11, 8-8-
2016)
3. Right To Foreclose: The failure of the City Clerk to record such lien or to
mail such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not
affect the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the
following subsection.
B. Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be
sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied
to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in-equity in the name of the
City. The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute such
proceedings in the name of the City in any court having jurisdiction over such
matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid twenty one
(21) days in the case of a monthly bill after it has been rendered. (1997 Code)
8-2-5-3: REVENUES:
A. Separate Account; Delivery To Treasurer: All revenues and monies derived
from the operation of the sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage
account of the Sewerage Fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the
City Clerk separate and apart from all funds of the City and all of said sum,
without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the City Treasurer not
more than ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent
intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Mayor and City Council.
B. Sewerage Fund: The City Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to the Treasurer and deposit the same
in the accounts designated as the "Sewerage Fund of the City of Colona" in
accordance with the bond ordinance. Such Treasurer shall administer such funds
as created in every respect in the manner provided by statute 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-130-11.
8-2-5-4: ACCOUNTS:
A. System Of Accounts; Audit: The City Treasurer shall establish a proper
system of accounts and shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which
complete and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals the Treasurer shall cause to
be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.
B. Annual Audit: In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual
audit report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the
wastewater facilities, including replacement cost, to indicate that sewer
service charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts
required to be recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact
meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown
in the audit report shall include the following:
1. Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for the
current fiscal year.
2. Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
3. Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
4. Number of users connected to the system.
5. Number of nonmetered users.
6. A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users) and volume
of waste discharged. (1997 Code)
8-2-5-5: NOTICE OF RATES:
A copy of the provisions of this chapter properly certified by the City Clerk
shall be filed in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Henry County and shall
be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of the charges of the sewerage
system of the City on their properties. (1997 Code)
8-2-5-6: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the City which
are applicable to the City system of user charges or industrial cost recovery
for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions
thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and general
conditions to any State grant. (1997 Code)
8-2-5-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section
8-2-5 shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1997 Code)
8-2-6: PENALTY:
A. Notice Of Violation: Any person found to be violating any provision of this
chapter except section
8-2-3-4 of this chapter shall be served by the City with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The City may revoke
any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter.
B. Misdemeanor: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time
limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be subject to penalty as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each violation. Each day in which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Liability For Violation: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation. (1997
Code)
CHAPTER 3
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
8-3-1: Compliance With Existing Laws
8-3-2: Cross Connections Prohibited
8-3-3: Investigation And Inspection
8-3-4: Discontinuance Of Water Service
8-3-5: Contamination; Cost Of Cleanup
8-3-1: COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING LAWS:
All plumbing installed within the city of Colona east and west, shall be
installed in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois
administrative code 890. If in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in
the judgment of the superintendent of water, an approved backflow prevention
device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the
superintendent of water will give notice to the water customer to install such
an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance
with the Illinois plumbing code and all applicable local regulations, and shall
have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and
as required by the Illinois plumbing code and local regulations. (Ord. 18-04,
9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
8-3-2: CROSS CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED:
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or
maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary
or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the
city of Colona east and west enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
superintendent of water and the Illinois environmental protection agency. (Ord.
18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
8-3-3: INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION:
A. Investigation: It shall be the duty of the superintendent of water to cause
surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served
by the public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to
the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be
made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2)
years, or as often as the superintendent of water shall deem necessary. Records
of such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at
least five (5) years.
B. Inspection: The approved cross connection control device inspector shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city of
Colona east and west for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of
cross connections, and that the water superintendent or his authorized agent
shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the city of
Colona east and west for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the
customer regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand
the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the
superintendent of water any information which he may request regarding the
piping system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the superintendent
of water, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this chapter. (Ord. 18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
8-3-4: DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE:
The superintendent of water of the city of Colona east and west is hereby
authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant
thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation
of the provisions of this chapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated
or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and until a
reconnection fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) is paid to the city of Colona east
and west. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
superintendent of water is assured that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate
disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided
that, in the reasonable opinion of the superintendent of water or the Illinois
environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the
public water supply, the superintendent of water, or its agents or assigns
shall be liable to any customer for any injury, damages or lost revenues which
may result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with
the terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without
notice. (Ord. 18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
8-3-5: CONTAMINATION; COST OF CLEANUP:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of cleanup of
the potable water supply system. (Ord. 18-04, 9-27-2004, eff. 9-27-2004)
TITLE 9
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODES 1
SECTION:
9-1-1: Adopted Codes
9-1-2: National Electrical Code
9-1-3: Fire Prevention Code
9-1-4: Building Inspector
9-1-5: Permit Fees
9-1-6: Erection Of Buildings
9-1-7: Driveway Or Walkway Construction
9-1-8: Moving Buildings
9-1-9: Trailer Coaches
9-1-10: Contractors
9-1-11: Energy Conservation Code
9-1-12: Residential Code
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-3-2.
9-1-1: ADOPTED CODES:
A. Adoption: In order to establish rules and regulations for the construction,
alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and
maintenance of buildings and structures within the city which are in
substantial conformity with present day building practices, the international
building code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters C, E, G, I and J (see
international building code section 101.2.1, 2012 edition), as published by the
International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the building code of
the city of Colona, in the state of Illinois for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such
structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of said building code are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this
section and the most recent editions of the following related codes also
recommended by the International Conference Of Building Officials: (1997 Code;
amd. Ord. 02-08, 2-11-2008; Ord. 0-09-13, 2-10-2014)
1. International building code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters C, E,
G, I and J (see international building code section 101.2.1, 2012 edition), as
published by the International Code Council; (Ord. 0-09-13, 2-10-2014)
2. International property maintenance code, 2012 edition, as published by the
International Code Council; (Ord. 0-12-13, 2-10-2014, eff. 2-10-2014)
3. Illinois plumbing code. (1997 Code)
B. Exemptions: The parties of the 2012 Illinois building code in reference to
residential sprinkler systems section 310 group are exempted from this adoption
and are not to be considered adopted.
Section 105 Permits, [A] 105.2 Work Exempt From Permit, is not adopted as to
portion under building: sub paragraphs 1, 2, 3, and 6 which are exempted from
adoption. Below are the sections as quoted:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as a tool and storage shed,
playhouses, and similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 120
square feet.
2. Fences not over 7 feet high.
3. Oil derricks.
6. Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade, and
not over any basement or story below and are not part of an accessible route.
C. Amendments To Adopted Codes: The following are amended sections of the codes
adopted in subsection A of this section:
1. International building code:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section 1612.3. Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section 1612.3. Insert: September 17, 1980
Section 3412.2. Insert: October 27, 1997
(Ord. 0-09-13, 2-10-2014)
2. International property maintenance code:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Colona, an Illinois municipal corporation
Section 103.5. Not applicable (no schedule)
Section 112.4. Insert: Not less than $200.00 nor more than $700.00
Section 302.4. Insert: Eight (8) inches
Section 304.14. Insert: April 1 to November 1
Section 602.3. Insert: November 1 to April 1
Section 602.4. Insert: November 1 to April 1
D. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of the building code and related codes
adopted above shall remain on file with the city for use and examination by the
public. (Ord. 0-12-13, 2-10-2014, eff. 2-10-2014)
9-1-2: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE:
   A.   Adoption: The national electrical code, 2017 edition, including all
chapters, articles, information annexes, and tables as copyrighted by the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA); providing for issuance of permits,
collections of fees therefor, and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions, and terms of said national electrical code (NEC) are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this
section with additions, insertions, deletions, and changes; if any as set forth
hereafter.
   B.   Exemptions: Section 210-12, "ARC - Fault Circuit - Interrupter
Protection" and section 406-12 "Tamper Resistant Receptacles For Dwelling
Units" are to be exempted from adoption at time of passage hereof.
      Section subparagraphs which are exempted from adoption. Below are the
sections as quoted:
         1.   Section 210-12 ARC - Fault Circuit - Interrupter Protection.
         2.   Section 406-12 Tamper Resistant Receptacles For Dwelling Units.
   C.   Copies On File: Three (3) copies of such electrical code shall at all
times be on file in the office of the city clerk.
(Ord. 0-14-13, 2-10-2014; amd. Ord. O-24-06, 10-14-2024)
9-1-3: FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
A. Adoption: There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the fire prevention code recommended by
the American Insurance Association, being particularly the most current edition
thereof, and the whole thereof is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as
if set out at length herein and shall be controlling.
B. Copies On File: Not less than three (3) copies of such fire prevention code
shall be on file in the office of the city clerk.
C. Enforcement: The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the proper
authority of the city under the supervision of the fire district. (1997 Code)
9-1-4: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
A. Enforcement Of The Building Code: The international building code shall be
enforced by the building inspector or the public works director. (Ord. 0-23-10,
1-10-2011)
B. Compensation: The compensation of the building inspector shall be set by the
city council as per the annual budget. (1997 Code)
9-1-5: PERMIT FEES:
A. Permits:
1. Before any person shall commence construction, alteration or removal of any
building or structure in the City, such person shall first secure a building
permit from the Clerk's Office and shall pay such permit, investigation and
inspection fees as determined from time to time by the City Council. (1997
Code; amd. Ord. 0-18-06, 2-12-2018)
2. Permits are required to erect any fence and plans showing lot lines and
where fence will be erected on property must be submitted and approved before
any permit is given. (Ord. 0-18-06, 2-12-2018)
B. Penalty: Building permit fees are to be doubled, when a building permit has
not been acquired by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first day of
construction. The property owner shall be directly liable for such permit
costs.
C. Building Valuation Scale: The valuation of construction projects for purpose
of permit fees shall be as follows:
 
Project                                              Cost
                                                     (Per Sq. Ft.)
Manufacturing warehouse, etc.                        $28.00
Masonry construction - garages, sheds, etc.          18.00
New home construction                                78.00
Open carport                                         7.00
Storage warehouse, etc.                              17.00
Wood frame - garages, sheds, etc. (new construction) 15.00
The building inspector or Zoning Officer may adjust these costs with the
approval of the City Council. These valuations will be reviewed annually by the
Council to determine if building cost permits need to be raised or lowered.
(Ord. 0-18-10, 5-10-2010)
9-1-6: ERECTION OF BUILDINGS:
A. Frontage Restrictions: Refer to title 12 of this Code.
B. Setback Lines: Refer to title 12 of this Code. (1997 Code)
C. Property Pins: The owner of the property must know where their property pins
lie before any type of construction or fence erecting is allowed and must keep
their fence on their own property. (Ord. 0-18-06, 2-12-2018)
9-1-7: DRIVEWAY OR WALKWAY CONSTRUCTION:
A. Permit Required: No driveway or walkway connecting any lot or tract with a
public street or alley upon which such lot abuts shall be constructed unless a
permit therefor has been first obtained.
B. Application: Any person wishing to obtain a permit for the construction of a
driveway or walkway shall file a written application therefor in the Office of
the City Clerk.
C. Issuance: A permit shall be issued by the Clerk when the City Council has
approved the same. This permit shall be in addition to all other building
permits required hereunder. (1997 Code)
D. Construction: Construction of such driveways or walkways shall be as
follows:
1. Culverts:
a. Minimum Length: The minimum length of culvert pipe at driveways shall be
twenty feet (20') and at walkways shall be ten feet (10').
b. Type; Diameter: Culverts shall be of corrugated metal construction or
reinforced concrete bell tile and the inside diameter shall be not less than
twelve inches (12").
c. Placement: Culverts shall be placed at a depth to permit uninterrupted flow
of water through ditches.
d. Installation And Maintenance; Cost: The installation and maintenance of such
culverts shall be under the direction and control of the City, but at the
expense of the lot owner.
2. Driveways: Driveway construction of any new or expanded driveway must be
approved by Director of Public Works or building inspector. Concrete must be a
minimum of four inches (4") thick with six inches (6") thick by twelve inches
(12") wide at the abutment of any street, and no greater than thirty feet (30')
wide without obtaining a variance. Asphalt must be a minimum of two inches (2")
thick with a rock base of four inches (4") thick and a minimum of eight feet
(8') wide without obtaining a variance.
3. Parking Spaces: Will be allowed along the frontage lots if approved by the
Public Works Director or building inspector providing all drainage is adequate,
and the spaces do not interfere with traffic and snow removal. (Ord. 0-15-019,
10-26-2015)
9-1-8: MOVING BUILDINGS:
Buildings or structures moved into or within the City shall comply with this
Code; provided, however, any person seeking to move any house, structure or
building into the City must first obtain the written consent of the City
Council and shall provide the City with a performance bond in an amount to be
determined by the Council, not to exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00),
wherein the City shall be named obligee and which bond shall ensure full
compliance with all provisions of the Building Code and any other written
specific agreement. (1997 Code)
9-1-9: TRAILER COACHES:
A. Definition: The term "trailer coach" as used in this section shall mean and
indicate any vehicle or similar portable structure constructed so as to permit
its being used as a conveyance on a public street and so as to permit the
occupancy thereof as a dwelling by one or more persons.
B. Use Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any trailer
coach used for human habitation upon any plot of ground in the City in
violation of this Code.
C. Removal Of Wheels Or Transporting Device: It shall be unlawful for any
person to remove the wheels or other transporting device from any trailer coach
or otherwise to affix said trailer coach permanently to the ground so as to
prevent ready removal of any such trailer coach unless a permit to do so is
obtained as required for the construction of a new building. Any such
alteration shall be construed as converting the trailer coach into a building
and subject to the requirements of titles 10 and 12 of this Code.
D. Occupancy: It shall be unlawful to occupy for sleeping or other residence
purposes any trailer coach which has been rendered immobile by the removal of
wheels or placing the same on a foundation or on the ground unless such trailer
coach in question and location complies with the provisions of this Code and
other regulations applicable to single-family dwellings. (1997 Code)
9-1-10: CONTRACTORS:
A. In order to be allowed to do business in the City of Colona, all contractors
must register with the City. All contractors must provide proof of license for
their profession and proof of insurance/bonding.
B. All contractors doing business in the City of Colona shall pay an annual
registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per calendar year. (Ord. 0-18-10, 5-
10-2010)
9-1-11: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
A. Adoption: The International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, as
published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the
Energy Conservation Code of the City of Colona, in the State of Illinois for
regulating and governing energy efficient building envelopes and installation
of energy efficient mechanical, lighting and power systems in the City of
Colona; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said Energy Conservation Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection B of this
section.
B. Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section C101.1 and R101.1 Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section C108.4 and R108.4 Insert: $50.00 to $750.00 in two places
C. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of such Energy Conservation Code are on
file in the Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-10-13, 2-10-2014)
9-1-12: RESIDENTIAL CODE:
A. Adoption: The International Residential Code, 2012 edition, including
appendix chapters C, E, G, I and J (see International Residential Code section
101.2.1, 2012 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be and
is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the City of Colona, in the State
of Illinois for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all
property, residential and structures; by providing the standards for supplied
utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and
the condemnation of residential and structures unfit for human occupancy and
use and the demolition of such structures as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Residential
Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in subsection B of this section.
B. Amendments: The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1. Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section 1612.3. Insert: city of Colona, Illinois
Section 1612.3. Insert: September 17, 1980
Section 3410.2. Insert: October 27, 1997
C. Copies On File: Three (3) copies of such Residential Code are on file in the
Office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 0-11-13, 2-10-2014)
CHAPTER 2
RENTAL HOUSING 1
SECTION:
9-2-1: Policy; Purpose; Applicability
9-2-2: Definitions
9-2-3: Permit Required
9-2-4: Fees
9-2-5: Minimum Standards And Requirements
9-2-5-1: Minimum Standards
9-2-5-2: Space Requirements
9-2-5-3: Artificial Illumination
9-2-5-4: Electrical Service
9-2-5-5: Heating
9-2-5-6: Water Heating Facilities
9-2-5-7: Ventilation
9-2-5-8: Sinks
9-2-5-9: Bathrooms
9-2-5-10: Outside Requirements
9-2-5-11: Refuse, Garbage And Rubbish
9-2-5-12: Dual Egress
9-2-5-13: Accessory Structures
9-2-5-14: Number Of Rooms Limited By Zoning Title
9-2-6: Owner's Responsibilities
9-2-7: Occupant's Responsibilities
9-2-8: Inspection
9-2-9: Noncompliance
9-2-10: Condemnation And Demolition
9-2-10-1: Placard On Building
9-2-10-2: Vacation Of Building
9-2-10-3: Removal Of Placard Prohibited
9-2-10-4: Right Of Appeal
9-2-10-5: Noncompliance; Remedy Of Defects
9-2-10-6: Condemned Buildings
9-2-10-7: Vacated Buildings Made Secure
9-2-11: Broken Glass; Boarding Up
9-2-12: Emergency Measures
9-2-13: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-30-3 and 5/11-31-1 et seq.
9-2-1: POLICY; PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY:
A. Declaration Of Policy: The City Council declares that the purpose of this
Chapter is to protect and preserve the physical and mental health of the people
and to promote the general safety and welfare of the people by establishing
minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for light, ventilation and
heating; and to provide safety from fire; and to determine the use and location
and amount of space for human occupancy and for safe, sanitary maintenance of
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels and motels; and by determining
the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings; and
providing for the administration and enforcement thereof. Any inconsistency or
conflict between the provisions of this Chapter and any other provision of this
Code or other existing ordinance shall not repeal such provision or ordinance,
but the provisions of the Chapter shall be cumulative thereto.
B. Purpose: The ultimate purpose of this Chapter is to prevent blight and
deterioration of neighborhoods into slums. More immediately, the purpose of
this Chapter is to establish minimum standards for maintaining both private and
commercial residential property so as to, on one hand, provide occupants and
neighbors with a healthful and safe environment in which to live and, on the
other hand, to permit the fullest use of residential properties for residential
purposes at the lowest reasonable cost to owner-occupants and to landlords and
tenants.
C. Applicability: Every building or portion thereof used for rental purposes
such as a dwelling, dwelling unit, two-family dwelling, multiple-family
dwelling, multiple use dwelling, hotel, motel, habitable room, rooming unit or
rooming house, shall conform to the requirements of this Chapter, irrespective
of the class to which such building or portion thereof may otherwise belong and
irrespective of which such building or portion thereof may have been
reconstructed, altered or repaired. This Chapter also applies to single-family
dwellings that are not owner- occupied and used for rental purposes, provided
one or more of the following conditions of subsections 9-2-5-1A through G or I
are encountered. (1997 Code)
9-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
A. Construction: Words used in the present tense shall include the future
tense; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural number includes
the singular. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". The word
"shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. Whenever the words
"dwelling", "dwelling unit", "rooming house", "rooming unit", or "premises",
are used in this Code, they shall be interpreted as though they were followed
by the words "or any part thereof".
B. Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases are hereby defined as
follows and shall be interpreted as such throughout these regulations. Terms
not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them:
    ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE: Any building or use which is on the same lot
with and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal
building or use.
   AGRICULTURAL USES, BONA FIDE: The growing of crops in the open, raising of
stock and poultry, forestry, mushroom growing, flower gardening, operation of
apiaries and aviaries, nurseries, orchards, fur farms, roadside stands, signs
and billboards relating to the sale or use of products produced thereon, and
necessary structures and farm dwellings for such uses.
   ALLEY: A trafficway dedicated to public use which affords a secondary means
of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a
street, and which is less than twenty feet (20') wide.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: One or more buildings on premises where
gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be
supplied and dispensed at retail, and incidental repair and maintenance may be
obtained. Uses permissible at a filling station do not include major mechanical
and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of
automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare,
fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found
in filling stations. A filling station is not a repair garage or body shop. All
activities incidental to the sale of gasoline or oil shall be conducted within
a building and there shall be no storage or accumulation of equipment or motor
vehicles disassembled or otherwise outside of the principal structure.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly below and partly above
grade and having at least one-half (1/2) its height above grade.
   BATHROOM: A room containing bathing and sanitary facilities consisting of a
water closet, a tub or shower and a lavatory. A bathroom shall be provided
within each living unit and shall afford complete privacy.
   BILLBOARD: A type of sign having more than one hundred (100) square feet of
display surface which is either erected on the ground or attached to or
supported by a building or structure.
   BOARD OF APPEALS: The Zoning Board of Appeals of the City.
   BOARDING AND LODGING HOUSE: A dwelling other than a hotel where, for
compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and
meals are provided for three (3) or more, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons
on a weekly basis.
   BUILDING: Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure,
shelter or protection of people, animals, chattels or property of any kind. Any
structure with interior areas not normally accessible for human use shall not
be considered as a building.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to
the mean height level between eaves and ridges for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR: The Building Inspector shall be the officer charged with
the administration and enforcement of this Chapter.
   CAR WASH: A building or portion thereof, containing facilities for washing
more than two (2) automobiles; using production-line methods with a chain
conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices; or
providing space, water, equipment or soap for the complete or partial hand-
washing of such automobiles, whether by operator or by customer.
   CELLAR: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade
and having at least one-half (1/2) of its height below grade.
   CHILD CARE CENTER: Any place, home or institution which receives three (3)
or more children under the age of sixteen (16) years and not of common
parentage, for care apart from their natural parents, legal guardians or
custodians when received for regular periods of time for compensation.
   CITY: The City of Colona, Illinois.
   CITY CLERK: The City Clerk of the City.
   CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City.
   CLINIC: An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are
admitted for examination or treatment by a physician and/or practitioners
practicing together.
   DETERIORATION: The condition or appearance of a building or part thereof,
characterized by breaks, holes, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or
other evidence of physical decay or neglect or excessive use of or lack of
maintenance shall define deterioration.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT OR REFRESHMENT STAND: Any place or premises principally
used for the sale, dispensing or serving of food, refreshments or beverages in
automobiles, including those establishments where customers may serve
themselves and may eat or drink the food, refreshments or beverages on or off
the premises.
   DWELLING: A dwelling is a building designed or used principally for
residential occupancy, including without limitation, single-family dwellings,
two-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A multiple-family dwelling is a building
containing three (3) or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-USE: A building containing a business, commercial or
manufacturing use and one or more dwelling or rooming units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A single-family dwelling is a building containing
one dwelling unit only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A two-family dwelling is a building containing two (2)
dwelling units only.
   DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit is one or more rooms arranged or designed for
the use of one family living together as a single housekeeping unit with
cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities in a self-contained unit, so
that access to the street in any additional facilities (such as laundry,
heating units, etc.) can be gained without passing through any other
residential or commercial unit.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, alteration or maintenance, by public
utilities or Municipal or other governmental agencies, of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, cables, fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other similar
equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities for Municipal or other
governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general welfare,
but not including buildings.
   EXTERMINATION: Extermination shall mean the control and elimination of
insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by
removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and
legal pest elimination methods approved by the Building Inspector.
   FAMILY: One or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, together
with his/her or their domestic servants, maintaining a common household in a
dwelling.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed or used for the storage of
motor driven vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which
it is an accessory. Not more than one of the vehicles may be a commercial
vehicle exceeding one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC: A building or portion thereof, other than a private or
storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring,
selling or storing motor driven vehicles.
   GARBAGE: Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food, wastes from the handling and storage of produce and paper
necessarily used for wrapping.
   HABITABLE BUILDING: Any structure or part thereof that shall be used as a
home or place of abode by one or more persons shall be defined as a habitable
building.
   HABITABLE ROOM: Any room meeting the requirements of this Chapter for
sleeping, living, cooking or dining purposes, excluding such enclosed places as
closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms, hallways, laundries, storage spaces,
utility rooms and similar spaces.
   HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation or activity incidental to residential use,
when carried on in the main building by one member of the immediate family
residing on the premises, in connection with which there is used no sign other
than a nonilluminated name plate not more than one square foot in area or no
display used that will indicate from the exterior that the building is being
used for any purpose other than that of a dwelling. There is no commodity sold
on the premises, no person is employed other than a member of the immediate
family residing on the premises, and no mechanical equipment is used except of
the type that is similar in character to that normally used for purely domestic
or household purposes. Home occupation shall include the use of premises by a
physician, surgeon, dentists, lawyer, clergyman, barber, beautician, or other
professional person.
   HOT WATER: Hot water means water at a temperature of not less than one
hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F).
   HOTEL (MOTEL): An establishment which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding house, lodging house or apartment-hotel, and is
commonly known as a hotel (motel) in the community in which it is located; and
which provides customary hotel services such as mail service, the furnishing
and laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service, the use and
upkeep of furniture and bellhop service.
   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE: See Section
6-7-13 of this Code regarding inoperative motor vehicles.
   INSTITUTION: A nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public
use.
   JUNKYARD: A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily for the
collection, storage and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded
materials or for the collection, storage, dismantling and salvaging of
machinery or vehicles not in running condition and for the sale of parts
thereof. The term "junkyard" shall include auto wrecking yards.
   KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which are kept four (4) or more dogs more
than six (6) months of age for compensation or sale.
   KITCHEN: A space of not less than seventy (70) square feet and shall mean
any room used for the storage and preparation of foods and containing the
following equipment: sink or other device for dishwashing, stove or other
device for cooking, refrigeration or other device for cool storage of food,
cabinets or shelves for storage of equipment and utensils, and counter or table
for food preparation. Only one kitchen is allowed per dwelling unit.
   LAUNDROMAT: An establishment providing hometype washing, drying or ironing
machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
   LOT: When used alone shall mean a "zoning lot" unless the context of this
Chapter clearly indicates otherwise.
   LOT AREA: The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
   LOT, CORNER: A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for
their full length on a street, provided the interior angle at the intersection
of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
   LOT DEPTH: The depth of a lot which shall be considered to be the distance
between the midpoints of straight lines connecting foremost points of the side
lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
   LOT FRONTAGE: That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a
street excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
   LOT, INTERIOR: Any lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
street.
   LOT OF RECORD: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has
been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Henry County; or a
parcel of land, the deed of which was recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Henry County prior to the adoption of the Zoning Ordinance as
hereinafter defined.
   LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot which shall be considered to be the distance
between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the
lot. Where side lot lines are not continuously parallel or at right angles to
the abutting street, the average of the rear and front widths shall be used.
   LOT ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block, which (at
the time of filing for a building permit) is designated by its owner or
developer as tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. Therefore, a "zoning lot" may or may not coincide with a
"lot of record".
   MOBILE HOME: A portable or mobile living unit used or designed for human
occupancy on a permanent basis. A travel trailer is not to be considered a
mobile home.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been
designed or improved or intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one or
more mobile homes.
   MOTOR COURT OR MOTEL: A building or group of buildings used primarily for
the temporary residence of motorists or travelers.
   NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
time of the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance as hereinafter defined, which
does not conform after passage of the Zoning Ordinance with the use regulations
of the district in which it is situated.
   OCCUPANT: Occupant shall mean any person living, sleeping, cooking, eating
in or having possession or use of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   OWNER: Any person, firm or corporation which alone, jointly or severally
with others, shall be in actual possession of, or have charge, care or control
of, any dwelling unit or rooming unit within the City as owner, employee or
agent of the owner, or as trustee or guardian of the estate or person of the
title holder, shall be defined as an owner. Any person acting in the capacity
of an owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this Chapter to the
same extent as if such person were the owner.
   OPERATOR: Any legally responsible person who has charge, care or control of
a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are leased
or let.
   PERMIT: The words "permit" and "license" shall be interchangeable.
   PERSON: Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization
or any other group acting as a unit as well as an individual. It shall also
include an executor, administrator, trustee or receiver or other representative
appointed according to law. Whenever the word "person" is used in any Section
of this Chapter prescribing a penalty or fine, as to partnerships or
associations, the word shall include the officer, agents or members thereof who
are responsible for any violation of such Section.
   PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD: The Planning and Zoning Board of the City.
   PLUMBING: All of the following facilities and equipment are included in this
definition: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, steam pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, toilets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents and any other similar fixtures, together with all connections to
water, sewer or gas lines.
   PRIVACY: The existence of conditions which will permit an individual or
individuals to carry out an activity commenced without interruption or
interference, either by sight or sound by unwanted individuals.
   PROVIDED: Any material furnished, supplied, paid for or under the control of
the owner or operator shall be said to be provided.
   PUBLIC HALL: A hall, corridor or passageway for egress from a dwelling not
within the exclusive control of one family shall be defined as a public hall.
   RENTAL HOUSING: Any nonowner-occupied dwelling or dwelling unit in which an
occupants may or may not pay an agreed fee to occupy such unit.
   ROOMING HOUSE: Any residential building, or any part thereof, containing one
dwelling unit, which is let by the owner or operator to more than four (4)
persons who do not constitute a family.
   ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
   RUBBISH: Combustible or noncombustible waste materials except garbage. The
term shall include the residue from the burning of coal, wood, coke, or other
combustible materials; paper, rags, cartons, and boxes, wood, excelsior rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tinned cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, ceramics, dust or other similar like materials.
   SIGN: A name, identification, description, display or illumination which is
affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or
piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization or business. However, a "sign"
shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor
shall it include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, political unit,
school or religious group.
   SIGN, OFF-SITE: A sign other than an "on-site" sign.
   SIGN, ON-SITE: A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on
which it is located or to products, accommodations, services or activities on
the premises. On-site signs do not include billboards.
   SMOKE DETECTOR: An approved device that senses visible or invisible
particles of combustion.
   STAIRWAYS: One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and
platforms connecting them to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from
one floor to another.
   STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, or the ceiling or roof
next above such floor; provided that, for the purpose of determining the
required dimensions of yards and courts, when the average story height of a
building exceeds twelve feet (12'), each twelve feet (12') or fraction thereof
of the total building height shall be considered a separate full story or
fractional story respectively, except the first story which may be fifteen feet
(15') high.
   STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which, on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than
four feet (4') above the floor of such story; provided however, that any
partial story used for residence purposes, other than a janitor or caretaker
and his/her family, shall be deemed a full story.
   STREET: A general term used to describe a public right of way which is
twenty feet (20') or more and provides a channel for vehicular and pedestrian
movement and may provide for vehicular and pedestrian access to properties
adjacent to it, and which may also provide space for the location of utilities,
both above and below ground. The word "street" shall include the meanings of
road, highway and thoroughfare.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected which is attached to something
having location on the ground, including a fence or free-standing wall or a
sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached or projecting, shall be
defined as a structure.
   SUBSTANDARD: Substandard shall mean all buildings used for purposes of human
habitation which do not conform to the minimum standards established by this
Chapter or by any other provision of this Code or ordinances of the City.
   SUPPLIED: Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
   TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis designed
to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having
a body width not exceeding eight feet (8') and a length not to exceed twenty
four feet (24').
   YARD: A required open space at grade unoccupied and unobstructed by any
structure or portion of a structure, other than projections of uncovered steps,
uncovered balconies, or uncovered porches; provided, however, that fences,
walls, poles, posts and other customary yard accessories, ornaments, and
furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height and visibility
requirements. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a
side yard, depth of a front yard or rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance
between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
   YARD, FRONT: An open space extending the full width of the lot between a
building and the front lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as hereinafter specified.
   YARD, REAR: An open space extending the full width of a lot between a
building and the rear lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as hereinafter specified.
   YARD, SIDE: An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between a building and side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward, except as hereinafter specified.
   ZONING OFFICER: The person appointed to occupy the office created herein, in
which office is vested the chief administrative and enforcement duties as
outlined in Title 12 of this Code.
   ZONING ORDINANCE: As applied to "lot of record" and "nonconforming use" as
used in this Chapter regarding date of recording or use in existence at the
time of passage of the Zoning Ordinance, it shall mean the Zoning Ordinance of
the Village of Colona dated August 5, 1982, as amended, or Ordinance 88-3 of
the City of Green Rock dated February 22, 1983, as amended, whichever applies
to the real property in question. All other references shall be to Title 12 of
this Code. (1997 Code)
9-2-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
A. Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, keep, manage or
operate or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated, any duplex,
apartment, rooming house, multiple-use dwelling, single-family dwelling, hotel
or motel, without a license therefor.
B. Application:
1. Form: A written application for the license or permit required by subsection
A above shall be submitted on a form furnished by the City Clerk's office. Said
application shall be filed with the Building Inspector on or before August 1.
2. Required Information: Applications shall accurately state the full name and
address of the applicant and the person in whose name such license is to be
issued. The full name and address of the owner of the building and premises
where such multiple-use dwelling, single-family rental, duplex, apartment,
hotel, motel or rooming house is proposed to be carried on, the number of rooms
or units in such buildings and which of such rooms in said buildings are to be
occupied as sleeping rooms and the number of persons proposed to be
accommodated or allowed in each room in a rooming house or multiple-use
dwelling or the number of dwelling units in a multiple-family dwelling or
multiple-use dwelling.
C. Inspection; Approval: Upon receipt of the application required by this
Chapter, the Building Inspector or the Fire Inspector shall authorize proper
inspection if required, and no such permit shall be issued until the Building
Inspector has given written approval.
D. Term: Licenses shall be renewed biennially from the date of inspection.
E. Transferability: No license issued under this Section shall be transferable.
Operating permits are not transferable from one party to another upon the sale
of any house, apartment house, multiple-use dwelling, duplex, hotel, motel or
rooming house. At the time of sale of a house, apartment house, multiple-use
dwelling, duplex, hotel, motel or rooming house, it will be necessary for the
new owner to acquire a new permit subject to the same conditions as the
original permit. (1997 Code)
9-2-4: FEES:
A. License Or Permit Fees: The permit or license required by this Chapter shall
be issued, upon approval, by the City Clerk's office. Fees for such permit or
license shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) biennially for each building.
B. Delinquent Penalty: After renewal due date, there shall be an additional
monthly charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00), provided that failure to have a
license is a violation of subsection 9-2-13A, despite the possibility of a late
fee for a license renewal.
C. Lost Application Fee: In the event an applicant for a license loses or
misplaces his or her application, there shall be a five dollar ($5.00) charge
imposed to receive a new application.
D. Missed Inspection Appointment Fee: For owners and/or managers who have
confirmed appointments and who do not show up for their appointments, a ten
dollar ($10.00) fee shall be imposed.
E. Reinspection Fee: Where an inspection reveals defects or deficiencies which
preclude approval of the license, thereby forcing or necessitating a
reinspection, a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per reinspection may be charged
to the license holder. Such fees are separate and apart and in addition to any
other fee provided by ordinance. (1997 Code)
9-2-5: MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of this Chapter
9-2-5 shall be held to be the minimum requirements with respect to houses,
apartments, multiple-use dwellings, duplexes, hotels, motels and rooming houses
for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, life and
general welfare. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-1: MINIMUM STANDARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to let or hold out to another for
occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, which is not
safe, clean and fit for human occupancy, and which does not comply with the
particular requirements of the following:
A. Foundations, Exterior Walls And Roofs: The foundation, exterior walls and
exterior roof shall be substantially watertight and protected against rodents
and shall be kept in sound condition and repair. The foundation elements shall
adequately support the building at all points. Every exterior wall shall be
free of deterioration, holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and
any other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions
of the walls or to the exterior spaces of the dwelling. The roof shall be tight
and have no defects which admit rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate to
prevent rain water from causing dampness in the walls. All cornices,
rustications, quoins, moldings, belt courses, lintels, sills, oriels, windows,
pediments and similar projections shall be kept in good repair and free from
cracks and defects which make them hazardous and dangerous.
B. Floors, Interior Walls And Ceilings: Every floor, interior wall and ceiling
shall be adequately protected against the passage and harborage of vermin and
rodents, and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Every floor
shall be free of holes and cracks. Every floor shall be free of loose, warped,
protruding or rotting floor boards. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be
free of holes and large cracks and shall be maintained in a tight, weatherproof
condition. Every interior wall and ceiling shall be free of loose plaster or
other structural material. Plaster, paint and all other surface materials shall
be of such character as to be easily cleanable, and shall be reasonably smooth,
clean and tight. Every toilet room and bathroom floor surface shall be
substantially impervious to water and be capable of being maintained easily in
a clean and sanitary condition.
C. Windows, Doors And Hatchways: Every window, exterior door and basement
hatchway shall be substantially tight, and shall be kept in sound condition and
repair. Every window shall be fully supplied with window panes, which are
without cracks or holes. Every window shall be in good condition and shall fit
reasonably tight, capable of locking, fastening or otherwise closing in a
locked manner, the window from the inside, and every window, other than a fixed
window, shall be capable of being opened and held in such an open position by
appropriate hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be
in good condition. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit reasonably
within its frame.
D. Screens: Screens shall be supplied, maintained and installed to the
following extent:
1. Every basement or cellar window which is openable shall be supplied with a
framed heavy wire screen or hardware cloth of not less than four (4) mesh per
inch (1") which fits tightly and which is securely fastened to the frame, or
with any other material affording equivalent protection against the entry of
rodents.
2. From April 15 to November 15 of each year, every door opening directly from
any dwelling unit to the outdoors and every window or other outside opening
used for ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with a screen of not less than
sixteen (16) mesh per inch (1") and every screen door shall have a self-closing
device in good working condition on it.
E. Stairways And Porches: Every stairway, inside or outside of the dwelling,
and every porch shall be kept in safe condition and sound repair. Every flight
of stairs and every porch floor shall be free of deterioration. Every stairwell
and every flight of stairs which is more than four (4) risers high shall have
rails not less than two and one-half feet (21/2') high, measured vertically
from the nose of the tread to the top of the rail; and every porch which is
more than four (4) risers high shall have rails not less than two and one-half
feet (21/2') above the floor of the porch. Every rail and balustrade shall be
firmly fastened and maintained in good condition. No flight of stairs shall
have settled more than one inch (1") out of its intended position or have
pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures. No flight of stairs shall
have rotting, loose or deteriorating supports. The treads and risers of every
flight of stairs shall be uniform in width and height. Every stair tread shall
be strong enough to bear a concentrated load of at least four hundred (400)
pounds without danger of breaking. Every porch shall have a sound floor. No
porch shall have rotting, loose or deteriorating supports.
F. Basements And Cellars: Every basement and every cellar shall be maintained
in a safe and sanitary condition with the required minimum window area entirely
aboveground level. The floors and walls must be constructed in a manner to
prevent the entry of moisture and must be so insulated so as to prevent the
condensation of moisture within the room. Water shall not be permitted to
accumulate or to stand on the floor. All sewer connections shall be properly
trapped. All cellar and slab drains shall be covered with grating. Junk,
rubbish and waste shall not be permitted to accumulate to such an extent as to
create fire hazards or to endanger health or safety.
G. Facilities, Equipment And Chimneys: Every supplied facility, fixture,
system, piece of equipment or utility, and every chimney and chimney flue shall
be installed and maintained in a safe, sound and sanitary working condition,
consistent with the requirements of this Chapter or the Uniform Building Code
as adopted by the City.
H. Grading And Drainage Of Lots: Every yard, court, vent, passageway, driveway
and any other portion of the lot on which the dwelling stands shall be graded
and drained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water on any such
surface. Driveways shall be maintained in a safe condition, free of safety
hazards to the general public.
I. Infestation: Each dwelling and all exterior appurtenances on the premises
shall be adequately protected against rats, mice, termites and other vermin
infestation. Remedial steps shall be taken by the owner to correct any problem
such as building defects which permit the entrance of rats, mice, termites and
vermin. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-2: SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
No person shall let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose
of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Minimum Floor Area: Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one
occupant shall have a minimum floor area of seventy (70) square feet; every
room occupied for sleeping purposes by two (2) occupants shall have a minimum
floor area of one hundred (100) square feet; and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by three (3) occupants shall have a minimum floor area of one
hundred fifty (150) square feet and shall contain an additional fifty (50)
square feet per each additional person.
B. Bathroom Access: Every room used as a bedroom shall have access to at least
one bathroom so that an occupant may enter the bathroom without passing through
another room used as a bedroom.
C. Ceiling Heights: Habitable rooms shall have the following ceiling heights:
1. Basements: Seven feet (7') clear under joists.
2. Main Floor: Any living unit must have eight feet (8') clear for at least
seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area.
3. Second Floor: Any living unit must have seven feet (7') clear.
4. Under Sloping Roofs: Ceiling height must be seven feet (7') for not less
than fifty percent (50%) of the floor area having four feet six inches (4'6")
or more headroom.
5. Exemption: Existing uses at the date of adoption of this Code, which are
exempt from this requirement.
6. Exception: Beams and girders or simulated beams and girders, spaced not less
than four feet (4') on center, may not project more than six inches (6") below
the required ceiling height.
D. Combined Living Room/Dining Room: Combined living room/dining room spaces
will meet the requirements of this Section if the total area is equal to that
required for separate rooms and if the space is so located that it may function
as a combination living room/dining room. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-3: ARTIFICIAL ILLUMINATION:
A. Habitable Room: Every habitable room shall have at least one ceiling or
wall-type electrical light fixture or outlet which can be operated and
controlled by an occupant at the entrance to the room.
B. Hallway; Stairway: Every hallway and stairway in a multiple- family dwelling
shall be lighted at all times by natural or electric light so as to provide in
all parts thereof at least five (5) foot-candles of light at the tread or floor
level. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-4: ELECTRICAL SERVICE:
A. Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to occupy or permit another to
occupy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which is not
adequately and safely provided with an electrical system in compliance with the
requirements of the National Electrical Code adopted by the City.
B. Request For Review: Wherever it is found, in the judgment of the Building
Inspector, that the electrical system in the building constitutes a hazard to
the occupants of the building by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing,
improper or inadequate grounding of the system, insufficient outlets, improper
wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the
Building Inspector shall request a review of said conditions.
C. Prohibited Installations: In addition to the hazards established by the
Building Inspector, the following installations are prohibited and their
presence shall be deemed a hazard:
1. Flush or semi-flush mounted floor convenience outlets, unless provided with
an approved waterproof cover.
2. Extension cords for other than short-term, temporary use.
3. Conductor-supported pendant switches or conductor supported pendant light
fixtures.
4. Loose or hanging wires.
5. Frayed or bare wires.
6. Inadequately grounded, grounded-type convenience outlets. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-5: HEATING:
A. Minimum Requirements: Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities
which are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water-closet compartments within its walls to a temperature of at
least seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) when the outside temperature is ten
degrees below zero Fahrenheit (-10°F). Gas appliances designed primarily for
cooking or water-heating purposes shall not be considered as heating facilities
within the meaning of this Section.
B. Portable Heating Equipment: Portable heating equipment employing flame and
the use of fossil fuels does not meet the requirements of this Section and is
prohibitive.
C. Owner Responsibility: The above shall be the sole responsibility of the
owner and failure to provide the foregoing shall be a violation of this
Chapter. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-6: WATER HEATING FACILITIES:
A. Minimum Requirements: Every dwelling unit shall have supplied water heating
facilities which are properly installed, which are maintained in safe and good
working condition, which are properly connected with the hot water lines
required under the provisions of this Chapter and which are capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be
drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a
temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F).
B. Independent From Heating Facilities: Such supplied water heating facilities
shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the
dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming unit heating facilities required under the
provisions of Section
9-2-5-5 of this Chapter are not in operation.
C. Owner Responsibility: The above shall be the sole responsibility of the
owner and failure to provide the foregoing shall be a violation of this
Chapter. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-7: VENTILATION:
A. Generally: Every habitable room shall have a ventilation system adequate for
the purpose for which the room is used. Natural ventilation shall be deemed to
be adequate for habitation when the total area openable to the outside air (by
means of windows, louvers, monitors or other direct openings excluding doors)
is five percent (5%) of the floor area of the habitable room, except that when:
1. Any portion of the room is more than sixteen feet (16') from a required
opening, the aggregate clear area of openings shall be not less than six
percent (6%).
2. A room has openable areas on two (2) or more sides thereof, the total
openable area shall be at least four percent (4%) of the total floor area of
such room.
3. The openable area faces a wall or other obstruction at a distance of less
than ten feet (10'), the effective area shall be computed at not more than
eighty percent (80%) of the actual openable area.
4. The openable area opens onto an enclosed porch, the enclosed porch shall
have an openable area of at least three (3) times the total required area of
the openings onto such porch.
B. Kitchen With Floor Area Of Less Than Seventy Square Feet: A kitchen with a
floor area of less than seventy (70) square feet may be without either
mechanical or natural ventilation if there is an opening of not less than
thirty two (32) square feet between the kitchen and another room in the same
family unit and if the room into which the kitchen opens has the ventilation
requirements of subsection A above.
C. Toilet And Bathroom: Every toilet room and bathroom shall have adequate
ventilation which may be either an openable window with an openable area of
five percent (5%) of the floor area, mechanical ventilation in compliance with
the foregoing requirements of this Section, or a gravity vent flue constructed
with incombustible material leading to the roof of the building or a
combination of any of these. The gravity vent shall be computed at an aggregate
clear area of not less than five percent (5%) of the floor area of the room
with a minimum area of at least one hundred twenty (120) square inches. Gravity
vents shall be provided with a weather cap, directional vane or rotary-type
ventilation on tile roof. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-8: SINKS:
A. Kitchen Sink: Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good
repair, free of chips, cracks or other defects which may be a sanitary hazard,
and it shall be in working condition, properly connected to a water and sewer
system approved by the Building Inspector.
B. Hot And Cold Water: Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
required under the provisions of this Chapter shall be properly connected with
both hot and cold water lines. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-9: BATHROOMS:
A. Required: Every dwelling unit shall contain a bathroom which affords privacy
to a person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet, a
tub or shower, and a lavatory basin.
B. Additional Facilities: Every dwelling unit with more than eight (8)
occupants shall contain additional bathroom facilities at the rate of one for
each additional six (6) occupants or fraction thereof. This requirement shall
be mandatory in all dwelling units.
C. Fixtures: All fixtures shall be in good repair and in working condition,
properly connected to the public water system and to a public sewer system.
(1997 Code)
9-2-5-10: OUTSIDE REQUIREMENTS:
A. Prohibited Acts:
1. Well, Cistern, Excavation: No owner shall permit any well, cistern,
excavation or other depression to exist in a dangerous or unprotected
condition.
2. Parking Truck Or Trailer: No owner or occupant shall permit any truck or
trailer of one and one-half (11/2) ton capacity or greater, to be parked on the
premises in a residential zone, except for loading or unloading.
3. Storage Of Wood Or Lumber: No wood, lumber or any other material or object
shall be stored, kept or permitted to remain except temporarily on the premises
in such a manner that will afford harborage to rats.
4. Exception: This subsection will not apply to recreational vehicles or
campers.
B. Wood Exteriors: All exterior wood surfaces on all dwellings shall be
reasonably protected from the elements and against decay by a suitable
protective material and must conform with requirements set forth in the Uniform
Building Code as adopted by the City governing exterior weather board and
veneers.
C. Garages, Tool Sheds, Outbuildings: All garages, tool sheds and all other
outbuildings shall be kept in good repair so as not to be unsafe or become a
harborage for rats and other rodents. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-11: REFUSE, GARBAGE AND RUBBISH:
Every dwelling unit shall have adequate refuse, garbage or rubbish storage
facilities provided by the owner of said premises. These facilities shall
comply to the health and garbage ordinances of the City. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-12: DUAL EGRESS:
All dwelling or rooming units in multiple-family dwellings, multiple-use
dwellings, duplexes and rooming houses shall be provided with two (2) separate
useable, unobstructed means of egress for each dwelling or dwelling unit. The
exit facilities from such dwelling or rooming units shall lead to a public
thoroughfare, either directly or through a court or yard and passage to such
exits shall not lead through another dwelling or rooming unit or through a
space that might be locked. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-13: ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
A. Accessory structures shall not obstruct light and air of doors and windows
of any dwelling unit, or obstruct a safe means of access to any dwelling unit
or create fire and safety hazards or provide rat or vermin harborage. Accessory
structures shall be functional and shall be maintained in a state of good
repair and alignment.
B. All exterior appurtenances or accessory structures which serve no useful
purpose and which are in a deteriorated condition which is not economically
repairable, shall be removed. Such structures include porches, terraces,
entrance platforms, garages, driveways, carports, walls, fences and
miscellaneous sheds. (1997 Code)
9-2-5-14: NUMBER OF ROOMS LIMITED BY ZONING TITLE:
Rooming houses, duplex, apartment and multiple-use dwellings shall contain not
more than the number of dwelling or rooming units authorized by the Zoning
Title of this Code 1
, nor shall any rooming or dwelling unit be occupied by more than the number of
persons which the Zoning Title permits to occupy such a unit. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 12 of this Code.
9-2-6: OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
The owner of a multiple-use dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling, single-family dwelling, hotel or motel has the duty and
responsibility to do or cause to be done the following:
A. Maintenance Of Grounds: To cut, mow, trim and maintain all grass, weeds and
other ground cover in such a way that it does not exceed eight inches (8") in
height.
B. Garbage: To provide and maintain receptacles for the collection and disposal
of garbage, refuse and debris and similar material of sufficient size and in
sufficient quantity to accommodate the refuse reasonably expected from the
occupants of the premises and to provide for the collection and disposal of the
contents thereof.
C. Maintenance: To maintain in operable condition or otherwise in a manner
required by law or ordinance all fixtures, equipment and appurtenances
installed in or provided with the premises.
D. Screens And Screen Doors: To install and maintain screens and screen doors
in accordance with subsection 9-2-5-1D of this Chapter.
E. Applications And Permits: To file all applications and obtain all required
permits and to pay any and all fees required in connection with the operation
of the respective establishments per Section
9-2-3 of this Chapter.
F. Parking Areas And Driveways: To install and maintain all parking areas and
driveways.
G. Street Numbers: To affix and maintain on the front of the establishment,
street numbers of not less than four inches (4") in height and of a color
contrasting with that of the area to which it is affixed.
H. Smoke Detectors: To install smoke detectors.
1. Definition: The term "smoke detectors" is defined as an approved device that
senses visible or invisible particles of combustion.
2. Sleeping Rooms: Smoke detectors are required within each sleeping room of a
dwelling unit. The detectors placed in sleeping rooms are in addition to those
required in other locations. Placing smoke detectors within each room will
provide the early warning that occupants of the room need when a fire begins
within the sleeping room. Section 1210(a) of the Uniform Building Code states,
"in dwelling units, a detector shall be installed in each sleeping room and at
a point centrally located in the corridor (hallway) or area giving access to
each separate sleeping area (room)".
3. Multiple Stories: When the dwelling unit has more than one story and in
dwellings with basements, a detector shall be installed on each story and in
the basement.
4. Split Levels: In dwelling units where a story or basement is split into two
(2) or more levels, the smoke detector shall be installed on the upper level
except that when the lower level contains a sleeping area, a detector shall be
placed at the ceiling of the upper level in close proximity to the stairway.
5. Sound Of Alarm: Detectors shall sound an alarm audible in all sleeping areas
of the dwelling unit in which they are located.
6. Addition, Alteration, Repair: When the valuation of an addition, alteration
or repair exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or when one or more sleeping
rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the entire building shall be
provided with smoke detectors located as required for new dwellings. (See UBC
sec. 1210A)
I. Maintenance: To maintain all installed smoke detector devices in operable
condition.
J. Compliance Required: To operate and maintain the establishment in complete
compliance with all codes of the City. (1997 Code)
9-2-7: OCCUPANT'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
Every occupant of a multi-use dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, two-family
dwelling, single-family dwelling, hotel or motel and rooming house shall be
responsible for the following as applied to the portion of the living unit that
they occupy or have access to:
A. Reasonable Care; Proper Use: To exercise reasonable care and make proper use
of the living unit and its facilities.
B. Clean And Sanitary: To keep the occupied area and all plumbing equipment and
cooking facilities and any other equipment or facilities that are provided
operating in a clean and sanitary fashion.
C. Rubbish And Garbage: To dispose of rubbish and garbage or to store such
waste in the proper containers as provided by the owners in a neat and sanitary
manner.
D. Compliance Required: To operate and maintain the living unit in complete
compliance with all codes of the City. (1997 Code)
9-2-8: INSPECTION:
A. Authority To Inspect: The Building Inspector or Fire Inspector is authorized
and directed to make inspections to determine whether dwellings, dwelling
units, rooming units, accessory structures and premises, hotels and motels
located within this City conform to requirements of this Chapter and other
applicable Chapters of the City Code.
B. Right Of Entry:
1. Free Access: For the purpose of making such inspections, the Building
Inspector or Fire Inspector is authorized to enter, examine and survey at all
reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, accessory
structures and premises, hotels and motels. The owner or occupant of every
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, accessory structure and its premises,
hotels and motels shall grant the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector free
access thereto at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey.
2. Denied Access: In the event the owner or occupant shall refuse access to any
premises, then the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector shall have authority to
enter any of such premises after written notice has been given to the owner,
occupant or his/her agent. (1997 Code)
9-2-9: NONCOMPLIANCE:
A. Notice Of Violation: Whenever the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector
determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a
violation of any provision of this Chapter, the Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector will give notice of such alleged violation to the person responsible
therefor, which shall:
1. Be in writing;
2. Contain a statement of the reason for which it is being issued;
3. Contain an outline of remedial action, which if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter;
4. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act which it requires;
B. Service Of Notice; Posting: Such notice shall be served upon the owner or
owner's agent, or the occupant, as the case may require. Such notice shall be
deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon any such
occupant if a copy thereof is:
1. Served upon the owner, owner's agent or occupant personally; or
2. Sent by regular first class mail, postage prepaid, to such owner, owner's
agent, or occupant's last known address; or
3. Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by notice.
(1997 Code)
9-2-10: CONDEMNATION AND DEMOLITION:
The designation of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels, and motels
as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the condemnation,
placarding and demolition of such unfit dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units, hotels and motels shall be carried out in compliance with the following
requirements. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-1: PLACARD ON BUILDING:
The designation of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels, or motels,
as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for such declaration and
placarding is as follows:
A. Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which shall be
found to have any of the following defects shall be declared unfit for human
habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the Building Inspector
or Fire Inspector:
1. One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin
infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health and safety of the
occupants or of the public.
2. One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate
to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
3. One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary or
otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
4. Where the person responsible has failed to correct, in a timely manner, the
condition described in a notice issued in accordance with Section
9-2-9 of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-2: VACATION OF BUILDING:
A. Time Limitation: Any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel
condemned as unfit for human habitation, and so designated and placarded by the
Building Inspector or Fire Inspector shall be vacated within a reasonable time,
not to exceed sixty (60) days, as ordered by the Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector.
B. Rehabitation: No dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which
has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be
used for human habitation until written approval is secured from and such
placard is removed by the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector. The Inspector
shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated.
C. Court Order: Where a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel
is condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation, and is not vacated
within time specified in such vacation order, the Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector shall seek a court order in a court of competent jurisdiction for the
vacation of such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel. (1997
Code)
9-2-10-3: REMOVAL OF PLACARD PROHIBITED:
No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, hotel or motel which has been condemned as unfit for human
habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in Section
9-2-10-2 above. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-4: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
A. Notice Of Appeal: Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the
condemnation or placarding of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or
motel as unfit for human habitation, or any interpretation of this Chapter, may
appeal and request in writing, within ten (10) days of such notice, a hearing
before the Zoning Board of Appeals in the manner described in the Title 12 of
this Code.
B. Hearing: Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, a hearing shall be held and
decision rendered.
C. Stay Of Proceedings: Any such appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Building Inspector or Fire
Inspector shall certify to the Zoning Board of Appeals subsequent to the filing
of any notice of appeal that, by reason of the facts stated in the certificate,
a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-5: NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF DEFECTS:
A. Time Limitations: The owner of any building shall have the period of time
specified in the letter of notice required to be sent by subsection 9-2-9A of
this Chapter, in which to remedy the condition therein described, except when
an emergency situation requires immediate action, as provided in Section
9-2-12 of this Chapter. The Building Inspector or Fire Inspector may extend the
time for compliance with any such notice.
B. Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply
with any order of the Building Inspector or Fire Inspector contained in a
notice described in Section
9-2-9 or Section
9-2-12 of this Chapter. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-6: CONDEMNED BUILDINGS:
A. Removal By Owner:
1. Order To Demolish: A dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel
which subject to condemnation and placarding as unfit for human habitation may
be ordered demolished by the Building Inspector if it is determined by the
Building Inspector that such defects upon which the condemnation order is based
cannot be economically remedied.
2. Demolition: Demolition according to requirements listed below may be
required of the owner within a reasonable period of time, said period of time
to be not less than thirty (30) days after notice is served on said owner. Such
demolition shall have the effect of fulfilling the requirements of removing
defects if the dwelling structure is razed to ground level and any subsurface
area is filled with solid material to ground level.
B. Removal By City: A dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel
which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and ordered demolished
and which has not been demolished by the owner within the time specified in
such demolition order, may be demolished at the expense of the owner, according
to the following procedure:
1. In accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings and pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1,
the corporate authorities shall apply to the Circuit Court of Henry County for
an order authorizing the demolition of said dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, hotel or motel unfit for human habitation.
2. After order of demolition is entered in the Circuit Court of Henry County,
the corporate authorities shall then proceed to demolish said building or
dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel or motel, or rooming house at the owner's
expense.
3. Cost Of Removal; Lien: All expenses incurred, including attorney fees, shall
be the responsibility of the owner of record, and said expenses, including
attorney fees, shall further be a lien on the real estate.
C. Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings must be removed at the time of
removal of the principal building. (1997 Code)
9-2-10-7: VACATED BUILDINGS MADE SECURE:
The owner of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel which
is declared unfit for human habitation or for continued occupancy shall make
the dwelling unit, rooming unit, dwelling, hotel or motel, safe and secure
under the terms so that it shall not be dangerous to human life and shall not
constitute a fire hazard or public nuisance. Any such vacant dwelling, dwelling
unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel, open at doors or windows, if unguarded,
shall be deemed to be dangerous to human life as a fire hazard and as a public
nuisance with the meaning of this provision. (1997 Code)
9-2-11: BROKEN GLASS; BOARDING UP:
A. Broken Glass; Replacement: Every window, glazed exterior door, exterior
transom or exterior sidelight, shall be provided with properly installed glass
or other approved glazing material. In the event of breakage, the owner shall
cause the immediate removal of broken glass from the premises and shall
temporarily board up the affected openings with suitable material to provide
protection from the elements and to prevent entry of insects, birds or animals
and to provide security to occupants or contents of the building.
B. Ventilation; Lighting: Adequate ventilation and artificial lighting shall be
provided for all occupied dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels or
motels.
C. Notice To Repair: Whenever any exterior openings are found boarded up, it
shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to notify the owner or agent of
this requirement by giving the owner or owner's agent a period of not more than
ten (10) working days in which to properly replace the broken glass, or the
dwelling unit, rooming unit, dwelling, hotel or motel shall be vacated. This
notice shall be given in the manner required by Section
9-2-9, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or agent to fail to comply with
the order of the Building Inspector contained in such notice.
D. Boarding Up:
1. Specifications: Since the presence of boarded up buildings, particularly
those where the boarding is unpainted or applied in an insecure, careless or
unpresentable fashion, invites vandalism and creates a blighting influence
which adversely affects the general welfare of the people of this City, it is
hereby required that all boarding up of exterior openings be accomplished in a
neat, workmanlike manner, with not less than one-half inch (1/2") thick,
weather resistant plywood cut to fit within openings, fastened in place as
securely as possible and suitably coated with an appropriate neutral color
blending with or harmonizing with the exterior colors of the building as
inconspicuously as possible.
2. Notice Of Noncompliance: It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to
notify the owner or agent of any boarded up dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, hotel or motel not complying with the above requirements, of the
necessity of compliance by giving the owner or agent a period of not more than
ten (10) working days in which to replace the broken glass, or in which to
repair, replace or paint the boarding. This notice shall be given in the manner
required in Section
9-2-9, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or agent to fail to comply with
the order of the Building Inspector contained in such notice. (1997 Code)
9-2-12: EMERGENCY MEASURES:
A. Revocation Of Permit; Order To Vacate: When any dwelling unit, rooming unit,
dwelling, hotel or motel, has become so damaged by fire, wind or other causes,
or has become so unsafe, unhealthful or unsanitary, that in the opinion of the
Building Inspector, life or health is immediately endangered by the occupation
of the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, hotel or motel, the Building
Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke without notice, any
occupancy permits for such dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, hotels or
motels, and to order and require the occupants to vacate the same forthwith and
to order the owner or agent to proceed immediately with the corrective work and
repairs required to make the dwelling, dwelling units, rooming unit, hotel or
motel temporarily safe and fit for human habitation, whether or not a notice of
violation has been given as described in this Chapter, and whether or not legal
procedures described by ordinances of the City have been instituted.
B. Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply
with any emergency order of the Building Inspector.
C. Declaration Of Emergency: Whenever the Building Inspector finds that an
emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the health and
safety of the residents or of the public, the Building Inspector may issue an
order citing the existence of an emergency and requiring immediate action to be
taken as deemed necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding other
provisions of this Chapter, such order shall take effect immediately. (1997
Code)
9-2-13: PENALTY:
A. Violation Declared Nuisance: The existence or use of any rooming house,
duplex, apartment, single-family dwelling, multiple-use dwelling, hotel or
motel as defined in this Chapter in violation of any provision of this Chapter
is hereby declared to be and shall constitute a public nuisance.
B. Violation; Penalty: Any owner, lessee, agent, tenant or other person who
shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter, upon being found guilty,
shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each violation.
C. Continuing Violation: Each day that any such violation or failure continues
shall be considered a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as
such. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
HOUSE NUMBERING 1
SECTION:
9-3-1: Uniform Plan
9-3-2: Copy On File
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-3.
9-3-1: UNIFORM PLAN:
All houses in the City shall be numbered in accordance with a uniform plan set
out in the plat of the City. All numbers must be in a color contrasting to the
color of the house and a minimum size of three inches (3") high. Such number
shall be placed in front of or on the front part of each house is the City. It
shall be unlawful for any house to display a number other than the one herein
authorized. (1997 Code)
9-3-2: COPY ON FILE:
The City Clerk shall keep a copy of said plan on file in the Clerk's office for
the purpose of advising owners the numbers to be displayed on their homes.
(1997 Code)
CHAPTER 4
FENCES 1
SECTION:
9-4-1: Height
9-4-2: Front Yard
9-4-3: Barbed Wire, Electric Fences
9-4-4: Property Pins
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-30-1.
9-4-1: HEIGHT:
A. Rear yard: No fence shall be over six feet (6') above the ground level.
B. Side yard: No fence shall be higher than forty eight inches (48") between
the front and rear of principal building.
C. Front yard: No fence shall be higher than forty eight inches (48") and fence
shall be open spaced at least two inches (2") or equal to pickets, or chain
linked. (Ord. 0-18-06, 2-12-2018)
9-4-2: FRONT YARD:
No fence shall be erected in any front yard so as to obstruct the view of
adjacent property within two hundred fifty feet (250'). (1997 Code)
9-4-3: BARBED WIRE, ELECTRIC FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any electric fence or
any fence constructed in whole or in part of barbed wire or to use barbed wire
as a guard to any parking lot, stairway, entrance to a building or parcel of
land. (1997 Code)
9-4-4: PROPERTY PINS:
Property pins must be visible before permits for any type of construction or
fence erecting is allowed. (Ord. 0-19-10, 5-10-2010)
CHAPTER 5
SWIMMING POOLS 1
SECTION:
9-5-1: Compliance Required
9-5-2: Definition
9-5-3: Location
9-5-4: Permit Required
9-5-5: Drawings, Plans And Permits
9-5-6: Recirculation
9-5-7: Construction Materials
9-5-8: Structural Design
9-5-9: Walk Areas
9-5-10: Fences
9-5-11: Steps And Ladders
9-5-12: Skimmers
9-5-13: Water Supply
9-5-14: Inlets
9-5-15: Outlets
9-5-16: Recirculation System And Appurtenances
9-5-17: Electrical Requirements
9-5-18: Safety Precautions
9-5-19: Inspection
9-5-20: Penalty
9-5-21: Pool Maintenance
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-30-9.
9-5-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming
pool in the city except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(1997 Code)
9-5-2: DEFINITION:
The term "swimming pool" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water or an
artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet
(2'), intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion of human
beings, and including all appurtenant equipment. (1997 Code)
9-5-3: LOCATION:
No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance
less than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property line or building line.
Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall be
located at a distance not less than eight feet (8') from any side property
line. No swimming pool may be located in the front yard as defined in section
9-2-2 of this title. (Ord. 00-16, 5-22-2000)
9-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, enlargement or
alteration of any private, residential swimming pool and appurtenances within
the city unless permits therefor shall have been first obtained from the
building inspector. (1997 Code)
9-5-5: DRAWINGS, PLANS AND PERMITS:
A. Submission; Approval: All drawings and plans for the construction,
installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances
shall first be presented to the building inspector for examination and approval
as to proper location and construction.
B. Specifications: All plans and drawings shall be drawn to scale of not less
than one-eighth inch (1/8") to one foot (1'), on paper or cloth, in ink or by
some process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions
shall be accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing
the lot line and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence
construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems and all
appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool. Detail plans and vertical
elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the building code.
C. Conformity With Approved Plans: All private, residential swimming pools,
appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems shall be constructed in
conformity with the approved plans. (1997 Code)
9-5-6: RECIRCULATION:
All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of
the water is maintained through the pool by pumps, the water drawn from the
pool being chlorinated and disinfected before being returned to the pool. (1997
Code)
9-5-7: CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS:
Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material
which will provide a tight tank with white or light colored finish and easily
cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the pool shall have a nonslip
finish as smooth as possible. The side and end walls of a pool shall present a
smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six feet (6') or
shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following conditions:
A. The pool walls may be vertical for thirty inches (30") from the water level,
below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point
equal to the difference between the depth at that point and thirty inches
(30").
B. To a depth of six feet (6'), except as in subsection A of this section, the
wall's slope shall not be less than one foot (1') horizontal in six feet (6')
vertical. (1997 Code)
9-5-8: STRUCTURAL DESIGN:
Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within
and resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty, to a pressure of
two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. The slope of the
bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five feet (5') in
depth shall not be more than one foot (1') in each ten feet (10'). The maximum
slope where water is five feet (5') or more in depth shall not exceed one foot
(1') in two feet (2'). (1997 Code)
9-5-9: WALK AREAS:
Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty six inches (36") wide shall be
provided to extend entirely around the pool. The walk area shall be constructed
of impervious material and the surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and
easily cleaned and of nonslip construction. The slope of the walks shall have a
pitch of at least one-fourth inch (1/4") to the foot, designed so as to prevent
backing drainage from entering the pool. (1997 Code)
9-5-10: FENCES:
A. Fence Required: All outdoor swimming pools having a water depth of three
feet (3') or more shall be completely enclosed by a fence. In determining if a
pool has three feet (3') depth the manufacturer's established stated depth for
the facility shall be conclusive of the pool's considered depth for water,
notwithstanding any measured active depth at any given time. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-
9-2009)
B. Gates: All fence openings or points of entry into pool area enclosure shall
be equipped with gates. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing and self-
latching devices placed at the top of the gate. (1997 Code)
C. Specifications: The fence and gates shall not be less than four (4) or more
than six feet (6') in height above the grade level and shall be constructed of
a minimum number of gauge woven wire mesh, corrosion resistant material or
similar material. However, a private swimming pool fence may be constructed of
treated CCA cedar or redwood. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-9-2009)
D. Fence Posts: Fence posts shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be
set in concrete bases.
E. Maintenance: All fences shall be maintained in a safe condition. (1997 Code)
F. Acceptable Enclosures: Pool enclosures which are attached to the top of the
pool, according to the manufacturer's recommendations, and which have a locking
gate will be considered an acceptable enclosure. This will only be considered
an acceptable enclosure as long as any stairs going up to the pool are removed
or have a locking gate at the bottom of the entrance to the stairs accessing
the pool. (Ord. 0-06-12, 6-11-2012)
9-5-11: STEPS AND LADDERS:
There must be one or more means of egress in the forms of steps or ladders
provided for all swimming pools. Treads of steps and ladders shall be
constructed of nonslip material and at least three inches (3") wide for the
full length. Steps and ladders shall have a handrail on both sides. (Ord. 0-10-
10, 11-9-2009)
9-5-12: SKIMMERS:
In every swimming pool at least one skimming device shall be provided for each
eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers
shall be located at least thirty feet (30') apart. Handholds shall be provided
and consist of all bullnosed coping not over two and one-half inches (21/2")
thick for the two inches (2") or an equivalent approved handhold. The handhold
must be no more than nine inches (9") above the normal water line. Skimming
devices shall be built into the pool wall, shall adequately remove floated oils
and waste and shall meet the following general specifications:
A. Flow Through Rate: Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow through rate of
at least thirty (30) gallons per minute and a total capacity of all skimmers on
any pool shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required flow of the
recirculation system.
B. Automatically Adjustable: They shall be automatically adjustable with
variations in water level over a range of at least three inches (3").
C. Basket Or Screen: An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through
which all overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids.
D. Airlock Prevention: The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent
airlock in the suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall provide an
adequate amount of make up water for pump suction should the water of the pool
drop below the air level. This pipe shall be at least two inches (2") in
diameter and shall be located at least one foot (1') below the lowest overflow
level of the skimmer.
E. Equalizer Line: An equalizer line shall be provided with a valve that will
remain tightly closed under normal operating conditions, but will automatically
open at a differential of not more than four inches (4") between the pool level
and the level of the overflow tank.
F. Overflow Weir: The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a
rate of flow of at least twenty (20) gallons per minute per linear foot of weir
lip. (1997 Code)
9-5-13: WATER SUPPLY:
No source of water other than that secured from the city waterworks
distribution system shall be used in swimming pools. (1997 Code)
9-5-14: INLETS:
A. Location: Swimming pool water recirculation system inlets shall be located
so as to produce, so far as possible, uniform circulation of water throughout
the pool without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits
to the outlets and shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten inches (10") below
the pool overflow level. Minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be
provided for every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet of surface area of the
pool.
B. Make Up Water: Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding
make up water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the
water supply line and the pool system. If the make up water is added directly
to the pool, the outlet shall be at least six inches (6") above the upper rim
of the pool. If the make up water line discharges to a surge or balancing tank,
the point of discharge shall be at least six inches (6") above the rim of the
tank. If a hose connection from a sill cock or other plumbing fixture is to be
used for supplying make up water, then an approved vacuum breaker shall be
installed between the sill cock or control valve at the fixture and the hose
connection. The vacuum breaker shall be installed at a height not less than
seven feet six inches (7'6") above floor, platform or ground, upon which a
person would stand when operating the sill cock or control valve. Minimum size
of the fill pipe is two inches (2").
C. Conformance With Ordinances: The systems supplying recirculated water and
make up water to the pool shall be constructed in conformance with the
ordinances relating to plumbing. (1997 Code)
9-5-15: OUTLETS:
A. Location:
1. Pool Thirty Feet Wide Or Less: In swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width
or less, water circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at
least one outlet at the deepest point in the pool.
2. Pool More Than Thirty Feet Wide: If the pool width is more than thirty feet
(30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty feet
(30') apart, nor closer than four feet (4') to any wall.
3. Gratings: All pool drain outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an
area of openings not less than four (4) times the cross sectional area of the
outlet pipe. The gratings shall be of such design so they cannot be readily
removable by bathers and will not injure bathers' fingers.
4. Number Required: One outlet shall be provided for each eight hundred (800)
square feet of surface area.
B. Facility To Empty Pool: Pools shall be equipped with facilities for
completely emptying the pool and the discharge of the pool water to the storm
sewer shall be at a rate not exceeding two hundred (200) gallons per minute. No
direct connection shall be made to the sewer.
C. Discharge Into Storm Sewer: Water drained from the pool shall not be
discharged to the storm sewer system during periods of rain or storms. At no
time shall the rate of drain water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred (200)
gallons per minute. (1997 Code)
9-5-16: RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES:
A. Components: The swimming pool's recirculation system shall consist of
plumbing equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters together with the necessary
pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe
connections necessary for backwashing filters and facilities and equipment for
disinfecting the pool water.
B. Capacity:
1. Hourly: Every swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly
capacity equal to the pool volume divided by eight (8).
2. Turnover: The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to
discharge the volume of water required for an eight (8) hour turnover of the
pool against the maximum head in the recirculation system.
C. Pump: The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity
to provide a filter backwash rate of at least twelve (12) gallons per minute
per square foot of filter area.
D. Hair And Lint Catcher; Strainer: A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall
be installed on the suction side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint
and other extraneous matter from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint
catchers shall be so designed that they can be easily dismantled for cleaning
and inspection and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning.
The design features shall be as follows:
1. Water passes through the strainer from the outside;
2. The strainer is made of noncorrosive material, the width or diameter of
strainer openings shall be not more than one-eighth inch (1/8");
3. The area of the strainer openings shall be at least five (5) times the cross
sectional area of the inlet pipe to the strainer.
E. Rapid Pressure Filters: Recirculating systems shall contain rapid pressure
filters. Sufficient filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents
of the pool in eighteen (18) hours at the rate of not more than three (3)
gallons per square foot of filter area per minute. The filter backwashing
facilities shall be sufficient to backwash at a rate of twelve (12) gallons per
minute per square foot of filter area.
F. Backwash Water And Effluents: All backwash water and effluents shall be
discharged to the sewer through an indirect connection. Pressure filters shall
be equipped with readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or pressure
gauges on the inlet and outlet pipes and an access head or hold large enough to
permit inspection, maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses that can be
easily removed for cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line from the
filter units.
G. Disinfection: Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool
water. Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds
shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector. Disinfection
equipment installed for the use of chlorine compounds shall have sufficient
capacity to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of five-tenths (0.5)
parts per million. The disinfection shall be introduced into the recirculation
system ahead of the filters.
H. Gaseous Chlorination Systems Prohibited: Gaseous chlorination systems shall
not be made use of as a disinfection method for pool water. (1997 Code)
9-5-17: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
A. Compliance Required: All electrical installations provided for, installed
and used in conjunction with private, residential swimming pools, shall be in
conformance with the ordinances regulating electrical installations.
B. Location Of Conductors: No current carrying electrical conductors shall
cross private, residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or
within fifteen feet (15') of such pools.
C. Grounding: All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to
swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact
with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively
grounded. (1997 Code)
9-5-18: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not
more than fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having sixty feet (60') of
three-sixteenths inch (3/16") manila line attached and one or more light but
strong poles with blunted ends and not less than twelve feet (12') in length,
for making reach assists or rescues. (1997 Code)
9-5-19: INSPECTION:
The building inspector, any member of the police department or the public works
director shall have the authority to inspect all swimming pools to determine
whether or not the provisions of this code regarding health, sanitation and
safety applicable hereto are being complied with. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-9-2009)
9-5-20: PENALTY:
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to a penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (1997 Code)
9-5-21: POOL MAINTENANCE:
During the time between May 15 and October 1 of each year owners of swimming
pools must maintain the pools in a sanitary, clear and clean manner. Water must
be clear of algae, kept from being stagnate in order to avoid mosquito breeding
and to avoid noxious smells which are considered to be adverse to public
health, safety and welfare.
Unless a pool is closed for the season the owners must continue to clean,
aerate and chemically treat to keep the contained water in a sightly, healthy
and environmentally safe fashion. (Ord. 0-10-10, 11-9-2009)
CHAPTER 6
DEMOLITIONS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Demolitions
9-6-1: DEMOLITIONS:
A. All demolitions of any structure require a permit.
B. The price of the permit shall be set from time to time by the city council.
C. The permit is valid for sixty (60) days.
D. The demolition area shall be fenced off so that the demolition is not a
hazard to pedestrians or children. The fencing shall be installed to the
satisfaction of the building inspector.
E. Demolition shall not involve burning of the structure or any parts thereof
without the approval of the building inspector or the city council. (Ord. 00-
22, 10-9-2000)
CHAPTER 7
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-7-1: Purpose
9-7-2: Certain Uses Not Covered By This Chapter
9-7-3: Interpretation And Definitions
9-7-4: Designation And Applicability
9-7-5: Allowable Uses; Development Criteria
9-7-6: Review Process
9-7-7: Approval Process
9-7-8: Shared Facilities And Collocation Policy
9-7-9: Removal Of Abandoned Wireless Communication Facilities
9-7-10: Nonconforming Wireless Communications Facilities
9-7-11: Revocation Of Tower Use Permits
9-7-12: Annual Review
9-7-13: Penalty
9-7-1: PURPOSE:
The city of Colona recognizes that the city desires to encourage the orderly
development of wireless communication technologies for the benefit of the city
and its citizens.
As a matter of public policy, the city of Colona aims to encourage the delivery
of new wireless technologies throughout the city while controlling the
proliferation of communication towers. Such development activities will promote
and protect the health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of those
residents living in the city of Colona.
Specifically, this wireless communication facility telecommunication chapter is
designed to achieve the following:
A. Provide a range of locations for wireless communication facilities in
various zoning districts;
B. Encourage the location of wireless communication facilities onto existing
structures to reduce the number of new communication towers needed within the
city of Colona;
C. Encourage collocation and site sharing of new and existing wireless
communication facilities;
D. Control the type of tower facility constructed, when towers are permitted;
E. Establish adequate development and design criteria to enhance the ability of
providers of telecommunications services to provide service to the community
quickly and efficiently;
F. Protect residential, historic preservation areas, and scenic corridors from
the uncontrolled development of wireless communications facilities by requiring
reasonable siting conditions;
G. Promote the use of suitable sites (public and private) for the location of
wireless antenna towers, and/or wireless communication facilities;
H. Ensure the harmonious orderly and efficient growth and development of the
city of Colona;
I. Stabilize the economy of the city of Colona through the continued use of the
city's suitable public resources;
J. Provide areas in which the zoning regulations permit the development of
wireless communication facilities which are consistent with the requirements of
the telecommunications act of 1996 and in the best interest of the future of
the city of Colona;
K. Provide clear performance standards addressing the sitting of wireless
communication facilities; and
L. Streamline and expedite the permitting procedures to effect compliance with
the federal telecommunications act of 1996. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-2: CERTAIN USES NOT COVERED BY THIS CHAPTER:
Nothing in this chapter shall reduce any of the permitted uses of any zoned
property within the city of Colona. Nothing in this chapter shall affect the
right of a property owner to use or develop their property consistent with
existing zoning regulations. Nothing in this chapter shall affect the right of
a property owner to continue any legal nonconforming use. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-
2001)
9-7-3: INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS:
A. Construction Of Other Ordinances: To the extent this chapter conflicts with
the zoning ordinance, sign ordinance or any other ordinance of the city of
Colona, this chapter shall control.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter, certain words, phrases and
terms used herein shall be interpreted as stated in this section. The zoning
enforcement officer shall define any word, phrase or term not defined herein.
All definitions defined herein are in addition to those definitions in the city
of Colona zoning ordinance.
    ANTENNA ARRAY: One or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for
the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals, which may include
omnidirectional antenna (rod), directional antenna (panel) and parabolic
antenna (disc). The antenna array does not include the support structure.
   ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: An antenna array that is attached
to an existing building or structure (attachment structure), structures shall
include, but not be limited to, utility poles, signs, water towers, rooftops,
towers with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which attaches
the antenna array to the existing building or structure and associated
connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside
or outside of the attachment structure.
   COLLOCATION/SITE SHARING: Use of a common site by more than one wireless
communication facility or common site by more than one wireless communication
license holder or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of
communications technology and/or placement of a wireless communication facility
on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
   EQUIPMENT FACILITY: Any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a
wireless communication facility that includes cabinets, shelters, a build out
of an existing structure, pedestals, and other similar structures.
   FAA: Federal aviation administration.
   FCC: Federal communications commission.
   FTA: Federal telecommunications act of 1996.
   HEIGHT: When referring to a wireless communication facility, height shall
mean the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the
wireless communication facility, excluding the antenna array.
   SETBACK: The required distance from the property line of the parcel on which
the wireless communication facility is located to the base of the support
structure and equipment shelter or cabinet where applicable, or, in the case of
guy-wire supports, the guy anchors.
   SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A structure designed and constructed specifically to
support an antenna array, and may include a monopole, self-supporting (lattice)
tower, guy-wire support tower and other similar structures. Any device
(attachment device) that is used to attach an attached wireless communication
facility to an existing building or structure (attachment structure) shall be
excluded from the definition of and regulations applicable to support
structures.
   TEMPORARY WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A wireless communication facility
to be in use for ninety (90) or fewer days.
   TOWER USE PERMIT (TUP): A permit issued by the city of Colona specifically
for the location, construction and use of a wireless communication facility
subject to an approved site plan with any special conditions determined by the
zoning administrator to be appropriate under the provision of this chapter.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A wireless communication facility is any
unstaffed facility used for the transmission and/or reception of wireless
telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, connection
cables, an equipment facility, and support structure to achieve the necessary
elevation.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: Any personal wireless services as defined in the
telecommunications act of 1996, which includes FCC licensed commercial wireless
telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
(ESNM), paging, and similar services that currently exist. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-
2001)
9-7-4: DESIGNATION AND APPLICABILITY:
The city of Colona shall designate certain areas to allow wireless
communication facilities. Said areas shall be determined from time to time by
the city council and be in accordance with the zoning code and comprehensive
plan of the city of Colona and any statutes that may apply. Facilities
requiring support structures may not be permitted within the same location as
those without support structures.
A. Permit Required: No person, firm or corporation shall install or construct
any wireless communication facility unless and until a tower use permit (TUP)
has been issued pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
B. Preexisting Wireless Communication Facility: Wireless communications
facilities for which a permit has been issued prior to the effective date
hereof shall be considered nonconforming and shall be required to meet the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Amateur Radio Exclusion: This chapter shall not govern the installation of
any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for "receive only"
antennas. Such installations shall comply with any other applicable provisions
of the zoning ordinance.
D. Relationship To Other Ordinances: This chapter shall supersede all
conflicting requirements of other ordinances regarding the locating and
permitting of wireless communication facilities.
E. Building Codes: Construction of all wireless communication facilities shall
comply with the requirements of the city of Colona building code and permitting
process in addition to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-
2001)
9-7-5: ALLOWABLE USES; DEVELOPMENT CRITERIA:
Allowable uses, subject to the limitations within each overlay district, will
include the underlying zoning districts plus wireless communication facilities
in compliance with the following development criteria:
A. Height Standards: The following height standards shall apply to all wireless
communications facility installations:
1. Attached Wireless Communications Facilities: Attached wireless communication
facilities shall not add more than twenty feet (20') to the height of the
existing building or structure to which that it is attached (attachment
structure). However, antenna attachments to existing communication towers shall
not increase the height of tower above the maximum permitted height of that
tower.
2. Wireless Communication Facilities With Support Structures: Wireless
communication facilities with support structures shall not have a maximum
height of tower above the maximum permitted height of that tower.
B. Setback Standards: The following setback standards shall apply to all
wireless communication facility installation:
1. Attached Wireless Communications Facilities: Attached wireless
communications facilities shall meet the setback provisions of the zoning code
in which they are located. However, an attached wireless communication facility
antenna array may extend up to thirty inches (30") horizontally beyond the edge
of the attachment structure so long as the antenna array does not encroach upon
an adjoining parcel.
2. Wireless Communications Facilities Monopole Support Structures: Wireless
communications facilities with monopole support structure shall meet the
setback requirements for principal structures of the zoning code in which they
are located.
C. Landscaping: The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all
wireless communications facility installations:
1. New Construction: New wireless communications facilities with support
structures and attached wireless communication facilities with new building
construction shall be landscaped in accordance with the applicable provisions
of the landscape ordinance that may now or hereafter be adopted.
2. Land Form Preservation: Existing mature tree growth and natural land form on
the site shall be preserved as feasible; provided however, vegetation that
causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the equipment
facility may be trimmed or removed.
3. Existing Vegetation: Existing vegetation on a wireless communication
facility site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the
zoning enforcement officer.
D. Aesthetics, Placement, Materials And Colors: Wireless communications
facilities shall be designated so as to be compatible with the existing
structures and surroundings, including placement in a location which is
consistent with proper functioning of the wireless communication facility, the
use of compatible or neutral colors, or camouflage technology.
E. Lighting And Signage: The following lighting and signage requirements shall
apply to all wireless communications facilities installations:
1. Artificial Illumination: Wireless communication facilities shall not be
artificially illuminated, directly or indirectly, except for:
a. Security and safety lighting of equipment buildings if such lighting is
appropriately down shielded to keep light within the boundaries of the site;
and
b. Such illumination of the wireless communications facility as may be required
by the FAA or other applicable authority installed in a manner to minimize
impacts on adjacent residences.
c. Unless otherwise required by the FAA or other applicable authority, the
required light shall be red and shielded upward.
2. Signage: Wireless communications facilities shall not display any signage,
logos, decals, symbols or any messages of a commercial or noncommercial nature,
except for a small message containing provider identification and emergency
telephone numbers and such other information as may be required by local, state
or federal regulations governing wireless communications facilities.
F. Fencing: Wireless communications facilities with support structures shall be
enclosed by an opaque fence (excluding slatted chainlink) not less than six
feet (6') in height. Security may be incorporated into the buffer and
landscaping requirements for the site. Nothing herein shall prevent fencing
that is necessary to meet requirements of state or federal agencies.
G. Radio Frequency Emissions/Sound: The following radio frequency emissions
standards shall apply to all wireless communications facility installations:
1. Radio Frequency Impact: The FTA gives the FCC jurisdiction of the regulation
of radio frequency (RF) emissions, and wireless communications facility that do
not exceed the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of
RF impact.
2. FCC Compliance: In order to provide information to its citizens, copies of
ongoing FCC information concerning wireless communication facilities and RF
emissions standards may be requested. Applicants for wireless communications
facilities shall be required to provide information with the application on the
measurement of effective radiated power of the facility and how this meets the
FCC standards.
3. Sounds Prohibited: No unusual sound emissions such as alarms, bells, buzzers
or the like are permitted.
H. Structural Integrity: Wireless communications facilities with support
structures shall be constructed to the electronics industries association/
telecommunications industries association (EIA/TIA) 222 revision F standard
entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antennas Towers and Antenna Support
Structures" (or equivalent), as it may be updated and amended. Each support
structure shall be capable of supporting multiple antenna arrays.
I. Collocation Agreement: All applicants for wireless communications facilities
are required to submit a statement with the application agreeing to allow and
reasonably market collocation opportunities to other wireless communications
facility users. The statement shall include the applicant's policy regarding
collocation of other providers and the methodology to be used by the applicant
in determining reasonable rates to be charged other providers. The collocation
agreement shall be considered a condition of issuance of a TUP (tower use
permit). A TUP shall not be issued unless the applicant complies with
collocation policy outlined in section
9-7-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-6: REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Development Criteria: The applicable development criteria referred to herein
are those set forth in section
9-7-5 of this chapter.
B. Permitting Procedures: Attached wireless communications facilities with or
without new building construction that meet the development criteria may be
permitted by administrative review in all zoning districts. All monopole-type
wireless communications facilities with support structures that meet the
development criteria may be permitted by administrative review except
hereinafter specified. All others, regardless of type or location shall be
subject to the planning board hearing process and may not be approved by the
administrative review process.
C. Wireless Communications Facilities As A Part Of A Coordinated Development
Approval: Wireless communications facilities as part of a proposed residential
or nonresidential subdivision, planned unit development, site plan, conditional
rezoning, or other coordinated development approval shall be reviewed and
approved through those processes.
D. Wireless Communications Facilities For Temporary Term: Temporary wireless
communications facilities may be permitted by administrative approval for a
term not to exceed ninety (90) days. Once granted, a temporary wireless
communications facility permit may be extended for an additional ninety (90)
days upon evidence of need by the applicant. In case of emergency (e.g., storm
damage to an existing tower or other circumstances resulting in the
interruption of existing service), the administrative review shall be expedited
as feasible. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-7: APPROVAL PROCESS:
A. Application Submission: All requests for a tower use permit regardless of
wireless communication facility type shall submit an application in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
1. Application Contents: Each applicant requesting a TUP under this chapter
shall resubmit a sealed complete set of drawings prepared by a licensed
architect and engineer that will include a site plan, elevation view and other
supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation showing the location
and dimensions of the wireless communications facility and all improvements
associated therewith including information concerning specifications, antenna
locations, equipment facility and shelters, landscaping, parking, access,
fencing and, if relevant as determined by staff, topography, adjacent uses and
existing vegetation. Applicants proposing to collocate on an existing wireless
communication facility shall include a radio frequency intermodulation study
with their application.
2. Submission Requirements: Application for a TUP shall be submitted to the
city of Colona on forms prescribed by the city of Colona. The application shall
be accompanied by a site plan containing the information described above and a
copy of appropriate FCC license. If planning commission review is required, the
application and site plan shall be placed on the next available commission
agenda in accordance with the agenda deadlines established by the commission.
3. Application Fees: A plan review fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and a
radio frequency intermodulation study review fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) (collocation applicants only) shall accompany each application. These
fees may be used by the city to engage an engineer(s) or other qualified
consultant(s) to review the technical aspects of the application and radio
frequency intermodulation study (if required).
4. Technical Assistance: In the course of its consideration of an application,
the city of Colona, the zoning enforcement officer, the planning commission or
city council may deem it necessary, in complex situations, to employ an
engineer(s) or other consultant(s) qualified in the design and installation of
wireless communication facilities to assist the city in the technical aspects
of the application. In such cases, any additional reasonable costs incurred by
the city not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for the
technical review and recommendation shall be reimbursed by the applicant prior
to the final hearing on the TUP.
B. Administrative Review: The following administrative review process shall
apply to all wireless communications facility applications eligible for
administrative review:
1. Review Authority: Review of wireless communication facilities under this
section shall be conducted by the zoning enforcement officer or his designee
upon filing a wireless communication facility application.
2. Review Criteria: Each application shall be reviewed for compliance with the
development criteria specified in section
9-7-5 of this chapter.
3. Timing Of Decision: The zoning enforcement officer shall render a decision
within thirty (30) days.
4. Deferral: The zoning enforcement officer may defer administrative approval
of wireless communication facilities for any reason. Deferral of administrative
approval shall require submission to the planning commission.
5. Application Denial: If administrative approval is not obtained or is denied
due to noncompliance with the development criteria, the applicant may appeal
the denial by applying for planning commission review.
6. Application Approval: If the TUP application is in compliance with the
development criteria and otherwise meets the requirements of this section, the
zoning enforcement officer shall issue a tower use permit.
C. Planning Commission Review: The following shall apply to all tower use
permit applications requiring submission to the planning board:
1. Review Authority: The planning commission shall be review authority for TUP
applications requiring submission to the planning commission.
2. Notice: Notice of the application and the public hearing by the planning
commission shall be accomplished in the same manner as a special use permit
under the zoning ordinance.
3. Hearing: The planning commission shall review and consider the TUP
application at a public hearing. At the hearing, interested persons may appear
and offer information in support or opposition to the proposed application. The
planning commission shall consider the following in reaching a decision:
a. Development Criteria: The tower use permit application shall be reviewed for
compliance with the development criteria set forth in section
9-7-5 of this chapter; provided that the applicable development criteria may be
amended or waived so long as the approval of the wireless communication
facility meets the goals and purposes of this chapter. The planning commission
recommends an alternative development criteria by specific inclusion in a
motion for approval.
b. Tower Siting Conditions: The planning commission may impose conditions and
restrictions on the application or on the premises benefited by the TUP as it
deems necessary to reduce or minimize any adverse effects and to enhance the
compatibility of the wireless communication facility with surrounding property,
in accordance with the purposes and intent of this chapter. The violation of
any condition shall be grounds for revocation of the TUP. The planning
commission may recommend such conditions in addition to the development
criteria upon the following findings:
(1) The wireless communication facility would result in significant adverse
visual impact on nearby residences.
(2) The conditions are based upon the purpose and goals of this chapter.
(3) The conditions are reasonable and capable of being accomplished.
c. Action: Following the public hearing and presentation of evidence, the
planning commission shall take one of the following actions:
(1) Recommend the application as submitted;
(2) Recommend the application with conditions or modifications;
(3) Defer the application for additional information or neighbor input; or
(4) Deny the application in writing.
4. Findings: All decisions rendered by the planning commission concerning a
tower use permit shall be supported by written findings of fact and conclusions
of law based upon substantial evidence of record.
5. Timing Of Decision: The planning commission shall render its decision within
sixty (60) days or less of the final submission of all required application
documents and technical review; however, this time may be increased due to
deferrals by either the applicant or planning commission.
6. Appeals: The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city
council under the following circumstances:
a. An appeal shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the final
action by the zoning enforcement officer or the planning commission. Only the
applicant and those who registered an objection to the TUP in the record of the
planning commission shall have standing to appeal.
b. Only such evidence or testimony in support of or opposition to the issuance
of the TUP which was provided to the planning commission may be presented to
the city council unless the city council, by majority vote, decides to hear new
information.
c. Notice of appeal shall be accomplished by the appellant in the same manner
as a special use permit under the zoning code. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-8: SHARED FACILITIES AND COLLOCATION POLICY:
A. Collocation: All new wireless communication facilities shall be engineered,
designed and constructed to be capable of sharing the facility with other
providers, to collocate with other existing wireless communication facilities
and to accommodate the future collocation of other wireless communication
facilities. A TUP shall not be issued until the applicant proposing a wireless
communications facility shall demonstrate that it has made a reasonable good
faith attempt to locate its wireless communication facility onto an existing
structure. Competitive conflict and financial burden are not deemed to be
adequate reasons against collocation.
B. Number Of Antenna Array: All wireless communication facilities with support
structure up to a height of one hundred fifty feet (150') shall be engineered
and constructed to accommodate at least three (3) antenna array. All wireless
communication facilities with support structure up to a height of more than one
hundred fifty feet (150') shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate at
least four (4) antenna array. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-9: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
Any wireless communication facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the city, at
its election, may require the wireless communication facility owner to remove
the wireless communication facility within ninety (90) days after notice. The
city may remove the structure and recover its costs from the wireless
communication facility owner. If there are two (2) or more users of single
wireless communication facility, this provision shall be effective until all
providers cease to use the wireless communication facility. If the owner of an
abandoned wireless communication facility cannot be located or is no longer in
business, the requirements of this section shall be the responsibility of the
landowner on whose property the wireless communication facility is located.
(Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-10: NONCONFORMING WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES:
Wireless communication facilities in existence on the date of the adoption of
the ordinance codified herein which do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter (nonconforming wireless communications facility) are subject to the
following provisions:
A. Expansion: Nonconforming wireless communication facilities may continue in
use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with
this chapter except as further provided in this section.
B. Additions: Nonconforming wireless communications facilities may add
additional antennas (belonging to the same provider or other providers) subject
to administrative review under this chapter.
C. Repairs Or Reconstruction: Nonconforming wireless communications facilities,
that become damaged due to any reason or cause, may be repaired and restored to
its former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to the provisions of
this chapter. Provided, however, that if the damage to the wireless
communication facility exceeds fifty percent (50%) of replacement costs, said
wireless communication facility may only be reconstructed or repaired in
compliance with this chapter.
D. Abandoned Facility: Any wireless communications facility not in use for six
(6) months shall be deemed abandoned and all rights as a nonconforming use
shall cease. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-11: REVOCATION OF TOWER USE PERMITS:
Any TUP issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked after a hearing as
provided hereinafter. If the zoning officer finds that any permit holder has
violated any provision of this chapter, or has failed to make good faith
reasonable efforts to provide or seek collocation, the zoning enforcement
officer shall notify the permit holder in writing that TUP is revocable due to
the permit holder's noncompliance with the conditions of the permit. The zoning
enforcement officer shall convene a meeting with the permit holder no later
than thirty (30) working days from the date of the letter. The zoning officer
may require the permit holder to correct the violation within a reasonable
amount of time or the zoning official may recommend to the city council that
the TUP be revoked. After the appropriate public hearing, the mayor and city
council may revoke the tower use permit (TUP) upon such terms and conditions,
if any, that the mayor and city council may determine. Prior to initiation of
revocation proceedings, the city shall notify the permit holder, in writing, of
specific areas of noncompliance and specify the date by which such deficiencies
must be corrected. The time for correction of deficiencies shall not exceed
sixty (60) working days. The permit holder shall provide the city with evidence
that the required corrective action has been taken. Should the permit holder
fail to correct any deficiencies in the time required, the mayor and city
council shall convene a public hearing to consider revocation of the TUP. The
hearing shall be conducted pursuant to notice of publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city of Colona not less than ten (10) days prior to
the hearing and by written notice to the permit holder. At any such hearing,
the permit holder may be represented by an attorney and may cross-examine
opposing witnesses. Other interested persons may comment. The mayor and city
council may impose reasonable restrictions with respect to time and procedure.
The proceedings shall be recorded; provided, however, that stenographic
services, if desired, shall be provided by the requesting party at that party's
expense. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-12: ANNUAL REVIEW:
The mayor and city council shall review this chapter on an annual basis and
shall alter or amend the same as required in a manner provided by law. (Ord.
15-01, 9-10-2001)
9-7-13: PENALTY:
The fine or penalty for violating any provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in the municipal court, not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
for any one specified offense or violation. Further, that if anything
prohibited or rendered unlawful is, in nature, continuous in respect to time,
the fine or penalty for allowing the continuance thereof in violation of this
chapter shall not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day that it
may be unlawfully continued. (Ord. 15-01, 9-10-2001)
TITLE 10
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS; GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
10-1-1: Definitions
10-1-2: Exemption
10-1-3: General Construction Standards
10-1-4: Maximum Occupancy
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-8a, 5/11-52-8b and 210 ILCS 115/1.
10-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Title, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to
them:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A building subordinate to and smaller than a principal
building or mobile home, that contributes to the comfort, convenience or
necessity of the occupants of the principal building or mobile home.
DEPENDENT TRAILER OR COACH OR DEPENDANT MOBILE HOME: A trailer coach which does
not have a toilet and bath or shower facilities. Use of a dependent trailer or
coach or dependent mobile home is prohibited in mobile home parks.
INDEPENDENT TRAILER COACH OR INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME: A transportable
nonpermanent single-family dwelling unit on wheels suitable for year-round
occupancy and containing within the same water supply, waste disposal, heating
and air conditioning, electrical conveniences and with self-contained toilet
and bath or shower facilities as conventional housing meeting "American
Standard Association" construction requirements of the most current listing.
This definition is not intended to include travel trailers or camper buses.
LICENSE: Permission to operate a mobile home park granted pursuant to this
Title.
PERMIT: Written permission issued by the City Council or its designated
representative allowing the owner to construct or alter a mobile home park
under this Title and the regulations promulgated.
SAFETY BUILDING: A building housing a manager's office, laundry facilities,
maintenance equipment, toilet facilities for employees, and emergency sanitary
accommodations.
SAFETY CODE: The code promulgated by the American National Standards Institute
and identified as the most recently published.
TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or similar portable structure used or
so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public
streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy as a dwelling place
for one or more persons.
TRAILER COACH OR MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land designated for the exclusive
use of the occupants of a single mobile home, also termed mobile home space.
TRAILER PARK OR MOBILE HOME PARK: An area of land upon which two (2) or more
occupied trailer coaches or mobile homes are harbored either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, tent, vehicle,
or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such
trailer coach park. (1997 Code)
10-1-2: EXEMPTION:
Nothing in this Title shall be construed to include the State parks; and the
term "trailer coach park" or "mobile home park" shall not be construed to
include buildings, tents or other structures maintained by any individual or
company on their own premises and used exclusively to house their own farm
labor; or any military establishment of the United States or of the State where
a trailer coach or coaches may be located or harbored; or any park on State or
County fairgrounds for a period during, immediately prior to and immediately
subsequent to the holding of the fair not to exceed a total of two (2) weeks in
all; or the area or premises on any farm upon which are harbored trailer
coaches occupied by persons employed upon the farm for not more than ninety
(90) days in any calendar year in the production, harvesting or processing of
agricultural or horticultural products produced on such farms. (1997 Code)
10-1-3: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Manufactured: No person shall park any mobile home with a manufacture date
over fifteen (15) years unless it complies with the Safety Code. (Ord. 0-18-07,
3-12-2018)
B. Compliance Required: All building, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical alterations or repairs to mobile homes shall be made in compliance
with the Safety Code.
C. Permanent Additions: No permanent additions shall be built onto or become a
part of any mobile home. (1997 Code)
10-1-4: MAXIMUM OCCUPANCY:
Occupancy of a mobile home shall be limited to the design capacity of the
mobile home; this is established by the number of sleeping spaces provided in
the mobile home. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2
LICENSES
SECTION:
10-2-1: License Required
10-2-2: Application; Supporting Documents
10-2-3: Fees
10-2-4: Conformity With County Ordinances
10-2-5: Issuance/Denial Of License
10-2-6: Term
10-2-7: Renewal
10-2-8: Transferability
10-2-9: Display
10-2-10: Rules Of Operation
10-2-11: Penalty
10-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate a trailer coach park
without first obtaining a license from the City Council. (1997 Code)
10-2-2: APPLICATION; SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS:
An applicant for a license required by this Chapter shall file with the City
Clerk or his/her designated representative a written application setting forth:
A. Name And Address: The full name and address of the applicant, or the names
and addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership or the names
and addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation, and the
present (or last) occupation of the applicant at the time of the filing of the
application.
B. Location, Legal Description: The location and legal description of the tract
of land, certified on a plat of a survey by an Illinois registered land
surveyor, drawn to scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or
larger.
C. Proposed, Existing Facilities: The proposed and existing facilities in the
park for water supply, sewerage, garbage and waste disposal, fire protection,
and for a sanitary community building which will include a description of
toilets, urinals, sinks, wash basins, slop sinks, showers, drains, and laundry
facilities, the proposed alterations and the maintenance.
D. Lighting: The proposed method of lighting the structures and land upon which
the park is to be located.
E. Corners, Points Of Tangency: All corners and points of tangency are to be
marked by galvanized or wrought iron pipe or iron or steel bars at least
eighteen inches (18") in length and not less than one-half inch (1/2") in
diameter. The top of the pipe or bar is to be set level with the established
grade of the ground.
F. Plot Plans: The plot plans of the park drawn on a scale of one hundred feet
to an inch (100' to 1") or larger, building plans and specifications for
existing buildings and facilities and the plans and specifications for new
buildings and facilities or the proposed alterations in existing facilities,
all showing compliance with the provisions of this Title. The plot plans shall
be drawn on a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or larger,
and shall contain, among other things, the following:
1. The date on which such plot plans were prepared.
2. An arrow indicating north.
3. All trailer coach sites shall be properly numbered on the plot plans.
4. Complete information regarding storm sewers.
5. Storm water runoff shall be shown on a separate plat.
6. Contour lines at one foot (1') intervals shall be shown on a separate plat.
United States Geological Survey data shall be used for the preparation of such
plat.
7. Grades of driveways and all ditches shall be shown on a separate plat.
G. Firefighting Facilities: A statement of the firefighting facilities, public
or private, which are available to the trailer coach park.
H. Affidavit: An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters
contained in the application shall be attached. (1997 Code)
10-2-3: FEES:
A. Application Fee: Each application for an original license required by this
chapter shall be accompanied by an application fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction, proposed to be used as a
trailer park. Each application fee shall be paid to the city clerk or the
clerk's designated representative in the amount of the application fee only,
and the application fee, once paid to the city clerk, shall not be refunded.
(1997 Code)
B. Annual License Fee: The annual fee for a license required by this chapter
shall be annually figured at five dollars ($5.00) per month, per trailer
existing on the premises of mobile homes/trailer parks on April 30 of the
preceding year.
Payment may be made quarterly to the city clerk of Colona. Payments should be
made July 31, October 31, January 31, and final payment April 30 each year
beginning with the year 2004.
If payments are not made on time, any late payments shall carry a delinquency
charge of one percent (1%) per month for such delinquency. (Ord. 05-04, 4-12-
2004)
10-2-4: CONFORMITY WITH COUNTY ORDINANCES:
No license required by this chapter shall be issued if the trailer park is, at
such time, in violation of any ordinances of the county. (1997 Code)
10-2-5: ISSUANCE/DENIAL OF LICENSE:
Upon receipt of an application for a license required by this chapter, the city
council, or its designated representative, shall, if the park is in conformity
with this title issue an original license. If the application for license is
declined, the city council shall give the reasons in writing to the applicant;
and if the objection can be corrected, the applicant may amend his/her
application and resubmit it for approval. The city council will notify the
applicant of approval or rejection within forty five (45) days of receipt of
application. (1997 Code)
10-2-6: TERM:
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for one year and shall
expire on April 30 of each year. The license shall be renewed from year to year
upon payment of the annual license fee. (1997 Code)
10-2-7: RENEWAL:
A. Fee: Each license issued under this chapter shall, upon payment of the fee
required, be renewed on an annual basis, provided the city council or its
designated representative finds that the trailer park continues to be in full
compliance with the requirements of this title. Any applicant aggrieved by a
decision of the city council under this section shall have the right to appeal
such decision within thirty (30) days to the city council.
B. Full Compliance: In no event shall an operating license issued under the
provisions of this chapter be renewed unless the trailer park is in full
compliance with the requirements of this title.
C. As Built Drawings: All trailer parks shall submit a full set of as built
drawings showing water, sewer, gas and telephone lines as extended. (1997 Code)
10-2-8: TRANSFERABILITY:
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter apply only to the premises described
in the application and in the license issued, and only one location shall be so
described in each license. A license which has been issued to a person may not
be transferred to any other person without the consent of the city council;
provided, that the city council shall not withhold consent where the provisions
of this title have been met. A license which has been issued for a particular
premises may not be removed to any other premises. (1997 Code)
10-2-9: DISPLAY:
Each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be prominently displayed in
the office of the trailer park for which it was issued. (1997 Code)
10-2-10: RULES OF OPERATION:
A. Covenant For Maintenance: A covenant shall be filed by the owners in a form
satisfactory to the city council to perpetuate maintenance of all mobile home
or trailer park improvements including sanitary systems, interior roads,
streets, and driveways, the covenants to run with the land.
B. Resident Rules And Regulations: A copy of the rules and regulations for
residents of the trailer court shall also be filed with the city council. (1997
Code)
10-2-11: PENALTY:
Operation of a trailer coach or mobile home park without a license shall
constitute a class B misdemeanor with each day's continued operation without
such license or other violation constituting a separate violation. In addition
to other remedies the city may bring an action for or injunction to restrain
such violation. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
PERMITS
SECTION:
10-3-1: When Required
10-3-2: Application
10-3-3: Fees
10-3-4: Issuance/Denial Of Permit
10-3-5: Compliance Required
10-3-6: Inspection
10-3-7: Display
10-3-8: Transferability
10-3-1: WHEN REQUIRED:
A. Construction Or Expansion: No person shall construct or expand a trailer
park by means of improvement of previously undeveloped mobile home lots in the
City without first obtaining a permit as provided in this Chapter.
B. Change In Facilities: No change in any sanitary facilities, methods of water
supply, sewerage, drainage, garbage or waste disposal, and no change in the
plot plan shall be made without first obtaining a permit from the City Council.
(1997 Code)
10-3-2: APPLICATION:
A. Form; Supporting Documents: Application for a permit required by this
Chapter shall be in the same form and shall be accompanied by such supporting
documents as are required for license applications.
B. Combined Application: Where a permit required by this Chapter, as well as an
original license to operate a trailer park is sought by the applicant, request
shall be made in the same application. (1997 Code)
10-3-3: FEES:
A. Application For Construction: Each application for a permit to construct a
trailer park shall be accompanied by an application fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each ten (10) acres of land, or fraction, proposed to used as a
trailer park. Each application fee shall be paid to the City Clerk in the
amount of the application fee only, and the application fee, once paid to the
City Clerk, shall not be refunded.
B. Application To Alter Or Expand: An application to alter a trailer park
including one to expand a mobile home park to include trailer coach or mobile
home lots not developed, shall be accompanied by an application fee of ten
dollars ($10.00) for each ten (10) acres or fraction used to harbor trailer
coaches. However, no application fee shall be required to accompany an
application for a permit to alter a park where such alteration involves only a
reduction in the number of trailer spaces to a number less than that for which
the park is currently listed. (1997 Code)
10-3-4: ISSUANCE/DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Upon receipt of an application for a permit required by this Chapter, the City
Council or its designated representative shall, if the park will be in
conformity with this Title, issue the permit. If the application for the permit
is declined, the City Council or its designated representative shall give the
reasons in writing to the applicant within forty five (45) days of receipt of
the application; and if the objections can be corrected, the applicant may
amend his/her application and resubmit it for approval. (1997 Code)
10-3-5: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A permit issued pursuant to this Chapter does not relieve the permittee from
securing any other permit required or from complying with any other provision
of this Code or other ordinances of the City. (1997 Code)
10-3-6: INSPECTION:
If a permit to construct a trailer park has been issued pursuant to this
Chapter, the permittee shall, upon completion, notify the City Council or its
designated representative. The City Council or its designated representative
shall then inspect the park and, if completed in accordance with the accepted
application the permit as required by this Chapter will be issued. (1997 Code)
10-3-7: DISPLAY:
Each permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be prominently displayed in
the office of the trailer park for which it was issued. (1997 Code)
10-3-8: TRANSFERABILITY:
No permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be transferable. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 4
ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-4-1: Power And Authority Of City Council
10-4-2: Notice Of Violation; Service
10-4-3: Emergency Orders
10-4-4: Hearing
10-4-5: Judicial Review
10-4-6: Notice Of New Mobile Homes Parked
10-4-1: POWER AND AUTHORITY OF CITY COUNCIL:
A. Enforcement: The City Council or its designated representative shall enforce
the provisions of this Title.
B. Inspection:
1. Annual Inspection: The City Council or its designated representative shall
inspect, at least once each year, each trailer coach park or mobile home park
and all the accommodations and facilities.
2. Right Of Entry: The City Council or its designated representative is granted
the power and authority to enter upon the premises of a trailer coach park or
mobile home park at any reasonable time for the purposes of this Title.
C. Written Regulations: The City Council is authorized to make and, after
public hearing, to adopt such written regulations as may be necessary for the
proper enforcement of the provisions of this Title. Such regulations shall have
the same force and effect as the provisions of this Title and the penalty for
violation of the provisions of this Title. (1997 Code)
10-4-2: NOTICE OF VIOLATION; SERVICE:
Whenever the City Council determines that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this Title, or of
any regulation adopted, it shall give notice of such alleged violation to the
person to whom a license was issued pursuant to Chapter 2 of this Title, which
notice shall:
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance.
C. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
D. Be served upon the owner or owner's agent as the case may require. However,
the notice or order shall be deemed to have been properly served upon such
owner or agent when a copy has been sent by certified mail to owner or agent's
last known address, or when owner or agent has been served with the notice by
any other method authorized or required by the laws of the State.
E. Contain an outline of remedial action, which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this Title and the regulations adopted
pursuant thereto. (1997 Code)
10-4-3: EMERGENCY ORDERS:
Whenever the City Council finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health, it may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such emergency and requiring
that such action be taken as it may deem necessary to meet the emergency
including suspension of the license. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Title, the order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such
an order is directed shall comply immediately, but upon petition to the City
Council shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. The provisions of this
Chapter shall be applicable to the hearing and the order issued. (1997 Code)
10-4-4: HEARING:
A. Right To Review Hearing: Any person affected by a notice of violation which
has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this
Title, or any regulation adopted, or whose application for a license or permit
has been denied, or whose license or permit has been suspended or revoked, may
request and shall be entitled to appeal the decision on hearing before the City
Council.
B. Application For Review Hearing: A person desiring an appeal hearing before
the City Council pursuant to this Chapter shall file with the Mayor or Mayor's
designated representative a written petition requesting the appeal hearing and
setting forth a statement of the grounds for such hearing within ten (10) days
after the day the notice of violation was served. The filing of the request for
a review hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice of violation except in
the case of an order issued pursuant to Section
10-4-3 of this Chapter.
C. Setting Date For Review Hearing: Upon receipt of a petition for hearing as
provided by this Chapter, the City Council shall set a time and place for the
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice. The hearing shall be
commenced at the earliest reasonable date after the day on which the petition
was filed. However, upon application of the petitioner, the City Council may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time when in its judgment,
the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient reasons for such postponement.
D. Notice Of Hearing: No hearing shall be held before the City Council until
notice of the time and place of the hearing has been published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing
date, and a brief statement as the reason the hearing is being held. Expense of
such publication and costs of the hearing shall be borne by the petitioner.
E. Public Hearing: All hearings before the City Council shall be open to the
public.
F. Scope Of Hearing: At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why the notice of violation should be
modified or withdrawn.
G. Findings; Final Order: After the hearing, the City Council shall make
findings as to compliance with the provisions of this Title and the regulations
issued, and shall issue an order in writing sustaining, modifying, or
withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as provided for notices of
violations. Upon failure to comply with any order sustaining or modifying a
notice, the license of the mobile home park affected by the order shall be
revoked.
H. Record Of Proceedings: The proceedings at the hearing, including the
findings and decisions of the City Council, together with a copy of every
notice of violation and final order, shall be entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the City Clerk. (1997 Code)
10-4-5: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may seek relief in any
court of competent jurisdiction as provided by Administrative Review Act of the
State 1
. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101.
10-4-6: NOTICE OF NEW MOBILE HOMES PARKED:
A licensee under this Title shall notify the Mayor or Mayor's designated
representative in writing of each new mobile home parked on the licensed
premises within ten (10) days. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 5
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Environmental Requirements
10-5-2: Site Drainage
10-5-3: Soil And Ground Cover
10-5-4: Protection Against Physical Hazards
10-5-5: Minimum Separation
10-5-6: Setback, Buffer And Screening
10-5-7: Recreation Areas
10-5-8: Park Street System
10-5-9: Off-Street Parking
10-5-10: Pedestrian Walkways Or Sidewalks
10-5-11: Illumination
10-5-12: Piers And Anchors
10-5-13: Skirting
10-5-14: Stairways
10-5-15: Utility Facilities
10-5-1: ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Each trailer park licensed or to be constructed under the provisions of this
Title shall provide for the following in the manner specified:
A. Flood Protection: All land proposed for trailer parks lying at or below an
elevation as exactly set forth by the Report on Regulation of Construction
within the Flood Plain of the Lower Rock River as recorded by the Illinois
Division of Urban Resources shall be adequately protected against flooding.
Engineering data shall be submitted to show protection against flood water
rising to this elevation.
B. Hazard Or Nuisance: The trailer park shall not be subject to any hazard or
nuisance such as excessive noise, vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation,
heat or glare.
C. Pollution: The trailer park shall not be subject to any source of pollution,
such as drainage from garbage disposal areas.
D. Adverse Influence: The trailer park shall not be subject to any adverse
influence from adjoining streets and area. (1997 Code)
10-5-2: SITE DRAINAGE:
Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall
meet the following site drainage requirements:
A. Grading; Surface Water Drainage: The ground surface in all parts of the
trailer park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe,
efficient manner.
B. Endangerment To Water Supply: No trailer park shall be so located that the
drainage of the park area will endanger any water supply.
C. Location: All trailer parks shall be well drained and shall be located in
areas free from ponds, swamps and similar places in which mosquitoes may breed.
D. Treatment Of Surface Water Collectors: Surface water collectors and other
bodies of standing water which may breed mosquitoes and other vectors shall be
treated in an approved manner.
E. Waste Water: Waste water from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line
shall be deposited directly into the City sanitary sewerage system or approved
sanitary facility. (1997 Code)
10-5-3: SOIL AND GROUND COVER:
Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall
meet the following soil and ground cover requirements:
A. Soil Erosion; Dust: Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of each trailer
park shall be paved, covered with stone screening, or other solid materials or
protected with a sturdy and healthy grass growth that is capable of preventing
soil erosion and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
B. Soil, Slope Stabilization: Where the topography has a slope of twenty five
percent (25%) or more, a rip wall cribbing or other approved system of soil and
slope stabilization shall be installed and maintained.
C. Poisonous Vegetation, Trees: Trailer park grounds shall be maintained free
of vegetative growth and trees which are poisonous. (1997 Code)
10-5-4: PROTECTION AGAINST PHYSICAL HAZARDS:
Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title shall
meet the following requirements for protection against physical hazards:
A. Protective Barriers: Adequate protective barriers shall be provided and
maintained where there is a slope in excess of forty five degrees (45°) and a
change in elevation of six feet (6'). Such barriers may include, but are not
limited to, continuous shrubs or fences.
B. Swimming Pools:
1. Fence Required: Swimming pools shall be fenced.
2. Construction; Maintenance: Swimming pools shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of the State Department of
Public Health. (1997 Code)
10-5-5: MINIMUM SEPARATION:
Each trailer park sought to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this Title
shall meet the following requirements for separation between trailer coaches:
A. Minimum Distance; Lot Size: Trailer coaches shall be separated from each
other and from other buildings and structures by a least twenty feet (20')
except each trailer coach lot shall contain a minimum of three thousand five
hundred (3,500) square feet.
B. Accessory Structure: An accessory structure which has a horizontal area
exceeding twenty five (25) square feet, attached to a trailer coach, and which
has an opaque top or roof that is higher than adjacent window sills of the
trailer coach, shall, for purposes of the requirements of subsection A above,
be considered to be part of the trailer coach. Roofed-over patios, carports and
individual storage facilities shall be included as part of the trailer coaches
in determining yard widths between trailer coaches. (1997 Code)
10-5-6: SETBACK, BUFFER AND SCREENING:
Each trailer coach park sought to be licensed or constructed pursuant to this
Title shall meet the following setback and screening requirements:
A. Setback; Maximum Density: All trailer coaches shall be located at least
twenty five feet (25') from any park property boundary line abutting a public
street or highway and at least ten feet (10') from other park property boundary
lines. There shall be a minimum distance of twenty feet (20') between an
individual trailer coach with a maximum density of seven and nine-tenths (7.9)
trailer coaches per acre, including any accessory structures and adjoining
pavement of a park street, or common parking area, or common areas accessible
to park residents.
B. Screening Buffer Strip: All trailer parks shall be provided with a screening
buffer strip along all property boundary lines. Where effective visual barriers
do not already exist along such property boundary lines, the buffer strip shall
be furnished with screening at least five feet (5') high and consisting of
wooden natural finish fences or natural growth, such growth consisting of a
compact and dense growth of shrubbery, hedges, evergreens or other suitable
plantings sufficient to serve as an effective and attractive visual screen.
(1997 Code)
10-5-7: RECREATION AREAS:
A. Required: In all trailer parks accommodating or designed to accommodate
twenty five (25) or more trailer coaches there shall be one or more recreation
areas which shall be easily accessible to all park residents.
1. Size: The size of such recreation areas shall be based upon a minimum of one
hundred (100) square feet for each space in the park that is designed to
accommodate a trailer coach. No outdoor recreation area shall contain less than
four thousand (4,000) square feet.
2. Location: Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic
hazards and should, where topography permits, be centrally located.
B. Hardwood Trees Required: All recreation areas shall be planted with at least
one hardwood tree of good and healthy desirability and type of at least six
feet (6') high when first planted, for each five hundred (500) square feet of
recreational area; provided, that if a swimming pool, baseball diamond, tennis
or basketball court, or other organized recreational facility shall occupy any
five hundred (500) square feet or portion of the area, such tree requirement
shall be waived for such five hundred (500) square feet. (1997 Code)
10-5-8: PARK STREET SYSTEM:
A. Street System Requirements: Each trailer park to be licensed or constructed
pursuant to this Title shall meet the following street system requirements.
1. General Requirements: All trailer parks shall provide safe, continuous and
convenient vehicular access from abutting public streets or roads to each
mobile home space. For purposes of this Title, all streets or roads providing
such vehicular access shall be referred to as the "park street system" and
shall be maintained by the owner.
2. Primary Entrance Road: The primary entrance road connecting the park street
system with a public street or road shall have a minimum road pavement width of
thirty six feet (36') where guest parking is permitted on both sides, or a
minimum road pavement width of twenty seven feet (27') where guest parking is
limited to one side. Where the primary entrance road is more than one hundred
feet (100') long and does not provide access to abutting property within such
distance, the minimum road width may be twenty four feet (24') if parking is
prohibited on both sides.
3. Secondary Entrance Road: In addition to the required primary entrance road,
all parks containing twenty five (25) or more acres in total area or providing
for the accommodation of two hundred (200) or more trailer coaches, shall have
at least one secondary entrance road connecting the park street system with a
public street or road. The secondary roads shall have a minimum pavement width
of twenty four feet (24'). Where primary and secondary entrance roads connect
to the same public street or road, there shall be a minimum separation of one
hundred fifty feet (150') between such access points; where this is not
feasible or possible, clearly marked one-way entrance and exit lanes with at
least a fifteen foot (15') wide median strip, are acceptable provided the
pavement width of each one-way road is at least twenty two feet (22') wide with
parking prohibited on both sides.
4. Interior Streets: All interior streets in the park street system shall have
a minimum pavement width of eighteen feet (18') on a twenty four foot (24')
right of way, with parking prohibited on both sides. Dead-end streets shall be
limited in length to one thousand feet (1,000') and shall be provided at the
closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least
sixty five feet (65') with parking prohibited within it. One-way minor streets
shall be acceptable only if less than five hundred feet (500') long and serving
less than twenty five (25) trailer coaches.
B. Street Construction And Design Standards: Each trailer park to be licensed
or constructed pursuant to this Title shall meet the following requirements for
street construction and design:
1. Pavement Materials: All streets shall be provided with seven inch (7")
reinforced, Portland cement concrete or asphalt B-4 mix, three inches (3")
thick on top of eight inches (8") of crushed stone.
2. Pavement Design: Primary and secondary entrance roads which exceed twenty
feet (20') in width shall have the standard City cross section, with curbs.
3. Grades: Grades of all streets shall be sufficient to ensure adequate surface
drainage, but shall not be more than eight percent (8%). Short runs with a
maximum grade of twelve percent (12%) may be permitted, if traffic safety is
assured by appropriate paving, adequate leveling areas, and avoidance of
lateral curves.
4. Intersections: Within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection, streets
shall be at approximately right angles. A distance of at least one hundred
fifty feet (150') shall be maintained between center lines of offset
intersecting streets. Intersections of more than two (2) streets at one point
shall be avoided. (1997 Code)
10-5-9: OFF-STREET PARKING:
A. Number Of Spaces Required; Location: Paved, off-street parking areas shall
be provided in all parks for the use of park residents and guests; such areas
shall be furnished at the rate of at least two (2) car spaces for each mobile
home. Parking areas shall be located at either end of each mobile home and
shall not extend alongside.
B. Use As Temporary Parking Only: The parking areas required by this Section
shall be used solely for the temporary parking of passenger-type motor vehicles
owned by residents of the park or their guests. (1997 Code)
10-5-10: PEDESTRIAN WALKWAYS OR SIDEWALKS:
Where provided, common pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of three and one-
half feet (31/2') in width. Pedestrian walkways constructed on an individual
lot for the private use of the residents thereof shall be a minimum of two feet
(2') in width. (1997 Code)
10-5-11: ILLUMINATION:
All trailer parks shall be furnished with sufficient electrical system and
lighting units at the owner's expense, so spaced and equipped with luminaries
placed at such mounting heights as will provide the following average
maintained levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and
vehicles at night:
A. Street System: All parts of the park street systems: four-tenths (0.4) of a
foot-candle with a minimum of two-tenths (0.2) of a foot-candle.
B. Potentially Hazardous Locations: Potentially hazardous locations such as
major street intersections and steps or stepped ramps; individually illuminated
with a minimum of four-tenths (0.4) of a foot-candle. (1997 Code)
10-5-12: PIERS AND ANCHORS:
Piers of poured concrete sixteen inches by sixteen inches by forty two inches
(16" x 16" x 42") below surface spaced eight feet (8') apart shall be provided
for each lot. Anchors or tiedowns shall be installed at the corners of each
mobile home for protection against high winds. Each anchor or tiedown shall be
capable of withstanding a vertical tension force of four thousand eight hundred
(4,800) pounds. (1997 Code)
10-5-13: SKIRTING:
Each mobile home shall be skirted around its entire perimeter including the
hitch portion, unless removed, by skirting material of fireproof composition
such as sheet metal. (1997 Code)
10-5-14: STAIRWAYS:
A stairway serving as an entrance to a mobile home shall be constructed of
incombustible material, and shall have sufficient strength and stability to
support safely its intended load. Each stairway of more than three (3) risers
shall be equipped with handrails no less than thirty inches (30") nor more than
thirty four inches (34") as measured vertically from the nosing of stair
treads. (1997 Code)
10-5-15: UTILITY FACILITIES:
All utility facilities shall be installed beneath the surface of the ground in
conformity with accepted engineering practices and the rules and regulations of
the authority having jurisdiction where such addition is designed to
accommodate more than five (5) mobile homes. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 6
WATER SUPPLY
SECTION:
10-6-1: Water Supply System
10-6-2: Source Of Supply
10-6-3: Water Storage Facilities
10-6-4: Distribution System
10-6-5: Individual Connections
10-6-6: Water For Protection
10-6-1: WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM:
A. Required: Each trailer park shall have a water supply system capable of
providing a sufficient supply of potable water under adequate pressure, to
water supply facilities for trailer coaches, service buildings, fire hydrants,
drinking fountains and other accessory facilities, as required by this Chapter
for the well-being of park residents and for park maintenance.
B. Compliance Required: The system shall be designed, constructed and
maintained in accordance with State standards of the Department of Public
Health and the provisions of this Code, other City ordinances and other local
laws and shall conform with regulations of the authorities having jurisdiction
and shall conform with pertinent City ordinances. Where conflicts exist, the
most restrictive requirement shall prevail. (1997 Code)
10-6-2: SOURCE OF SUPPLY:
A. Public System Available: When a public water supply system is available and
within five hundred feet (500') of a trailer park, the trailer park must
connect to the public water supply within one year. No private water supply
system shall be cross-connected with any public water supply system.
B. Public System Unavailable: Where a public water supply source is not
available, the trailer park's source of water supply, including the
construction, equipment and distribution system for withdrawing or processing
and distributing water shall be approved by the City Council and other
authorities having jurisdiction. The chemical and bacteriological quality of
the potable water distributed in any trailer park, including water treatment
processes employed, shall conform to the standards established by the health
authority having jurisdiction.
C. Capacity: The water source shall be capable of producing an adequate volume
of water to supply all trailer coach spaces in any trailer park, but in no case
shall such capacity be less than one hundred fifty (150) gallons per space per
day in any trailer park.
D. Well; Construction, Location: When an independent or nonpublic water system
is used to serve the trailer park with water obtained from wells, the well
shall be located and constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor
surface contamination will reach the water supply from any source. A minimum
distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be maintained between the water
supply and any other possible source of contamination except that sewers or
pipes through which sewage may back up shall be located at least fifty feet
(50') from any well or water suction pipeline.
E. Well Casings, Pumps, Etc.: No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or
suction pipes used to supply water to a trailer park shall be located in any
pit, room or space extending below ground level, nor in any room or space
aboveground which is walled in or otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms,
whether aboveground or belowground, have free drainage by gravity to the
surface of the ground. The floor or rooms aboveground shall be at least six
inches (6") above the ground surface. All floors shall be watertight and sloped
from well casing to the drain. The well casing shall be not less than twelve
inches (12") above the floor.
F. Water Metering Pits: All water metering pits shall be free of surface water
and provided with a sump pump and sealed entrance with easy access (depth of 2
feet or more requires steps). (1997 Code)
10-6-3: WATER STORAGE FACILITIES:
All water storage reservoirs for the supply of water to trailer parks shall be
watertight and constructed of impervious material; all overflows and vents of
such reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Open reservoirs are prohibited.
Manholes shall be constructed with overlapping covers so as to prevent the
entrance of contaminated material, and so designed that they may be locked. All
of the overflow pipes from a reservoir shall be connected with back siphonage
protection to any pipe in which polluted water may back up. (1997 Code)
10-6-4: DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
A. Construction: The water distribution system in a trailer park shall be
constructed of piping, fixtures and other equipment of approved materials and
shall be so designed and maintained to comply with pertinent provisions of this
code, and to provide a pressure of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square
inch, under normal operating conditions, at each trailer coach. Service shall
not be interconnected or cross connected with any drainage, venting or other
system conveying nonpotable water, nor shall such piping be subject to hazards
of backflow or any back siphonage. (1997 Code)
B. Master Meter: Water and sewer usage shall be billed to the owners of the
trailer parks within the city of the total water and sewer used during each
billing period. The owners of each facility shall be responsible to pay the
bill for water and sewer usage which shall be rendered from the master meter
feeding into the private system of the park.
1. In the event that a reading from any master meter would include usage not
incurred by a park the reading shall be adjusted by reducing usage recorded by
the master meter by the outside users, and a bill would be rendered from the
adjusted usage figure.
2. In the event of the necessity to shut off services because of failure to
receive payment when due, a notice of intent to shut off water service to the
entire park shall be mailed to the park owners or managers which shall provide
a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the actual shutoff. In the event of
shutoff there shall be additional charges for costs of shutoff and turn on when
necessitated. (Ord. 12-03, 11-10-2003)
10-6-5: INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS:
A. Water Service Connections: Individual water service connections shall be
provided at each trailer coach lot in the trailer park. All water service
connections shall be watertight and located at a minimum distance of five feet
(5') from sanitary sewer connections belowground. The minimum pipe size of
connections shall be three-fourths inch (3/4"). Outlets shall be so constructed
as to be free of possible contamination from surface drainage and possible
damage during installation of a mobile home and shall be four inches (4") above
grade. At this point a gate valve must be installed.
B. Protection Of Risers From Freezing: Adequate provisions shall be made to
prevent freezing of riser pipes and thawing, to protect risers from heaving and
thawing actions of ground during freezing weather.
C. Stop And Waste Cocks: Underground stop and waste cocks shall not be
installed on any connection.
D. Code Compliance: All potable water connections and suppliers to all fixture
outlets within the trailer coach unit shall comply with applicable provisions
of this code in regard to the protection of potable water supply from
contamination. (1997 Code)
10-6-6: WATER FOR PROTECTION:
A. Public System: Where a public water supply system with a water main of four
inches (4") or larger is available, all trailer parks accommodating or designed
to accommodate ten (10) or more mobile homes, or both, shall provide the
following water supply facilities:
1. The system shall permit the operation of a minimum of two (2), 11/2-inch
hose streams on a fire in any trailer coach, service building, or other
accessory structure in the park.
2. Fire hydrants shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of such
structures and shall be of a type prescribed by the water department of the
city.
3. Water supply and associated facilities shall be sufficient to provide a
delivery of at least seventy five (75) gallons per minute at each of the two
(2) nozzles, held four feet (4') above the ground, at a flowing pressure of at
least thirty (30) pounds per square inch when measured at the highest elevation
in the trailer park.
B. Private Source: In the event a public water supply system is not available,
all trailer parks accommodating or designed to accommodate ten (10) or more
mobile homes shall provide from a well or similar private source service
sufficient water at sufficient pressure to comply with the requirements of
subsection A of this section. Fire hydrants shall also be placed as directed by
subsection A of this section. A public water supply system shall be deemed
available when the system is within five hundred feet (500') of the trailer
park, measured along a street or other public easement, and a connection shall
be made lawfully within one year of when such public system reaches within five
hundred feet (500') of the trailer park. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 7
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
10-7-1: Use Of City System Required
10-7-2: Individual Connections
10-7-3: Waste Water
10-7-1: USE OF CITY SYSTEM REQUIRED:
All sewage and other water-carried wastes shall be disposed of into the City
sewerage system, or, if the City sewerage system is not available, then into a
private sewage system designed and built in accordance with the standards and
regulations of the State Environmental Protection Agency. The City sewerage
system shall be deemed available when the system is within five hundred feet
(500') of the trailer park, measured along a street or other public easement,
and a connection shall be made lawfully within one year of when such public
system reaches within five hundred feet (500') of the trailer park. The system
will have master meters for both water and sewer. (1997 Code)
10-7-2: INDIVIDUAL CONNECTIONS:
Each trailer coach site shall be provided with a sewer connection for the
combined liquid waste outlet or outlets of each trailer coach. It shall be the
duty of the owner or operator of the trailer park to provide an approved type
of water and odortight connection from the trailer coach water drainage to the
sewer connection. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to make the
connection and keep all occupied trailer coaches connected to the sewer while
located in the trailer park. Sewer connections in unoccupied trailer coach
sites shall be so closed that they will emit no odors or cause a breeding place
for flies. (1997 Code)
10-7-3: WASTE WATER:
No waste water from trailer coaches shall be deposited on the surface of the
ground. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 8
REFUSE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
10-8-1: Generally
10-8-2: Location, Type And Size Of Containers
10-8-3: Platforms For Containers
10-8-4: Collection
10-8-5: Incineration
10-8-1: GENERALLY:
The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a trailer park shall be so
managed as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect-breeding
areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution. (1997 Code)
10-8-2: LOCATION, TYPE AND SIZE OF CONTAINERS:
All garbage refuse shall be stored in commercial-type or large bulk-type
containers which shall be located not more than one hundred fifty feet (150')
from any mobile home space. Containers shall be provided by the licensee in
sufficient number and capacity to contain all refuse in a sanitary manner.
Containers shall not be placed outside for collection until the day designated
therefor. (1997 Code)
10-8-3: PLATFORMS FOR CONTAINERS:
Refuse collection stands shall be provided for all refuse containers in trailer
parks. Such containers stands shall be so designated as to prevent containers
from being tipped, to minimize spillage and container deterioration, and to
facilitate cleaning around them. (1997 Code)
10-8-4: COLLECTION:
All refuse shall be collected at least once a week or as often as necessary to
keep the park litterless and sanitary. If garbage bags are used in lieu of
commercial-type or large bulk-type containers, refuse shall be collected at
least twice a week. The mobile home park operator shall provide collection
service. All refuse shall be collected and transported in covered vehicles.
(1997 Code)
10-8-5: INCINERATION:
A. Burning Prohibited; Exception: No garbage or refuse shall be burned on the
premises of a trailer park, except in approved incinerators.
B. Construction Of Incinerator 1
: Refuse incinerators shall be constructed only with the approval of the City
Council or its designated representative. Such approval shall be based on a
review of the plans and specifications for the incinerators and approval of the
site where they will be located. The approval shall specify the type of
material which may be placed in the incinerator.
C. Operation: Incinerators shall be operated only when attended by some person
specifically authorized by the owner or operator of the trailer park. (1997
Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section
  5-2-4-5 of this Code.
CHAPTER 9
VERMIN AND WEED CONTROL
SECTION:
10-9-1: Generally
10-9-2: Insect Control
10-9-3: Rodent Control
10-9-4: Control Of Potentially Hazardous Locations
10-9-5: Weed Control
10-9-1: GENERALLY:
Grounds, buildings and structures in trailer parks shall be maintained free of
insect, vermin and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and
other measures to control insects, vermin and rodents shall conform with
requirements of the health authority. (1997 Code)
10-9-2: INSECT CONTROL:
Trailer parks shall be maintained free of accumulations of debris which may
provide breeding places for flies, mosquitoes and other pests. (1997 Code)
10-9-3: RODENT CONTROL:
Storage areas in trailer parks shall be so maintained as to prevent a rodent
harborage. Lumber, pipe and other building materials shall be stored at least
one foot (1') above the ground. (1997 Code)
10-9-4: CONTROL OF POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS LOCATIONS:
Where the potential for vermin infestation exists in trailer parks, all
exterior openings in or beneath any structures shall be appropriately screened
with wire mesh or other suitable materials. No storage shall be permitted under
a trailer coach. (1997 Code)
10-9-5: WEED CONTROL 1
:
The growth of brush, weeds and grass shall be controlled in trailer parks to
prevent the harborage of ticks, chiggers and other noxious insects. Trailer
parks shall be so maintained as to prevent the growth of ragweed, poison ivy,
poison oak, poison sumac and other noxious weeds considered detrimental to
health. Open areas shall be maintained free of heavy undergrowth of any
description. (1997 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 4, Chapter 2 of this Code and subsection 10-5-3 of this Title.
CHAPTER 10
SERVICE BUILDINGS AND SERVICE FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-10-1: Generally
10-10-2: Nonresidential Uses
10-10-3: Required Service Facilities
10-10-4: Storage Areas
10-10-1: GENERALLY:
The requirements of this Chapter shall apply to accessory structures and
community service facilities in all trailer parks which are required for park
management and for the servicing and well-being of trailer park residents. The
accessory structures may include, but are not limited to, service buildings or
other community structures containing one or more of the following uses and
must be constructed in accordance with applicable City regulations:
A. Park management office.
B. Community laundry facilities.
C. Community sanitary facilities.
D. Indoor community recreation areas.
E. Repair shops and storage buildings. (1997 Code)
10-10-2: NONRESIDENTIAL USES:
No part of any trailer park shall be used for nonresidential purposes except
such uses that are required for the direct servicing and well-being of the park
residents and for the management and maintenance of the park. (1997 Code)
10-10-3: REQUIRED SERVICE FACILITIES:
Each trailer park operated, or intended to be operated subject to this Title,
shall be provided with a community service building containing a park
management office. (1997 Code)
10-10-4: STORAGE AREAS:
Locations for storage of maintenance materials such as lumber, pipe and other
building materials in trailer parks shall be screened from the view of the
residents and the public. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 11
FIRE PROTECTION
SECTION:
10-11-1: Generally
10-11-2: Flammable Materials
10-11-3: Fire Extinguishers
10-11-4: Fires
10-11-5: Smoke Alarms
10-11-1: GENERALLY:
All trailer park shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Colona
Community Fire Protection District. (1997 Code)
10-11-2: FLAMMABLE MATERIALS:
Trailer park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable
materials; no storage shall be permitted under a trailer coach. (1997 Code)
10-11-3: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS:
Two (2) all purpose fire extinguishers of a least two and one-half (21/2) pound
capacity shall be located inside each mobile home at opposite ends. Each fire
extinguisher shall be checked annually and kept in condition for use at all
times. (1997 Code)
10-11-4: FIRES:
Fires in trailer parks shall be made only in cooking stoves and equipment
approved for such purposes. (1997 Code)
10-11-5: SMOKE ALARMS:
Smoke alarms are to be in place. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 12
MISCELLANEOUS FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-12-1: Electrical Distribution System
10-12-2: Natural Gas Installations
10-12-3: Fuel Oil Supply Systems
10-12-4: Storage Structures
10-12-1: ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM:
Each trailer park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of
approved wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances, which shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the Electrical Code of the City and
other regulations governing such systems. All parts of the trailer park
electrical distribution system shall conform with approved standards for safety
to life and property and with accepted engineering practices. No electric wires
shall be suspended less than seven feet (7') above the sidewalks or pathways or
be allowed to lie on the ground. (1997 Code)
10-12-2: NATURAL GAS INSTALLATIONS:
Natural gas piping systems in all trailer parks shall be installed and
maintained in conformity with accepted engineering practices and the rules and
regulations of the authority having jurisdiction. (1997 Code)
10-12-3: FUEL OIL SUPPLY SYSTEMS:
All fuel oil supply systems provided for trailer coaches, service buildings and
other structures shall be installed and maintained in conformity with the rules
and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction. Fuel oil systems
underground shall be located at a minimum of ten feet (10') horizontally from
water lines and, at necessary crossings, shall be placed substantial pipe
sleeves extending ten feet (10') on each side of the water pipe. (1997 Code)
10-12-4: STORAGE STRUCTURES:
No more than one storage structure shall be permitted on each mobile home lot.
Such storage structures shall be located at least three feet (3') from any
mobile home and lot line, and shall be:
A. Not larger than ten feet by ten feet (10' x 10') in floor plan, by eight
feet (8') in height.
B. Capable of being completely and easily disassembled and are readily
portable.
C. Used only for storage purposes.
D. Not attached to a trailer or used as an auxiliary room or otherwise used for
dwelling or living purposes.
E. Set on a poured concrete slab and properly anchored. (1997 Code)
CHAPTER 13
OPERATION
SECTION:
10-13-1: Generally
10-13-2: Attendant Or Caretaker
10-13-3: Registration Of Trailer Coach And Occupants
10-13-4: Confinement Of Pets
10-13-5: Maintenance; Ejectment Of Tenant
10-13-1: GENERALLY:
The construction, operation and maintenance of trailer parks in the City shall,
in addition to complying with this Title, be in conformity with the trailer or
mobile home park law of the State and provisions promulgated by the State
Department of Public Health. (1997 Code)
10-13-2: ATTENDANT OR CARETAKER:
Each trailer park shall be in the charge of a responsible attendant or
caretaker at all times, whose duty it shall be to maintain the park, its
equipment and facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and be
answerable, with the licensee for any violation of the provisions of this
Title. (1997 Code)
10-13-3: REGISTRATION OF TRAILER COACH AND OCCUPANTS:
A. Custodian's Office: Each trailer park shall be provided with a custodian's
office where each trailer coach entering the trailer park shall be assigned to
a lot location, given a copy of the trailer park rules and registered according
to the prescribed form.
B. Registration: The registration shall include the name and address of each
occupant of the trailer coach; the license number of all units; the state
issuing such license; and a statement indicating the exact location at which
the trailer coach was last parked, including the state, city, town or village
where the parking occurred. The register shall be signed by an occupant of the
trailer coach. Any person furnishing misinformation for the purposes of
registration shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable under the
general statutes for such an offense.
C. Maintenance Of Records: The registration records required by subsection B
above shall be neatly and securely maintained, and no registration records
shall be destroyed until six (6) years have elapsed following the date of
registration. The register shall be available at all times for inspection by
law enforcement officers.
D. Home Manufactured After April 1, 1981: No licensee under this Title shall
permit any mobile home manufactured after April 1, 1981, to be parked on the
licensed premises unless it complies with the safety code provisions then in
force. (1997 Code)
10-13-4: CONFINEMENT OF PETS:
No owner or person in charge of a dog or other pet animal shall permit it to
run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any trailer park.
All animals are subject to City ordinances. (1997 Code)
10-13-5: MAINTENANCE; EJECTMENT OF TENANT:
The licensee of each mobile home park shall assume full responsibility for
maintaining in good repair and condition all park facilities required by this
Title, including streets and sanitary and safety appliances, and shall promptly
bring such action as is necessary to prosecute or eject from the park any
person who wilfully or maliciously damages any appliance, or any person who
fails to comply with the provisions of this Title. (1997 Code)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Jurisdiction
11-1-3: Interpretation
11-1-4: Disclaimer Of Liability
11-1-5: Variances
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
In accordance with State law 1
this Title regulates the subdivision and development of land in order to
implement the City Comprehensive Plan and Official Map. Thus this Title assists
in achieving the following specific objectives:
A. To preserve, protect, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare;
B. To provide a pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly layout
and use of land; and to create an environment conducive to the productive
development of the City;
C. To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be
properly monumented and recorded;
D. To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements, and buildings;
E. To preserve the natural beauty and topography to the maximum feasible
extent;
F. To provide adequate light, air, and privacy for all residents of new
developments by preventing undue concentration of population;
G. To protect against injury or damage caused by fire, pollution, flooding,
storm water runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
H. To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid
traffic congestion by requiring the proper location, design, and construction
of streets and sidewalks;
I. To reduce the cost of installing and maintaining adequate water mains,
sanitary sewers, storm water sewers, and other utilities and services; and
J. To ensure that adequate parks, schools, and similar facilities can be made
available to serve the residents of new developments.
K. Provide for the acceptance of lands of public rights of way. (Ord. 99-01, 1-
25-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 through 5/11-12-12.
11-1-2: JURISDICTION:
This Title shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the City and
within all unincorporated territory located within one and one-half (1.5) miles
of said limits, provided such territory is not located within the subdivision
jurisdiction for another municipality 1
. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. See 65 ILCS 5/11-12-9 for State requirements concerning jurisdictional
  boundary lines.
11-1-3: INTERPRETATION:
Every provision of this Title shall be construed liberally to achieve the
purposes outlined in Section
11-1-1 of this Chapter.
A. More Restrictive Requirements Apply: Whenever the requirements of this Title
differ from those of any statute, lawfully adopted ordinance or regulation,
easement, covenant, or deed restriction, the more stringent requirement shall
prevail. Thus, in accordance with State law 1
, whenever this Title imposes higher standards than the County subdivision
ordinance, said higher standards shall supersede the County regulations in the
unincorporated territory located within the City's subdivision jurisdiction.
This Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant, deed
restriction, or any other private agreement or restriction; provided, that,
where the provisions of this Title are more restrictive or impose higher
standards or regulations than such easement, covenant, deed restriction, or
other private agreement or restriction, the provisions of this Title shall
govern. Where the provisions of the easement, covenant, deed restriction, or
private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more
restrictive, or higher standards than the requirements of this Title or the
determinations of the City in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this
Title, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this Title or
determinations thereunder, then such private provisions shall be operative and
supplemental to this Title and determinations made thereunder. The City does
not purport to enforce any such private provisions not reflected on the plat
and its supporting documents and unless there is expressed in the nature of the
document and the approval process an intent to give the City enforcement rights
over same. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-11.
11-1-4: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
A. Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no officer,
board member, agent, or employee of the City shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any
act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this Title 1
.
B. Any suit brought against any officer, board member, agent, or employee of
the City, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this Title, shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final
determination of the legal proceedings. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. See "Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act", 745
  ILCS 10/1-101.
11-1-5: VARIANCES:
When the subdivider can show that a provision of this Title, if strictly
adhered to, would cause the unnecessary hardship and when, in the opinion of
the City Plan Commission, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar
to the site, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such
provision, the City Plan Commission may recommend a variance or modification to
the Council. The subdivider shall apply in writing for such variance or
modification of the action. Any variance or modification thus authorized, shall
be attached to and made a part of the final plat. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Construction Of Terms
11-2-2: Selected Definitions
11-2-1: CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS:
In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this Title, the
following rules shall be observed:
A. Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Section
11-2-2 of this Chapter; terms not defined in Section
11-2-2 of this Chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
the Zoning Ordinance of the City; if any term is not defined either in Section
11-2-2 of this Chapter or in the Zoning Ordinance, said term shall have its
standard English dictionary meaning.
B. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine
and neuter genders.
C. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
D. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the
plural the singular.
E. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is discretionary.
F. Captions (i.e., titles of sections, subsections, etc.) are intended merely
to facilitate general reference and in no way limit the substantive application
of the provisions set forth thereunder.
G. References to sections shall be deemed to include all subsections within
that section; but a reference to a particular subsection designates only that
subsection.
H. A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific terms
shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited. (Ord.
99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-2-2: SELECTED DEFINITIONS:
ADMINISTRATOR: The official appointed to administer this Land Subdivision
Title, or his duly authorized representative.
ALLEY: A public right of way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to the side or rear of premises that front on a nearby street.
AMENDMENT: A change in the provisions of this Title, properly effected in
accordance with State law and the procedures set forth herein.
AREA, GROSS: The entire area within the lot lines of the property proposed for
subdivision/development, including any areas to be dedicated/reserved for
street and alley rights of way and for public uses.
BLOCK: An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers, or ways
(except alleys, pedestrianways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision unless
exterior boundary is a street, highway, or way) or bounded by a combination of
streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, waterways, or
corporate boundary lines.
CENTER LINE OFFSET: The distance between the center lines of two (2) roughly
parallel streets, measured along the third street with which both said
"parallel" streets intersect.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street used primarily to collect limited amounts of
residential traffic and for access to abutting properties, and on which the
speed limit is low and traffic volume is minimal.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The plan or any portion thereof adopted by the City Council
to guide and coordinate the physical and economic development of the City of
Colona. The Comprehensive Plan includes, but is not limited to, plans and
programs regarding the location, character, and extent of highways, bridges,
public buildings or uses, utilities, schools, residential, commercial or
industrial land uses, parks, drainage facilities, etc.
CROSS-SLOPE: The degree of inclination measured across a right of way rather
than in the direction traffic moves on said right of way.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street having only one outlet for vehicular traffic and having
the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround for vehicles, the term may
also be used to refer solely to said turnaround.
CURB AND GUTTER, INTEGRAL: The rim forming the edge of a street plus the
channel for leading off surface water, constructed of poured concrete as a
single facility.
DEDICATE: To transfer the ownership of a right of way, parcel of land, or
improvement to the City of Colona or other public entity without compensation.
DEVELOP: To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of
land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefor.
DISTRICT, ZONING: A portion of the territory of the City of Colona wherein
certain uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to
structures, lots, and uses under the terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
EASEMENT: A right to use a portion of another person's real property for
certain limited purposes.
EROSION: The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind, water or
gravity.
ESCROW DEPOSIT: A deposit in cash or other approved securities to assure the
completion of improvements within a subdivision.
FRONTAGE: The boundary of a lot along a public street.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A minor street fronting on an arterial street or highway
(usually a limited access highway), used for access to abutting lots.
GRADE: The degree of inclination of the site or right of way, expressed as a
percentage. Synonym for "slope".
IMPROVEMENT PLANS: The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for the structures and facilities to be installed in, or
in conjunction with, a subdivision.
IMPROVEMENTS: Any street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, drainage ditch, sewer,
catch basin, newly-planted tree, off-street parking area, or other facility
necessary for the general use of property owners in a subdivision.
INTERSECTION: The point at which two (2) or more public right of ways
(generally streets) meet.
LOCAL STREET: A street serving limited amounts of residential traffic, and used
for access to abutting property.
LOT: A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate or
future) of development or transfer of ownership. A "lot" may or may not
coincide with a "lot of record".
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plan bounded by the front, side, and rear
lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot having at least two (2) adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon streets.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Henry County, Illinois, in accordance
with State law.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that abut
two (2) approximately parallel streets. Both such lot lines shall be deemed
front lot lines.
MAINTENANCE BOND: A surety bond, posted by the developer and approved by the
City of Colona, guaranteeing the satisfactory condition of installed
improvements for the one year period following their dedication.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A local dead-end street providing access to ten (10) or
fewer dwelling units.
MINOR ARTERIAL STREET: A street which carries or is proposed to carry
intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and
which may or may not be continuous.
OFFICIAL MAP: The Official Map may show indication of sites for planned public
facilities. Public facility sites which may be indicated on the Official Map
may include, but are not limited to: sites for new trafficways or widening of
existing trafficways; school sites; public building sites; and sites for future
storm drainage, electrical or other public service or utility easements.
PERFORMANCE BOND: A surety bond posted by the developer and approved by the
City of Colona, guaranteeing the installation of required improvements within,
or in conjunction with, a subdivision.
PLAT, DEDICATION: A plat required for the dedication to the City of all right-
of-way easements, and public improvements outside of a subdivision plat or
within a special use classification.
PLAT, FINAL: The subdivider's plan and supporting documentation of the
subdivision which, if approved, may be filed with the Henry County Recorder of
Deeds.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY: Preliminary engineering maps, drawings, and supportive
material indicating the proposed layout of a subdivision.
PREFILING CONFERENCE: A conference held between the developer and appropriate
City staff prior to submission of a preliminary or final plat.
PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL STREET: A street designed or utilized primarily for high
vehicular speeds or for heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route with
intersections at grade, and on which traffic-control devices are used to
expedite the safe movement of through traffic.
RESERVE: To set aside a parcel of land in anticipation of its acquisition by
the City of Colona (or other government entity) for public purposes.
RIGHT OF WAY, PUBLIC: A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has dedicated
to the City of Colona or other unit of government for streets, alleys, and
other public improvements.
SEDIMENT: Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SETBACK, FRONT: The horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line
and the building line. Minimum setback requirements are set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM, PRIVATE: A sewer system including collection and treatment
facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision in an
outlying area.
SIDEWALK: A pedestrianway constructed in compliance with the standards of this
Title.
SOIL: All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin that
overlies bedrock which can be readily excavated.
STOP ORDER: An order used by the Administrator to halt work-in- progress that
is in violation of this Title.
STREET: A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term "street"
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or way for pedestrian use only.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures
but not all structures are buildings.
STUB STREET: A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned for
future continuation.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate or
other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land in a manner that constitutes a "subdivision" as defined in this Section.
SUBDIVISION: Any division of land into two (2) or more lots, any of which is
less than five (5) acres, or any transfer involving an easement of ingress or
egress, except as set forth in the Plat Act, 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes
205/1.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: A division of land into two (2) but not more than five (5)
lots, all of which front upon an existing street, and not involving any new
streets, other rights of way, easements, improvements, or other provisions for
public areas and facilities.
TOPOGRAPHY: The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
UTILITY: A business or service which is engaged in regularly supplying the
public with some commodity or service which is of consequence and need and
which has a duty to serve without discrimination all within its service area. A
utility can be publicly or privately owned and includes, without limitation,
the following services or commodities:
A. Electricity;
B. Gas, oil, or steam;
C. Water;
D. Sanitary sewerage;
E. Storm sewerage;
F. Telephone or telegraph;
G. Cable television and other communication lines;
H. Transportation lines, such as fixed rail, but only if expressly stated.
VACATE: To terminate the legal existence of right of way or subdivision or
portion thereof, and to so note on the final plat recorded with the Henry
County Recorder of Deeds 1
.
VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION: A relaxation in the strict application of the design and
improvement standards set forth in this Title. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/6 through 205/8.
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1: Applicability Of Chapter
11-3-2: Suitability For Subdivision Generally
11-3-3: Lot Requirements; Access And Relationship To Street
11-3-4: Permanent Reference Monuments
11-3-5: Street Design Standards
11-3-6: Street Improvements Standards
11-3-7: Blocks
11-3-8: Sidewalks
11-3-9: Utilities
11-3-10: Water Facilities
11-3-11: Sanitary Sewers
11-3-12: Easements
11-3-13: Drainage And Storm Sewers
11-3-14: Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control
11-3-15: Dedications For Public Use
11-3-1: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City other than land that is
specifically exempted from the requirements of the Illinois Plat Act 1
shall be subdivided or developed except in compliance with the regulations of
this Chapter and the applicable provisions of State law 2
. No lot in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
A. The final plat of said subdivision has been approved by the City Council and
recorded in the office of the Henry County Recorder of Deeds; and
B. The portion of said subdivision in which the lot is located has been
improved in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter or until a
performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of
such improvements.
A building permit shall not be issued for any lot conveyed in violation of this
Section. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/1.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8; 765 ILCS 205/1 et seq.
11-3-2: SUITABILITY FOR SUBDIVISION GENERALLY:
Land that is unsuitable for development due to flooding, poor drainage, rough
topography, adverse soil conditions, or other features which will be harmful to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the subdivision
and/or its surrounding areas shall not be subdivided or developed unless the
subdivider/developer formulates adequate plans/methods to solve the problems
caused by the adverse land conditions. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-3: LOT REQUIREMENTS; ACCESS AND RELATIONSHIP TO STREET:
A. Lot Requirements: All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the minimum lot
area and dimension requirements of the zoning district in which said
subdivision is located; land that is under water or proposed for street
improvements shall not be counted to satisfy these minimum requirements. Every
corner and through lot shall be large enough to permit compliance with the
district's front setback requirements on every side of the lot that faces a
street. All lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots to avoid the creation
of unbuildable parcels.
B. Access And Relationship To Street: Land shall be subdivided in such a way
that each lot abuts a street meeting the requirements of Section
11-3-5 of this Chapter. All side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
street right-of-way lines or radial to curved street right-of-way lines except
where a deviation from this rule will provide a better street and lot design.
(Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-4: PERMANENT REFERENCE MONUMENTS:
A. Materials, Size, And Location:
1. Concrete cylinders or rectangular prisms, not less than four inches (4") in
diameter or square and forty two inches (42") long, shall be set at the extreme
corners of subdivisions.
2. Steel pins, not less than one-half inch (1/2") in diameter and thirty inches
(30") long, with a survey marker cap showing the land surveyor's registration
number, shall be set at locations in accordance with the Plat Act.
3. The intersection of two (2) right-of-way lines at corner lots shall
terminate at a tangent to a curve having a minimum radius of fifteen feet
(15').
B. Resetting Monuments: Any monuments disturbed by construction or grading
shall be reset. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-5: STREET DESIGN STANDARDS:
All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed street
system indicated in the Municipal Comprehensive Plan and Official Map, and
shall meet the specifications set forth in tabular form below. For divided
boulevards, the developer shall submit an acceptable plan for maintenance to
the City Planning Commission.
   TABLE OF STREET DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
Type Of Permitted Required     Required    Maximum/
Street  On-Street Right Of Way Pavement    Minimum
        Parking                Width (B-B) Grades
Type Of             Permitted  Required     Required     Maximum/
Street              On-Street  Right Of Way Pavement     Minimum
                    Parking                 Width (B-B)  Grades
Alley               None       20 ft.       18 ft.       Maximum: 10%
                                                         Minimum: 0.5%
Marginal Access     None       50 ft.       20 ft.       Maximum: 10%
                                                         Minimum: 0.5%
Local Street        One side   50 ft.       27 ft.       Maximum: 10%
                    Two side   50 ft.       31 ft.       Minimum: 0.5%
Collectors          Both sides 60 ft.       40 ft.       Maximum: 10%
                                                         Minimum: 0.5%
Minor Arterials     None       80 ft.       11 ft. lanes Maximum: 5%
                                                         Minimum: 0.5%
Principal Arterials None       100 ft.      12 ft. lanes Maximum: 5%
                                                         Minimum: 0.5%
Divided Boulevard   None       70 ft.       14 ft.       Maximum: 10%
                                                         Minimum: 0.5%
A. Horizontal Curvatures: All changes in horizontal alignment shall be
conducted with a horizontal curve with the following minimum center line
radius, designated "R":
1. For principal, minor and collector streets (design speed = 35 mph), R shall
equal five hundred feet (500');
2. For local streets (design speed = 30 mph), R shall equal one hundred twenty
five feet (125'); and
3. For alleys, R shall equal one hundred feet (100').
B. Through Traffic Discouraged: Marginal access and local streets shall be laid
out so as to discourage use by through traffic. The rigid rectangular gridiron
street pattern should be avoided, and the use of curvilinear streets, cul-de-
sacs, or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged to effect a more desirable street
layout.
C. Limited Access To Arterials: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may recommend to
the City Council that access to said arterial may be limited by one of the
following means:
1. The subdivision of lots so that they back onto the arterial street and front
onto a parallel local street (double frontage lots), coupled with the
installation of screening in a reserve (access-restricting) strip along the
rear lot lines of such lots;
2. A series of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and
generally at right angles to the arterial street; or
3. A frontage road separated from the arterial street by a planting strip, but
having access thereto at suitable points.
D. Dead-End Streets:
1. Temporary Stub Streets: Streets shall be so arranged to provide for the
continuation of streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is
necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire and police
protection, and efficient provision of utilities, and where such continuation
comports with the Municipal Comprehensive Plan. If the adjacent property is
owned by the developer (under the same ownership) and undeveloped and the
street must dead-end temporarily, the right of way shall be extended to the
property line, and no strip that would prevent connections with future streets
shall be reserved. A temporary turnaround shall be provided at the terminus of
any temporary dead-end street. If the adjacent property is under another
ownership there should be a permanent dead-end.
2. Permanent Dead-End Streets: Cul-de-sacs shall have a maximum length of seven
hundred fifty feet (750'). A cul-de-sac turnaround, having a minimum right of
way diameter of ninety eight feet (98'), a minimum pavement return radius of
twenty five feet (25'), and a pavement diameter of seventy five feet (75'),
shall be provided at the end of every permanent dead-end street.
E. Alleys: Alleys shall be prohibited in single-family residence districts.
Alleys may be required in multiple-family districts and in commercial/
industrial districts unless other adequate provisions for service access are
made. Adequate vehicular turnaround space shall be provided at the terminus of
any dead-end alley.
F. Intersections:
1. Only Two Streets: Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one
point.
2. Right Angles: Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles; in no case shall two (2) streets intersect at an
angle of less that eighty degrees (80o) or more than one hundred degrees
(100o). An oblique street shall be curved approaching an intersection and shall
be approximately at right angles with said intersection for at least one
hundred feet (100') therefrom.
3. Alignment: Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street
shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the
opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than
one hundred twenty five feet (125') shall not be permitted, except where the
intersected street has divided lanes without median breaks at either
intersection. Intersections involving collector or arterial streets shall be at
least eight hundred feet (800') apart.
4. Curb Radii: To permit safe vehicular movement at corners, the minimum curb
radius at the intersection of two (2) streets shall be fifteen feet (15') where
both streets are marginal access or local and at other intersections, not less
than twenty five feet (25').
5. Grade: Intersections shall be designed with a minimum grade of 0.5%. In
hilly terrain, an area having not greater than a two percent (2%) slope for a
distance of sixty feet (60') from the nearest right-of-way line of the
intersecting street shall be provided at the approach to an intersection.
6. Cross-Slope: The cross-slopes of all streets, including intersections, shall
not exceed three percent (3%).
7. Adequate Sight Lines: Where any street intersection will involve earth banks
or existing vegetation, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation
(including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right of way to
the extent necessary to provide adequate sight distance in accordance with the
following chart:
      30 mph   130 feet each way from intersection
      35 mph   155 feet each way from intersection
For design speeds exceeding thirty five miles per hour (35 mph), sight distance
will be determined based upon AASHTO criteria.
G. Reverse Curves: A tangent at least fifty feet (50') long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on local streets and one hundred feet (100') long on
collector streets.
H. Road Dedications And Reservations And Improvements To Existing Streets:
1. New Perimeter Streets: Street systems in new subdivisions shall be laid out
so as to eliminate or avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing half-
street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other half of the street shall be
improved and dedicated by the subdivider. The Planning Commission may authorize
a new perimeter street where the subdivider improves and dedicates the entire
required street right-of-way width within his own subdivision boundaries.
2. Existing Roads: Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road or when
the Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, or zoning setback regulations indicate
plans for realignment or widening a road that would require use of some of the
land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be required to improve and
dedicate at his expense such areas for widening or realignment of such roads as
are specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision and to reserve
for public use any portion of the right of way determined not to be
specifically and uniquely attributable to his subdivision.
3. Excess Right Of Way: Right of way in excess of the standards set forth in
the Table of Street Design Specifications shall be required to be dedicated
when:
a. Due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth
slopes; or
b. Due to the location of railroad tracks, additional width is needed to
construct overpasses, underpasses, and approaches thereto.
4. "Specifically And Uniquely Attributable" Defined: For purposes of this
Section, the phrase "specifically and uniquely attributable" shall mean as a
minimum that areas currently zoned or to be zoned single-family for residential
uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require marginal access, local, or
collector streets, depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be
zoned for multi-family residential uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require
local, boulevard, collector, minor arterial, or principal arterial streets,
depending on density; that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for commercial
uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require local, collector, minor arterial,
or principal arterial streets, depending on whether same is a neighborhood,
community, or regional area; and that areas currently zoned or to be zoned for
industrial uses in the Comprehensive Plan shall require collector, minor
arterial, or principal arterial streets, depending on the size of the
industrial area. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-6: STREET IMPROVEMENTS STANDARDS:
All new streets shall be graded, curbed, and surfaced in accordance with the
standards of Illinois Department of Transportation and the provisions of the
subsections below.
A. Curb And Gutter: All streets shall be bounded by concrete curbs and gutters.
Definition of a rollover curb is more fully explained in diagram form by
Appendix 1 of this Section.
B. Pavement: All streets and alleys shall be paved in accordance with the
minimum standards as indicated below:
1. Alleys: Six inch (6") thick nonreinforced concrete.
2. Marginal Access, Local:
a. Six inch (6") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete pavement; or
b. Seven inch (7") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
c. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting ACO
                                    specifications.
3. Collector, Minor Arterial:
a. Seven inch (7") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
b. Eight inch (8") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
c. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting ACO
                                   specifications.
4. Principal Arterial:
a. Eight inch (8") thick reinforced Portland cement concrete; or
b. Nine inch (9") thick nonreinforced Portland cement concrete; or
c. Asphaltic concrete construction meeting Department of Transportation
specifications and satisfactorily meeting ACO                              
specifications.
The above thickness requirements shall be increased if traffic volume, subgrade
or other conditions show justifications for increased thickness. A subbase or
base shall be constructed in accordance with the appropriate articles of the
standard specifications when required by the ACO
                                . A subbase or base with an underdrain system
may be required in areas where a combination or proposed street grade and soil
type may lead to subgrade erosion and pavement undermining. The City may
require additional engineering documentation to establish that the above
standards are appropriate for the reasons stated in this paragraph.
Pavements shall be constructed in accordance with these standard specifications
and in conformity with the lines, dimensions and grades shown on the plans and
to the form and dimensions shown on the detail drawings included with and being
part of these specifications.
   APPENDIX 1
(Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-7: BLOCKS:
A. Block Width: Blocks shall be sufficiently wide to accommodate two (2) tiers
of lots having the minimum depth required by the zoning district regulations;
provided, that this requirement may be waived in blocks adjacent to local
collector or collector streets, railroads, or watercourses.
B. Block Length: No block shall be longer than one thousand feet (1,000') nor
shorter than three hundred feet (300'). (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-8: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets. Sidewalks shall be
installed at the time the lot is developed or prior to issuance of the
occupancy permit.
A. Sidewalk Construction Standards:
1. Relationship To Curb: Sidewalks shall be located one foot (1') inside the
right-of-way line or on a line to be given by the City Engineer when it is
impossible or not feasible to build or construct the same as aforesaid.
2. Width: Sidewalks shall be at least four feet (4') wide.
3. Thickness Of Concrete: All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete at
least four inches (4") thick, except that across driveways the thickness shall
be increased to six inches (6").
4. Grade: No sidewalk shall be constructed at a grade steeper than ten percent
(10%).
5. Ramps At Intersections: Curbs shall be cut and sidewalks shall be ramped at
all intersections so as to enhance the mobility of handicapped individuals.
Ramps shall equal or exceed the standards of the Illinois Capital Development
Board. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-9: UTILITIES:
All utilities provided as new installations within a subdivision shall be
placed in the right of way or in easements, and shall be provided underground,
unless an exception or exemption has been granted.
A. Responsibility: For all major subdivisions, the subdivider shall make the
necessary arrangements with the appropriate utility companies for the proper
installation of utilities to assure that all lots have adequate gas,
electrical, and communications service.
B. Requirements: All underground electric distribution circuits installed by
the utility company within the City shall be installed in accordance with the
Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electric Supply and
Communication Lines, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards,
and General Order No. 160, Rules for Construction of Electric Power and
Communication Lines, Illinois Commerce Commission.
C. Enforcement: The Building Inspector shall not issue any occupancy permits
until all utilities have been installed in the subdivision.
D. Exceptions: The requirements for underground utilities shall not apply in
the following instances:
1. Principal electric distribution feeder circuits and electric transmission
circuits shall not be required to be installed underground.
2. Any service which is considered by the utility company to be unfeasible for
undergrounding, due to high voltage or inordinately high and unjustified cost,
may be provided overhead when authorized by the City Council.
3. When topographic or soil conditions cause the cost of undergrounding to be
extremely and unjustifiably high, services may be provided overhead when
authorized by the City Council.
4. When a subdivision is developed adjacent to or abutting an existing
development in which the primary feeder lines have been installed overhead, the
new subdivision may use the overhead lines with the following provisions:
a. The service lines to the buildings in the new subdivision shall be installed
underground.
b. All additional necessary feeder lines shall be installed underground.
5. When a building is constructed on a single unoccupied lot in an area which
is fully developed with overhead electric and communication service, the
building may use the overhead service line if it completes the development of
the area.
6. Utilities provided as new installations to lots for industrial purposes may
be provided overhead.
E. Exemptions: The following specific facilities shall be exempt from the
requirements of this Title:
1. Poles used exclusively for street lighting.
2. Poles, overhead lines, and associated overhead structures, authorized by the
City Council, crossing or entering any portion of a district from which
overhead wires have been prohibited, and originating in an area in which
overhead wires are allowed.
3. Overhead lines attached to the exterior of a building by means of a bracket
or similar device, and extending from one location on the building to another
on the same building, or to an adjacent building without crossing any public
street or right of way.
4. Radio antenna and associated structures and equipment used for furnishing
communication service.
5. Service terminals and necessary pad-mounted electric equipment installed
aboveground, used to distribute communication and electric service in
underground systems. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-10: WATER FACILITIES:
A. Water Distribution System: Every subdivision shall be provided with a
complete water distribution system adequate to serve all lots within the
subdivision. The water distribution system shall be designed according to
standard specifications and shall be approved by the ACO
                              and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
Whenever a water main is extended it shall be extended across the entire
frontage of the property being subdivided and it shall be connected to any
other mains which front on or are adjacent to the subdivision to provide for
looping of the water system.
B. Fire Flow Requirements: The engineer for the subdivider shall calculate the
expected fire flow requirements within the subdivision based upon the intended
zoning and expected land use in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code, latest
adopted edition. Also taken into consideration when determining the size of
pipe to be installed shall be the anticipated demand for water by downstream
properties based on anticipated development of such properties based on the
Comprehensive Plan for such expansion areas.
C. Service Connections: Individual service connections within single-family
residential subdivisions shall be extended from the main to within one foot
(1') of the lot line of each lot with an approved corporation and curb box and
clearly marked with a fence post or similar material to facilitate their
locations.
D. Fire Flow Tests: Upon written request to the ACO                       , the
City will perform fire flow tests on the existing water mains to be extended
and provide the data to the subdivider's engineer.
E. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants of the type approved by the ACO
                          shall be installed according to standard engineering
practices and shall be placed at intervals of not more than four hundred feet
(400') for residential, and not more than the maximum specified for commercial
and industrial use, in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code. (Ord. 99-01, 1-
25-1999)
11-3-11: SANITARY SEWERS:
All proposed sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the regulations of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and must be approved by the ACO.
A. When Public System Available:
1. Whenever the subdivision any point of which is within three hundred feet
(300') of an existing publicly owned sewer main or other collection system and
who have the right to extend public sewer mains or private sewer laterals from
said property to said existing publicly owned sewer main or other collection
system either by way of street, alley, public way, public easement, or private
easement the subdivider shall construct sewer mains, where technically
feasible, which shall be connected to such public sewer and shall provide sewer
to all lots within the subdivision.
2. All sewer main construction shall be done according to standard engineering
practices.
3. Whenever a sanitary sewer system is extended it shall be extended across the
entire frontage or frontages of the property to be improved by the extension
unless the City has determined, because of land contours or the presence of
other mains, that no other property can be technically or needs to be served by
such an extension.
B. Interim Disposal Systems: Where a sanitary sewer cannot be extended as
required by subsection A3 of this Section, the developer shall construct a
sanitary sewer system to serve all lots within the subdivision and shall
provide sewage treatment by means of an approved sewage treatment plant which
shall be operated and maintained by the developer until such time as the system
can be connected to the publicly owned system. Said system shall be temporarily
capped. Where the land covered by the preliminary plat contains not more than
ten (10) lots, individual sewage disposal systems may be used and must be
installed according to applicable laws and regulations of the appropriate
approving agency. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-12: EASEMENTS:
A. Utility Easements: Easements at least ten feet (10') wide shall be provided
for public and private utilities along the front right-of-way lines of the
public streets. Easements located elsewhere shall be at least twenty feet (20')
wide and if along lot lines, they shall be centered on the lot lines.
B. Drainage Easements: Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall be
established along any natural drainage channel and in any other locations where
necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm water from streets, alleys,
and all other portions of the subdivision. The precise location and minimum
widths of said easements shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer. (Ord.
99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-13: DRAINAGE AND STORM SEWERS:
A. Design Criteria: The Planning Commission shall not recommend the approval of
plat unless, the appropriate City official (ACO)
                                determines that the proposed provisions for
storm water drainage are adequate within boundaries of the subdivision.
Drainage improvements in the subdivision shall be coordinated with existing and
planned drainage improvements elsewhere so as to form an integrated City
system. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and independent of
the sanitary sewer system and shall meet the following design criteria:
1. Principal And Minor Arterial Streets:
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center twenty feet (20') of
the pavement.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
2. Collector Streets:
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not inundate the center ten feet (10') of
the pavement.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
3. Local Streets:
a. Flow from a 10-year storm shall not top the curb.
b. Flow from a 50-year storm shall be carried without damage to any building.
B. Catch Basins Or Inlets: Catch basins or inlets, if required, shall be
constructed so that the majority of surface water shall be intercepted before
reaching the intersection, and not carried for a distance of more than four
hundred feet (400') of the pavement.
C. Accommodation Of Upstream Drainage Areas: A culvert or other drainage
facility large enough to accommodate potential runoff from the entire drainage
area upstream from the proposed subdivision shall be provided in accordance
with the City's standard specifications. Potential runoff shall be determined
on the basis of the maximum development of the upstream area that is permitted
or to be permitted under the Comprehensive Plan.
D. Areas Subject To Flooding: Whenever a plat is submitted for an area that is
subject to flooding, the City Council may require appropriate protective
measures, including the filling of the flood-prone area to a level equal to the
regulatory flood elevation, if any. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-14: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL:
In the development of any subdivision, the following erosion and sedimentation
control regulation shall be observed:
A. The developer shall protect the development site from soil erosion and shall
protect downstream property from sedimentation deposits during the construction
of the subdivision. Practices contained in "Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" shall be employed in the
preparation of an erosion and sedimentation control plan which shall be
approved by the City Engineer prior to any earth disturbing activity taking
place. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-3-15: DEDICATIONS FOR PUBLIC USE:
The City Council may require the developer to dedicate (i.e., to transfer
without compensation) to the City or other appropriate governmental entity
suitable parcel(s) of land within the subdivision for public purposes provided
such facilities are otherwise required by this Title. Any such dedicated area
shall be shown on the final plat.
A. Reservations For Public Use: Besides requiring the developer to dedicate
parcels for public purposes, the City Council may require that he reserve land
for parks, playgrounds, schools, or other public purposes in locations
designated in the City's Comprehensive Plan. Since public acquisition of
reserved land requires compensation, it is not essential that the need for such
land be uniquely and specifically attributable to the subdivision 1
.
1. Adopted: There is hereby adopted an Official Map dated
                          , which shall be applicable to all land situated
within the City, and shall also be applicable to contiguous territory within
one and one-half (11/2) miles from the corporate limits of the City and not
included within the corporate limits of any other municipality. The Official
Map shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and is made part of this
Title by reference.
2. Planned Public Improvements To Be Shown On Map: The Official Map may show
indication of sites for planned public facilities. Public facility sites which
may be indicated on the Official Map may include, but are not limited to: sites
for new trafficways or widening of existing trafficways; school sites;
recreational sites; public building sites; and sites for future storm drainage,
electrical or other public service or utility easements.
3. Availability Of Sites For Planned Public Improvements:
a. Whenever the Official Map indicates the necessity for providing a site for a
planned public facility, the Council may require that the site for the public
use be designated on the subdivision plat before granting approval to such
plat; and, furthermore, that the site be held for that specific public use for
a period of one year from the date of approval of the final plat. When such
designation has been required, the Council shall notify the responsible public
agency in writing of the designation within ten (10) days.
b. Whenever a site for public use, shown on the Official Map, has been required
to be indicated on a subdivision plat, the responsible agency having
jurisdiction of such use shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or
commence proceedings to acquire the land by condemnation within one year from
date of final approval of the plat; and, if it does not do so within such
period of one year, the land so designated may then be used by the owners in
any other manner consistent with this Chapter, the Zoning Ordinance, or any
other provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City.
4. Amendments Or Additions To The Official Map: Amendments to the Official Map,
including the indication of additional public sites to be shown on the map,
shall be considered amendments to this Title and therefore shall be as
specified in this Title for amendments to this Title. Any public agency
requesting the establishment of the Official Map of a future public site or
easement which is not included in the Comprehensive Plan, shall indicate to the
Plan Commission the need for the site in the particular location specified. The
Plan Commission, before making a favorable recommendation for the inclusion on
the Official Map of such site by the Council, shall find that this public site
location is determined to be necessary to provide public service consistent
with the Comprehensive Plan of the community and shall so indicate in its
minutes. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
CHAPTER 4
PLATS AND PLANS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Prefiling Conference
11-4-2: Preliminary Plats
11-4-3: Improvement Plans
11-4-4: Assurance For Completion Of Required Improvements
11-4-5: Final Plats
11-4-6: Maintenance Of Improvements
11-4-1: PREFILING CONFERENCE:
Prior to the submission of the initial plat, a prefiling conference may be held
between the developer and appropriate City staff. The developer shall present a
concept sketch of the proposed development. City staff shall use a standardized
checklist to review the proposed development for conformance to the Subdivision
Ordinance. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLATS:
Except as specifically provided below, every person who proposes to subdivide
any land located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City shall file six
(6) copies of the preliminary plat of said subdivision with the ACO
                          at least three (3) weeks prior to a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.
He shall also file one copy of the preliminary plat and supporting data with
the appropriate Soil and Water Conservation District. Said District shall have
not more than thirty (30) days to submit any comments it might wish to make to
the Planning Commission 1
.
Whenever a large tract is to be developed in stages and only a portion of that
tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a preliminary plat of the
entire tract shall be submitted.
All preliminary plats shall be reviewed and acted upon in accordance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-8 and the provisions of the subsections
below.
Exception: A preliminary plat shall not be required for minor subdivisions; or
land that is specifically exempted from the Illinois Plat Act as now or
hereafter amended 2
.
A. Information Required: Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land
surveyor registered in Illinois at a scale of one hundred feet (100') or less
to the inch provided the resultant drawing does not exceed thirty six inches by
twenty four inches (36" x 24"). Said preliminary plat, together with the
supporting data, shall provide all of the following information:
1. Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider (if not owner), and registered
land surveyor;
2. Proposed name of the subdivision and all adjoining subdivisions;
3. Zoning district classification of the tract to be subdivided and proposed
setbacks;
4. North arrow, graphic scale, and date of map;
5. Dimensions of the tract, and its gross area;
6. Topography of the tract to be subdivided as indicated by two foot (2')
contour data for land having slopes of zero to four percent (0 to 4%), five
foot (5') contour data for land having slopes between four and twelve percent
(4 and 12%), and ten foot (10') contour data for land having slopes of twelve
percent (12%) or more;
7. Locations of such features as bodies of water, ponding areas, natural
drainageways, railroads, cemeteries, bridges, parks, schools, buildings, areas
subject to flooding, etc.;
8. Locations and right-of-way widths of all existing and proposed streets and
alleys;
9. Locations, widths, and purposes of all existing and proposed easements;
10. All proposed deed restrictions and covenants;
11. Location and size of existing and proposed sanitary and storm sewers, water
mains, and any appurtenances thereto;
12. Locations, types, and approximate sizes of all other existing and proposed
utilities;
13. Locations, dimensions, and areas of all parcels to be reserved or dedicated
for schools, parks/playgrounds, and other public purposes;
14. Locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots within
the subdivision numbered sequentially;
15. For all contiguous holdings of the owner; including land owned by the same
person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association
or owned by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or
unincorporated associations in which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or a
member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership,
entity, or unincorporated association; with an indication of the portion
proposed for subdivision: an affidavit of ownership, which shall include the
dates the respective holdings of land were acquired, together with the book and
page of each conveyance to the present owner as recorded in the County Recorder
of Deeds' office or other official records; the name and address and telephone
number of the legal owner of the property, the subdivider, if different from
the legal owner, the land surveyor and engineer, and the agents of any of these
persons; the name, address and telephone number of the contract owner, if any,
of the property and the date the contract of sale was executed; and, if any
corporations are involved, a complete list of all directors, officers, and
stockholders owning more than five percent (5%) of any class of stock of each
corporation; and, if a trust is involved, a complete list of the names of the
trustees, and the names and addresses and telephone numbers of all
beneficiaries of the trust;
16. The location by township, range, section, or by other legal description;
17. A list of requested variances and justifications.
B. Utility Company Notification: It is the subdivider's responsibility to
notify the appropriate public utilities. Proof of notification shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat to the City for City approval.
C. Planning Commission Action: The Planning Commission shall either recommend
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the application for the
preliminary plat within ninety (90) days from the date of said application or
the filing of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is
later, unless the Planning Commission and the subdivider mutually agree to
extend this time limit 3
. If the Planning Commission recommends disapproval of the preliminary plat,
they shall furnish to the applicant within the ninety (90) day period a written
statement specifying the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to
this Title and/or the Official Map. If the Planning Commission recommends
approval of the preliminary plat, it shall promptly so inform the City Council.
D. Appeals Process: If the preliminary plat is not approved, the ACO
                               shall write "Not Approved" and the date of the
Planning Commission's action on the prints, and shall transmit to the
subdivider one print with a letter stating the reasons for the disapproval. The
subdivider may transmit an amended plat to the Planning Commission for
consideration.
If the subdivider is not satisfied with the decision of the Planning Commission
on the preliminary plat, then the subdivider may appeal the decision to the
City Council. An appeal must be made by letter addressed to the Mayor and City
Council, stating the reasons for the appeal. Said letter must be received by
the ACO                         no less than ten (10) days following the date
of the Planning Commission's decision. The letter of appeal shall be placed on
the next regular City Council meeting agenda after it is received by the ACO
                         . The ACO                               shall also
provide to the City Council the preliminary plat, the Planning Commission's
meeting minutes pertaining to the plat, and the reports and recommendations
made to the Planning Commission by the ACO                         . The City
Council shall have thirty (30) days from the time the appeal is first placed on
its agenda either to: reaffirm the Planning Commission's decision on the
preliminary plat; to approve the preliminary plat as submitted by the
subdivider; or to approve the preliminary plat with modifications.
E. Action By The City Council: If the Planning Commission has recommended
approval of a preliminary plat, the City Council, by resolution, shall either
accept or reject said plat within thirty (30) days after their next regularly
scheduled meeting following the Planning Commission's action. If the City
Council rejects the preliminary plat, their resolution shall specify the
aspects in which the plat fails to comply with this Title. The City Clerk shall
attach a certified copy of the Council's resolution of approval or disapproval
to the preliminary plat. One copy of the resolution and plat shall be retained
by the Clerk, one copy shall be filed with the ACO                      , and
one copy shall be given to the subdivider. City Council approval shall not
qualify a preliminary plat for recording. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 70 ILCS 405/22.02A.
2 2. 765 ILCS 205/1.
3 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
11-4-3: IMPROVEMENT PLANS:
After the City Council has approved the preliminary plat, but prior to
submission of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish four (4) copies of
the plans and specifications for all improvements to be installed within or in
conjunction with the proposed subdivision to the ACO
                             for review. These plans and specifications shall
be signed and sealed by the registered professional engineer responsible for
their preparation. Until the ACO                             certifies in
writing that the proposed improvements conform to generally accepted
engineering practices and to the standards imposed in this Title: the ACO
                           shall not issue any permit to allow construction of
said improvements; and the City Council shall not act upon the application for
final plat approval.
A. Information Required: Improvement plans shall consist of black or blue line
prints not larger than thirty six inches by twenty four inches (36" x 24").
These plans and the related specifications shall provide all of the following
information:
1. Topography of the tract, both before and after development at the same scale
as required in the preliminary plat;
2. Existing and proposed elevations along the center lines of all streets;
3. Radii of all curves and lengths of tangents on all streets;
4. Locations and typical cross section of street pavements including curbs/
gutters and catch basins;
5. Locations and typical cross section of sidewalks and driveway aprons;
6. Locations, sizes, and invert elevations of all existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and fire hydrants, showing connections to any
existing or proposed utility systems;
7. Locations and sizes of all water, gas, electric, and other utilities;
8. Locate area(s) for removal of trees six inches (6") or larger;
9. All proposed measures to control erosion and sedimentation;
10. High water elevations of all lakes/streams adjoining or within the tract;
and
11. Such other information as the ACO                          may reasonably
require to perform his duties under this Section.
B. Inspections Required: The subdivider/developer shall notify the ACO
                            of both the start and completion of construction of
approved improvements.
1. The ACO                            shall inspect said improvements while
they are under construction. If he determines that they are being built in
violation of this Title, he shall promptly notify the Administrator who, in
turn, shall issue a stop order. All public improvements proposed to be made
under the provisions of this Chapter shall be inspected during the course of
construction by the ACO                              or a duly designated
deputy selected and retained by the subdivider and approved by the City. All
fees and costs connected with such inspection and in reviewing the plan and
specifications for such improvements shall be paid by the subdivider. The fees
and cost shall be set at the prevailing rate.
2. In addition to the detailed requirements listed below, the inspector shall
maintain a daily diary in a standard format acceptable to the ACO
                        . Copies of the daily diary entries shall be provided
to the ACO                            on a weekly basis during construction.
a. Content: The daily entries shall include at least the following information:
(1) Weather conditions.
(2) Site conditions.
(3) Contractor's working hours.
(4) Inspector's hours on the site.
(5) An explanation of the actual work performed by the contractor that day.
(6) Specific information about material tests taken.
(7) Description of any problems.
b. Purpose: The purpose of the diary is to provide backup information for the
developer's engineer and the ACO                           to recommend
acceptance of the improvements by the City Council and provide actual
construction records of any problems that may develop.
c. Format: The general format of the diary must be approved by the ACO
                       before construction begins.
3. The inspector shall make and document the following inspections:
a. Storm And Sanitary Sewer And Water Main Improvements:
(1) Inspect all materials and documents pertinent items such as pipe
manufacturer, class, and size.
(2) Reject any defective material and ensure that it is not used on the job.
(3) Observe the actual pipe laying operation to ensure that all joints are
properly made, the pipes are true to line and grade, and the bedding and
backfill are done according to the specifications.
(4) Document the depth and type of bedding, trench conditions, location of all
service laterals, backfilling, and location of all utilities installed and
encountered. Location measurements shall be of the accuracy and type required
by the ACO                            .
(5) Observe and document all final acceptance testing required by the
specifications.
b. Street Improvements:
(1) Perform and document subgrade, subbase, base, and embankment compaction
tests.
(2) Inspect the alignment and condition of the paving forms.
   (A) Check and document subgrade depth checks.
   (B) Check and document the paving machine adjustments.
(3) Furnish the asphalt or PC concrete mix design to the ACO
                       for approval prior to connecting paving operations.
(4) Inspect all concrete pours.
   (A) Perform and document an appropriate number of air content and slump
measurements.
   (B) Cast compression cylinders or beams and document the results of the
tests.
(5) Inspect the placement of all asphalts.
   (A) Perform and record asphalt compaction tests.
   (B) Perform at least one asphalt extraction test and one sieve analysis from
an asphalt sample taken on the job site.
4. The ACO                            shall also inspect required improvements
upon their completion. The City shall not accept any improvement until the
Municipal Engineer has certified that it complies with this Title.
C. Filing "As Built" Records: The improvements will not be recommended for
acceptance until the following is provided for the ACO
                                 :
1. Copies of all daily diary entries.
2. Copies of all material test results.
3. Detailed reproducible cloth or polyester reproducible "as- built"
improvements construction plans of all public improvements.
4. Certification by the developer's engineer that all construction was
accomplished within reasonably close conformance to the plans and
specifications, and that the "as-built" plans accurately reflect actual field
conditions.
5. A labor and material payment and maintenance bond posted prior to
construction by the contractor of a subdivider for the installation of all
public improvements, using forms provided by the ACO                         .
6. Permanent easements or agreements granted to the City for all public
improvements that are not constructed in dedicated right of way, using forms
provided by the ACO                        .
7. Accurate triangular measurements for sewer and water laterals to permanent
items, e.g., fire hydrants or manholes. The sewer and water services shall be
marked with a four inch by four inch (4" x 4") marking, that stands five or six
feet (5 or 6') tall including a curb notch.
D. Privately Developed And Operated Facilities: Where the subdivision is to
contain sewers, sewage treatment plants, water supply systems, park areas, or
other physical facilities which will not be maintained by existing public
agencies, provision should be made by trust agreement, which is a part of the
deed restrictions and which is acceptable to the proper public agencies, for
jurisdiction over the continuous maintenance, supervision, operation and
reconstruction of such facilities by the lot owners in the subdivision. (Ord.
99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-4-4: ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS:
A. Final Plat Approval: The City Council shall not approve any final plat (and,
hence, said final plat shall not be entitled to recording) until:
1. All improvements required in the approved improvements plan have been
completed by the subdivider/developer at his expense, inspected by the ACO
                        , and dedicated to the City, or other appropriate
entity; or
2. In accordance with the subsections below, the subdivider/developer has
provided the City with legal assurance to guarantee the satisfactory completion
and dedication of all required improvements; or
3. Necessary title assurances have been given.
B. Forms Of Assurance: The required legal assurance may be a performance bond,
an escrow deposit or a letter of credit. Every performance bond shall be
approved as to form by the City Attorney, and posted with the City Clerk. Any
funds held in escrow shall be deposited with an approved escrow agent.
C. Amount Of Bond Or Deposit: The amount of the legal assurance shall be equal
to the ACO's                        estimate of the costs of constructing the
uncompleted portion of the required improvements plus all required inspection
fees. Any escrow deposit may be in the form of:
1. An irrevocable letter of credit or commitment from a lending institution
guaranteeing to the City the availability of the escrow funds from time to time
upon demand; or
2. Interest bearing accounts with a financial institution authorized to serve
as an escrow agent.
D. Eligible Sureties: No person shall be eligible to act as surety unless he
has been approved by the State to act as a surety on public works improvements.
E. Term Of Assurance, Extension: The initial term of any performance bond or
escrow agreement shall not exceed two (2) years. If all the required
improvements have not been completed by the end of the two (2) year period, the
ACO                             , with the advice and consent of the City
Council may extend said bond/escrow agreement for one year only.
F. Release Of Bond/Escrow Deposit:
1. The ACO                          may release up to ninety percent (90%) of
the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit upon receipt of written
authorization from the Municipal Engineer. The amount which the Municipal
Engineer authorizes to be released shall be equal to the value of improvements
actually completed in accordance with approved plans.
2. The balance of the amount of the performance bond/escrow deposit shall not
be released until:
a. The Municipal Engineer has certified to the ACO                   in writing
that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; and
b. Said improvements and corresponding right of way have been accepted by and
dedicated to the City or other appropriate entity.
G. Failure To Complete Improvements: If all the required improvements have not
been completed by the end of the two (2) year period (or 3 year period, in the
case of an extension), the ACO                            , with the assistance
of the City Attorney, may:
1. Require the surety to perform on the bond, and to pay to the City an equal
amount to the cost of completing the required improvements (as estimated by the
Municipal Engineer) or the amount of the bond not theretofore released,
whichever is less; or
2. Order the escrow agent to retain all escrowed funds needed to complete the
required improvements, and to return the balance (if any) of such funds to the
subdivider/developer. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-4-5: FINAL PLATS:
The Henry County Recorder of Deeds shall not record any final plat of a
subdivision located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the City until said
final plat has been approved by the City Council. The City Council shall not
approve any final plat unless they determine that it is in compliance with all
pertinent requirements of this Title including those set forth in the
subsections below.
A. Filing, Time Limits: The subdivider of every subdivision, who desires final
plat approval shall file six (6) black or blue line prints of the final plat
and supporting data with ACO                     not later than one year after
preliminary plat approval has been granted.
B. Information Required: Every final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor
authorized to practice land surveying in the State on new linen tracing cloth-
or polyester-based film with waterproof black ink at a scale not greater than
one hundred feet equals one inch (100' = 1"), provided that the resultant
drawing shall not be less than 81/2 x 14 and shall not exceed twenty four by
thirty six inches (24 x 36") square. The final plat and supporting data shall
portray/provide all of the following information:
1. North arrow, graphic scale, and data;
2. Name of subdivider and subdivision;
3. Accurate metes and bounds or other adequate legal description of the tract
tied to section or one-fourth (1/4) section corner;
4. Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles which
provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not more
than one foot in fifteen thousand feet (1' in 15,000') and provide a copy of
the closure calculations;
5. Reference to recorded plats of adjoining platted land by record name, plat
book and page number;
6. Accurate locations of all existing streets intersecting the boundaries of
the subdivision;
7. Right-of-way lines of all streets, other rights of way, easements, areas to
be reserved, and lot lines with accurate dimensions, angles, or bearings and
curve data, including radii, arcs or chords, points of tangency, central
angles, and accompanying legal descriptions;
8. Name and right-of-way width of every proposed street;
9. Location, width and purpose of any existing or proposed easement;
10. Number of each lot, lot dimensions, and (in a separate list) lot areas;
11. Purpose(s) for which sites, other than private lots, are reserved;
12. Building or setback lines with accurate dimensions;
13. Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become covenants
in the deeds of lots;
14. The names of all legal owners and other parties with an interest, whether
recorded or not, in the property being subdivided, together with formal
irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government
uses, utilities, parks, and easements, signed by all parties of interest or
their authorized agents, in a form approved by the City Attorney, if the plat
is proposed for final approval without improvements in place and accepted with
a deed of dedication to the public in fee simple absolute unless otherwise
called for on the plat of such lands; and with a commitment for title insurance
policy or title opinion from a licensed attorney showing that those signing the
plat are necessary and sufficient to create the subdivision and, prior to
signing the plat, a title policy for the local government in the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for any lands or interests to be dedicated to the
public; and
15. Monument identification.
16. Notification approval of easements by appropriate utilities. This approval
will not be noted in the final plat.
C. Modifications And Exceptions: If the final plat is under one ownership and
is no more than five (5) lots, no formal Commission approval is needed and the
plans can go directly to the City Council unless there are new streets, other
public improvements, or easements of egress or ingress.
D. Certificates Required: Certificates 1
are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
E. Action By City Council: The City Council shall either approve or disapprove
the application for final plat approval by resolution within sixty (60) days
from the date of said application or the filing of the last item of required
supporting data, whichever date is later, unless the City Council and the
subdivider mutually agree to extend this time limit 2
. The City Council shall not approve any final plat unless:
1. The final plat substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat if
required; and
2. The final plat manifests substantial compliance with the design and
improvement standards of this Title and the Official Map; and
3. To the City Council's knowledge and belief, the final plat complies with all
pertinent statutory requirements; and
4. Either of the following has been met:
a. All required improvements have been completed, inspected, accepted, and
dedicated; or
b. The subdivider/developer has posted an acceptable form of assurance as
stated in subsection 11-4-4B of this Chapter.
If the City Council disapproves the final plat, their resolution shall specify
the aspects in which the plat fails to meet the above conditions for approval.
(Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8.
11-4-6: MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider/developer shall provide all the improvements in the subdivision
for a period of one year and provide a one year maintenance bond prior to
acceptance and dedication to the City or other appropriate entity. Said bond
shall be in the amount determined by the ACO                            to be
sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the required improvements
for a period of one year from the date of their acceptance and dedication. If
at any time during the one year period the improvements are found to be
defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider/developer's
expense. If the subdivider/developer refuses to pay such costs within ninety
(90) days after demand is made upon him by the ACO                          ,
the City shall use the maintenance bond to make the necessary repairs/
replacement. If the cost of repairs/replacement exceeds the bond amount, the
subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess. At the end of the one year
period, the maintenance bond shall be released. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
CHAPTER 5
OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Enforcement Officer, Duties
11-5-2: Amendments
11-5-3: Penalties
11-5-4: Repeal
11-5-5: Separability
11-5-1: ENFORCEMENT OFFICER, DUTIES:
The                              , referred to herein as the Administrator, is
hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this
Title. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-5-2: AMENDMENTS:
Amendments to this Title may be proposed by any member of the City Board, any
Planning Commission member, or any party in interest. Every amendment proposal
shall be filed on a prescribed form in the Administrator's office. The ACO
                     shall promptly transmit each proposal, together with any
comments or recommendations he may wish to make, to the City Planning
Commission for a public hearing.
A. Public Hearing, Notice: The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
on every amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said proposal is
submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify,
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the
time, date, and place of the hearing, and the nature of the proposed amendment
shall be given not more than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days before
the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
City.
B. Advisory Report, Action By City Board: Within a reasonable time after the
public hearing, the Planning Commission shall submit an advisory report to the
City Board. The City Board shall act on the proposed amendment at a regularly
scheduled meeting following submission of this report. Without another public
hearing, the City Board may either pass, modify or reject the proposed
amendment or may refer it back to the Planning Commission for further
consideration. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-5-3: PENALTIES:
A. Any person who is convicted of a violation of this Title shall be guilty of
a petty offense and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
B. Nothing contained in this Section shall prevent this Municipality from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this Title. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-5-4: REPEAL:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the extent
of such conflict hereby repealed. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
11-5-5: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Title is
for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this Title. The City Board hereby declares that it
would have adopted the Title and each section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase, or word thereof without incorporation in this Title of any such invalid
section, subsection, clause, phrase or word. (Ord. 99-01, 1-25-1999)
TITLE 12
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
ADOPTION
SECTION:
12-1-1: Adoption By Reference
12-1-1: ADOPTION BY REFERENCE:
Those ordinances pertaining to city zoning regulations, adopted by ordinance
03-5-02 dated April 22, 2002, and all amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by
reference, and are on file in the city. (Per correspondence dated 10-25-2005)
CHAPTER 2
SIGNS
SECTION:
12-2-1: General Provisions
12-2-2: Residence Districts
12-2-3: Nonresidential Districts
12-2-4: Agriculture District
12-2-5: Business Districts
12-2-6: Industrial Districts
12-2-7: Additional Regulations
12-2-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Interference With Traffic Control: No sign shall be erected or maintained at
any location where by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size,
shape or color it may impair, obstruct, obscure, or be confused with any
authorized traffic control sign, signal or device.
B. Flashing, Intermittent Or Animated Illumination: No off site sign or
billboard having flashing, intermittent, or animated illumination shall be
permitted within three hundred feet (300') of property in any residence
district unless such sign is not visible from such property.
C. Proximity To Residential District: No off site sign or billboard shall be
erected or placed within one hundred feet (100') of any residence district.
D. Temporary Signs: Advertising signs of no more than four (4) square feet in
area shall be permitted in any district provided they comply with subsections A
and B of this section. These signs shall be removed within five (5) days
following the event to which they pertain. (1997 Code)
12-2-2: RESIDENCE DISTRICTS:
In any residence district the following regulations shall apply:
A. Identification Sign: A nonilluminated identification sign not exceeding one
square foot in area shall be permitted for each dwelling unit. Such sign shall
indicate nothing other than name and/or address of the occupants.
B. Real Estate Signs: One temporary, nonilluminated, on site sign not to exceed
six (6) square feet in area for the sale of real estate, which sign shall be
removed within ten (10) days after sale of the real estate.
C. Announcements: Announcement of church, school, or other public buildings or
uses, where permitted bulletin boards or identification signs shall be
permitted, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area.
D. Normal Use: Signs corresponding to that normal use permitted in the zoning
district for uses given conditional uses.
E. All Other Signs: All other signs are prohibited in residence districts.
(1997 Code)
12-2-3: NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following signs are allowed in nonresidential districts:
A. Real Estate: Temporary signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area
advertising the sale or lease of real property when located on the property to
which the sign refers and when not located closer than ten feet (10') to a lot
line, which sign shall be removed within ten (10) days of the sale or lease of
the property.
B. Future Use Or Development: Temporary ground signs advertising future use or
development of property on which such signs are located may be maintained
subject to provisions of this section, provided such signs do not exceed two
hundred fifty (250) square feet in area or remain longer than six (6) months.
"For Rent" and "For Lease" signs in commercial and industrial districts for new
buildings shall not exceed forty eight (48) square feet in area or remain more
than ninety (90) days after the building is completed and when located not
closer than ten feet (10') to a lot line.
C. Church Or Public Building: Church or public building bulletin boards not
exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area. (1997 Code)
12-2-4: AGRICULTURE DISTRICT:
In the A agriculture district, the following signs are also permitted:
A. On Premises Activities: Ground signs pertaining to activities conducted on
the premises.
B. Off Premises Activities: Ground or post signs, not exceeding one hundred
(100) square feet in area, advertising activities conducted within twelve (12)
miles of the sign or providing information of direct interest to the traveling
public, including points of interest, recreation and scenic areas, places for
camping, lodging, eating, sale of farm supplies, and vehicular service and
repair. (1997 Code)
12-2-5: BUSINESS DISTRICTS:
A. Permitted Signs: In the business and commercial districts, there may be any
signs allowed in subsection 12-2-4B of this chapter and roof signs, wall signs,
projecting signs, awning signs, and portable signs when displaying no
advertising matter except pertaining to the business conducted in the building
or on the premises on which such sign is placed.
B. Size: The total square foot area of roof signs, wall signs, projecting
signs, marquee signs and awning signs shall not exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the
total square foot area of the face of the building on which they are placed.
C. Number Of Signs: There shall not be more than one ground sign for each one
hundred feet (100') of street frontage.
D. Placement: No ground sign shall extend closer than ten feet (10') to a lot
line. (1997 Code)
12-2-6: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Permitted Signs: In the I-1 and I-2 industrial districts there may be any
sign allowed in section
12-2-5 of this chapter and ground signs, provided that no ground sign shall
exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area.
B. Number Of Signs: Not more than one ground sign shall be erected on any one
lot or tract of land, or one sign for each three hundred feet (300') of street
frontage when located at least three hundred feet (300') apart on such lot or
tract of land.
C. Intersecting Streets: No ground sign when erected on a lot fronting on
intersecting streets shall be erected within fifty feet (50') of the
intersection of the streets, and no ground sign may be erected within fifty
feet (50') of the intersection of the state or federal highways.
D. Frontage On Interstate Highway: Notwithstanding any other provision herein,
in a B-2 district along the frontage of any interstate highway, being any
highway designated by the Illinois department of transportation and approved by
the United States department of transportation as a part of the national system
of interstate and defense highways on July 1, 1972, or thereafter, ground signs
may be one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet in total area, with no
height restriction. (1997 Code)
12-2-7: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
The following additional sign regulations shall be observed:
A. Ground Signs: No ground sign shall be, at any point, over twenty five feet
(25') above ground level and shall have an open space of at least three feet
(3') between the lower edge of such sign and the ground level, fifty percent
(50%) of which may be filled in with a platform and decorative latticework of
light construction. Every ground sign shall be stoutly constructed in a secure
and substantial manner. The end of all such ground signs shall be at least six
feet (6') distant from any wall or fence or any obstruction that would prevent
a clear passage around the ends and shall be at least ten feet (10') distant
from any lot line.
B. Wall Signs: No wall sign shall extend beyond the building more than twelve
inches (12"). No wall sign shall be so erected as to cover the doors or windows
of any building or otherwise prevent free ingress or egress to or from any
window, door or any fire escape of any building.
C. Projecting Signs: Projecting signs may extend not more than four feet six
inches (4'6") from the building into the front yard.
D. Marquee Signs: Marquees may extend eight feet (8') into a front yard.
Marquees shall be not less than eleven feet (11') above the ground at its
lowest level. A sign may be placed upon a marquee, provided such sign does not
extend more than three feet (3') above or one foot (1') below such marquee, but
shall be at least eight feet (8') above grade.
E. Portable Signs: Portable signs are prohibited except that there may be such
portable signs on parking lots as permitted by the administrative officer as
being necessary to satisfactory operation of the lot and except that each
filling station may have one portable sign not exceeding twelve (12) square
feet of total sign area restricted solely to stating the price of gasoline.
F. Paper Posters And Certain Signs Or Devices Prohibited: Paper posters applied
directly to the wall or building or pole or other support and letters or
pictures in the form of advertising printed or applied directly on the wall of
a building are prohibited. Temporary signs may be displayed in or attached to
the inside of show or display windows, provided the total sign area does not
exceed twenty percent (20%) of the show or display window area. Signs or
devices which by color, location or design resemble or conflict with traffic
control signs or devices are prohibited. No sign shall contain flashers,
animators, or mechanical movements or contrivances of any kind, excepting
clocks.
G. Required Signs: Traffic or county signs, railroad crossing signs, danger,
safety, temporary, emergency, nonadvertising, community service, or decorative
signs as may be required by statute or authorized by the administrative
officer. (1997 Code)
TITLE 13
FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
SECTION:
13-1-1: Purpose
13-1-2: Definitions
13-1-3: Base Flood Elevation
13-1-4: Duties Of The Building Inspector And Zoning Officer
13-1-5: Development Permit
13-1-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
13-1-7: Protecting Buildings
13-1-8: Subdivision Requirements
13-1-9: Public Health And Other Standards
13-1-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
13-1-11: Variances
13-1-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
13-1-13: Penalty
13-1-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
13-1-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this city of
Colona by the Illinois municipal code 1
in order to accomplish the following purposes:
A. To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage hazards to
others;
B. To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
C. To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens from the hazards of flooding;
D. To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to public
facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
E. To maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
F. To make federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
G. To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and
floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve water
quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, 5/11-31-2.
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year flood.
The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
13-1-3 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes recreational
vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate including, but not necessarily
limited to:
A. Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a building,
or any structural alteration to a building;
B. Substantial improvement of an existing building;
C. Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
D. Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
E. Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
F. Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or other
alterations of the ground surface;
G. Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal emergency management agency.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid accumulation,
or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency management
agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one foot
(1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the city of Colona, the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Colona, or that may be annexed
into the city of Colona that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains of the city of Colona are generally identified as such on panel
number(s) 135E, 151E, 152E, and 155E of the countywide flood insurance rate map
of Henry County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated
June 2, 2011. Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as
identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Henry County that are within
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city of Colona or that may be annexed
into the city of Colona are generally identified as such on the flood insurance
rate map prepared for Henry County by the federal emergency management agency
and dated June 2, 2011.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the federal emergency management
agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Rock River and Green River shall
be as delineated on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Henry County
prepared by FEMA and dated June 2, 2011. The floodways for each of the
remaining floodplains of the city of Colona shall be according to the best data
available from the federal, state, or other sources.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places or
preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register.
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as
contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined by
the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
C. Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency.
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has been
certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois department of natural resources/office of water resources.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of section
13-1-7 of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
NFIP: National flood insurance program.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck
and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
SFHA: See definition of Floodplain And Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement, was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation or placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a substantial improvement, actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of a building whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: See definition of Building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage "subsequent to the adoption of this chapter",
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition of Repetitive Loss).
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place "subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter", in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
A. Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the improvement or repair is started, or
B. Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
"Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of
any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
B. Any alteration of a structure listed on the national register of historic
places or the Illinois register of historic places.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required federal, state, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
A. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of Rock River and Green River
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide flood
insurance study of Henry County prepared by the federal emergency management
agency and dated June 2, 2011.
B. The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH zone" or
"AO zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the countywide flood
insurance rate map of Henry County.
C. The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains delineated as
an "A zone" on the countywide flood insurance rate map of Henry County shall be
according to the best data available from federal, state or other sources.
Should no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the
applicant to determine base flood elevations.
D. The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Henry County that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the city of Colona, or that may be annexed into the city of Colona shall be
as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood insurance study of
Henry County prepared by the federal emergency management agency and dated June
2, 2011. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-4: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR AND ZONING OFFICER:
The building inspector and zoning officer shall be responsible for the general
administration of this chapter and ensure that all development activities
within the floodplains under the jurisdiction of the city of Colona meet the
requirements of this chapter. Specifically, the building inspector and zoning
officer shall:
A. Process development permits in accordance with section
13-1-5 of this chapter;
B. Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
13-1-6 of this chapter;
C. Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings subject
to section
13-1-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or floodproof certificate;
D. Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
13-1-8 of this chapter;
E. Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public health
standards of section
13-1-9 of this chapter;
F. If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
13-1-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
G. Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
13-1-13 of this chapter as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
H. Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other required
local, state, and federal permits;
I. Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse;
J. Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about permit
procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
K. Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
L. Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps, copies of
state and federal permits, and documentation of compliance for development
activities subject to this chapter;
M. Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and make
substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain; and
N. Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR and/or
submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a modification of
the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in a change to the
floodplain map. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the building inspector and zoning officer. The building
inspector and zoning officer shall not issue a development permit if the
proposed development does not meet the requirements of this chapter.
A. The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
1. Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions;
2. Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation
or filling;
3. The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings;
4. The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed
buildings subject to the requirements of section
13-1-7 of this chapter; and
5. Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer or
architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building
inspector and zoning officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the
base flood elevation. Any development located on land that can be shown by
survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has
not been filled after the date of the site's first flood insurance rate map is
not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the requirements of this
chapter. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the base
flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current flood
insurance rate map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
The building inspector and zoning officer shall maintain documentation of the
existing ground elevation at the development site and certification that this
ground elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first flood insurance
rate map identification.
The building inspector and zoning officer shall be responsible for obtaining
from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local permits,
approvals or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of
activity. The building inspector and zoning officer shall not issue a permit
unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained. (Ord. 0-
25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the countywide flood insurance rate map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
A. Except as provided in subsection B of this section, no development shall be
allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated development
will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to public
health and safety. The following specific development activities shall be
considered as meeting this requirement:
1. Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the following
conditions of the Illinois department of natural resources, office of water
resources statewide permit number 2:
a. The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile
elevation in excess of 1.0 foot, and
b. The crossing will not result in an increase in water surface profile
elevation in excess of one-half foot (0.5') at a point one thousand feet
(1,000') upstream of the proposed structure.
c. There are no buildings in the area impacted by the increases in water
surface profile.
d. The proposed bridge or culvert crossing will not involve straightening,
enlarging, or relocating the existing channel.
e. The design must be certified by a licensed professional engineer in the
state of Illinois and the designs must meet the conditions of an IDNR/OWR
permit.
f. The design must be certified by a second licensed professional engineer.
2. Barge fleeting facilities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 3:
a. The permit is only applicable when deadmen, pier cells, or other similar
anchorage devices have been permitted by the U.S. army corps of engineers.
3. Aerial utility crossings meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
statewide permit number 4:
a. The utility line must be constructed above the existing 100-year flood
elevation or attached to an existing bridge.
b. A utility line attached to an existing bridge shall be constructed above the
low cord elevation of the bridge.
c. No supporting towers or poles shall be located in a river, lake or stream.
d. Supporting towers including foundation and poles shall be designed and
located so as to not cause an obstruction of flood flows by trapping debris.
e. All disturbed areas shall be returned to preconstruction grades and
revegetated.
f. All Illinois commerce commission, national electrical safety code, and
federal requirements must be met.
4. Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide
permit number 5:
a. The boat dock must not extend more than fifty feet (50') into a waterway and
no more than one-fourth (1/4) of the width of the waterway and shall not extend
beyond the navigational limits established by the IDNR and corps of engineers.
b. The width of the boat dock shall not be more than ten feet (10').
c. For L-shaped or T-shaped docks, the length of that portion parallel to the
shoreline must not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the landowner's shoreline
frontage nor fifty feet (50').
d. Docks must be aligned so as not to cross the projection of property lines
into the waterway or come within ten feet (10') of the projected property line.
e. Dock posts must be marked by reflective devices.
f. The boat dock must be securely anchored to prevent detachment during times
of high wind or water.
g. Metal drums or containers may not be used as buoyancy units unless they are
filled with flotation foam. Containers which previously stored pesticides,
herbicides, or any other toxic chemicals are not permissible.
h. This permit does not authorize any other related construction activity such
as shore protection or fill.
i. Nonfloating boat docks must be constructed in a manner which will minimize
obstruction to flow.
j. At any future date, the permittee must agree to make necessary modifications
to the dock as determined by the IDNR or corps of engineers.
5. Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 6:
a. The following activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade)
are covered by this permit:
(1) The construction of underground utility lines, wells, or septic tanks not
crossing a lake or stream.
(2) The construction of light poles, signposts, and similar structures.
(3) The construction of sidewalks, driveways, athletic fields (excluding
fences), patios, and similar structures.
(4) The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures such as
playground equipment, pavilions, and carports.
(5) The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding seventy (70)
square feet in size, nor ten (10) square feet in any dimension. Only one such
building on a property is authorized by this statewide permit.
(6) The raising of existing buildings, provided no changes are made to the
outside dimensions of the building and the placement of fill is not involved.
6. Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the following
conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 7:
a. Any outfall structure, including any headwall or end section, shall not
extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent natural bank slope or
adjacent bank protection.
b. The velocity of the discharge shall not exceed the scour velocity of the
channel soil, unless channel erosion would be prevented by the use of riprap or
other design measures.
c. Outlets from drainage ditches shall not be opened to a stream until the
ditch is vegetated or otherwise stabilized to minimize stream sedimentation.
d. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway
areas, including the stream banks, shall be restored to their original contours
and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
7. Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 8:
a. In all cases, the crossing shall be placed beneath the bed of the river,
lake or stream and, unless the crossing is encased in concrete or entrenched in
bedrock, a minimum of three feet (3') of cover shall be provided. The river,
lake or stream bed shall be returned to its original condition.
b. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway
areas, including stream banks, shall be restored to their original contours and
seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
c. Any utility crossing carrying material which may cause water pollution, as
defined by the environmental protection act 1
, shall be provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be
crossed.
d. If blasting is to be utilized in the construction of the crossing, the
permittee shall notify the IDNR/OWR at least ten (10) days prior to the
blasting date to allow monitoring of any related fish kills.
8. Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide
permit number 9:
a. Only the following materials may be utilized in urban areas: stone and
concrete riprap, steel sheet piling, cellular blocks, fabric formed concrete,
gabion baskets, rock and wire mattresses, sand/cement filled bags, geotechnical
fabric materials, natural vegetation and treated timber. Urban areas are
defined as: areas of the state where residential, commercial, or industrial
development currently exists or, based on land use plans or controls, is
expected to occur within ten (10) years. (The department should be consulted if
there is a question of whether or not an area is considered urban.)
b. In addition to the materials listed in subsection A8a of this section, other
materials (e.g., tire revetments) may be utilized in rural areas provided all
other conditions of this permit are met.
c. The following materials shall not be used in any case: auto bodies, garbage
or debris, scrap lumber, metal refuse, roofing materials, asphalt or other
bituminous materials, or any material which would cause water pollution as
defined by the environmental protection act 2
.
d. The affected length of shoreline, stream bank, or channel to be protected
shall not exceed, either singularly or cumulatively, one thousand feet
(1,000').
e. All material utilized shall be properly sized or anchored to resist
anticipated forces of current and wave action.
f. Materials shall be placed in a way which would not cause erosion or the
accumulation of debris on properties adjacent to or opposite the project.
g. Materials shall not be placed higher than the existing top of the bank.
h. Materials shall be placed so that the modified bank full width and cross
sectional area of the channel will conform to or be no more restrictive than
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
For projects involving continuous placement of riprap along the bank, toe of
the bank or other similar applications, in no case shall the cross sectional
area of the natural channel be reduced by more than ten percent (10%) nor the
volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of the
stream bank or shoreline. The bank may be graded to obtain a flatter slope and
to lessen the quantity of material required.
i. If broken concrete is used, all protruding materials such as reinforcing
rods shall be cut flush with the surface of the concrete and removed from the
construction area.
j. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to
prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be seeded or
otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
k. In the case of sea walls and gabion structures on lakes, the structure shall
be constructed at or landward of the water line as determined by the normal
pool elevation, unless:
(1) It is constructed in alignment with an existing sea wall(s) or gabion
structure(s), and
(2) The volume of material placed, including the structure, would not exceed
two (2) cubic yards per linear foot.
l. Excess material excavated during the construction of the bank or shoreline
protection shall be placed in accordance with local, state, and federal laws
and rules, shall not be placed in a floodway.
9. Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings meeting
the conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 10:
a. The accessory structure or building addition must comply with the
requirements of the local floodplain ordinance.
b. The principal structure to which the project is being added must have been
in existence on the effective date of this permit (July 25, 1988).
c. The accessory structure or addition must not exceed five hundred (500)
square feet in size and must not deflect floodwaters onto another property, and
d. Must not involve the placement of any fill material.
e. No construction shall be undertaken in, or within fifty feet (50') of the
bank of the stream channel.
f. The accessory structure or addition must be properly anchored to prevent its
movement during flood conditions.
g. Only one accessory structure or addition to an existing structure shall be
authorized by this permit; plans for any subsequent addition must be submitted
to IDNR/OWR for review.
h. Disturbances of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to
prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway areas shall be seeded
or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
10. Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the following conditions of
IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 11:
a. The affected length of the stream shall not either singularly or
cumulatively exceed one thousand feet (1,000').
b. The project shall not include the construction of any new channel; all work
must be confined to the existing channel or to reestablishing flows in the
natural stream channel, and
c. The cross sectional area of the dredged channel shall conform to that of the
natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
d. Dredged or spoil material shall not be disposed of in a wetland and shall be
either:
(1) Removed from the floodway;
(2) Used to stabilize an existing bank provided no materials would be placed
higher than the existing top of bank and provided the cross sectional area of
the natural channel would not be reduced by more than ten percent (10%), nor
the volume of material placed exceed two (2) cubic yards per linear foot of
stream bank;
(3) Used to fill an existing washed out or scoured floodplain area such that
the average natural floodplain elevation is not increased;
(4) Used to stabilize an existing levee provided the height of the levee would
not be increased nor its alignment changed;
(5) Placed in a disposal site previously approved by the department in
accordance with the conditions of the approval; or
(6) Used for beach nourishment, provided the material meets all applicable
water quality standards.
e. Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during
construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed floodway
areas, including the stream banks, shall be seeded or otherwise stabilized upon
completion of construction.
11. Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening meeting the
following conditions of IDNR/OWR statewide permit number 12:
a. A licensed professional engineer shall determine and document that the
existing structure has not been the cause of demonstrable flood damage. Such
documentation shall include, at a minimum, confirmation that:
(1) No buildings or structures have been impacted by the backwater induced by
the existing structure, and
(2) There is no record of complaints of flood damages associated with the
existing structure.
b. A licensed professional engineer shall determine that the new structure will
provide the same or greater effective waterway opening as the existing
structure. For bridge widening projects the existing piers and the proposed
pier extensions must be in line with the direction of the approaching flow
upstream of the bridge.
c. The project shall not include any appreciable raising of the approach roads.
(This condition does not apply if all points on the approaches exist at an
elevation equal to or higher than the 100-year frequency flood headwater
elevation as determined by a FEMA flood insurance study completed or approved
by IDNR/OWR.)
d. The project shall not involve the straightening, enlargement or relocation
of the existing channel of the river or stream except as permitted by the
department's statewide permit number 9 (minor shoreline, channel and streambank
protection activities) or statewide permit number 11 (minor maintenance
dredging activities).
e. The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this permit
necessary to document compliance with the above conditions.
12. Temporary construction activities meeting the following conditions of IDNR/
OWR statewide permit number 13:
a. No temporary construction activity shall be commenced until the individual
permittee determines that the permanent structure (if any) for which the work
is being performed has received all required federal, state and local
authorizations.
b. The term "temporary" shall mean not more than one construction season. All
temporary construction materials must be removed from the stream and floodway
within one year of their placement and the area returned to the conditions
existing prior to the beginning of construction. Any desired subsequent or
repetitive material placement shall not occur without the review and approval
of the IDNR/OWR.
c. The temporary project shall be constructed such that it will not cause
erosion or damage due to increases in water surface profiles to adjacent
properties. For locations where there are structures in the upstream
floodplain, the temporary project shall be constructed such that all water
surface profile increases, due to the temporary project, are contained within
the channel banks.
d. This permit does not authorize the placement or construction of any solid
embankment or wall such as a dam, roadway, levee, or dike across any channel or
floodway.
e. No temporary structure shall be placed within any river or stream channel
until a licensed professional engineer determines and documents that the
temporary structure will meet the requirements of special condition number 3 of
this statewide permit. Such documentation shall include, at a minimum,
confirmation that no buildings or structures will be impacted by the backwater
induced by the temporary structure.
f. The permittee shall maintain records of projects authorized by this permit
necessary to document compliance with the above condition.
g. Disturbance of vegetation shall be kept to a minimum during construction to
prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed areas shall be seeded or
otherwise stabilized upon completion of the removal of the temporary
construction.
h. Materials used for the project shall not cause water pollution as defined by
the environmental protection act 3
.
13. Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely within a
flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit requirements.
B. Other development activities not listed in subsection A of this section may
be permitted only if:
1. A permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written documentation
is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
2. Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and approval
obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 415 ILCS 5.
2 1. 415 ILCS 5.
3 1. 415 ILCS 5.
13-1-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
A. In addition to the damage prevention requirements of section
13-1-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
1. Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition to an
existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
seventy (70) square feet.
2. Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing
building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or
equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration shall be
figured cumulatively "subsequent to the adoption of this chapter". If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
3. Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall be
figured cumulatively "subsequent to the adoption of this chapter". If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section.
4. Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home on
an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
5. Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
6. "Repetitive loss" to an existing building as defined in section
13-1-2 of this chapter.
B. Residential or nonresidential buildings can meet the building protection
requirements by one of the following methods:
1. The building may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance with the
following:
a. The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation.
b. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches (6") before
compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the foundation
before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
c. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during flooding by
vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
d. The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated debris or
refuse material, and
e. Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or onto
neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques such
as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
2. The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
a. The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles, walls,
crawl space, or other foundation that is permanently open to floodwaters.
b. The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the
flood protection elevation.
c. If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection elevation
shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed professional
engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each wall no more
than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings
shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch for every one
square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base flood
elevation, and
d. The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored, designed, and
certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such as current,
waves, ice, and floating debris.
(1) All structural components below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
(2) Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible pumps,
and other service facilities may be located below the flood protection
elevation provided they are waterproofed.
(3) The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used solely for
parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as habitable
space, or
(4) In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with these
requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect.
3. The building may be constructed with a crawl space located below the flood
protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
a. The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
b. Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have openings
that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a total net
area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed area. The
openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
c. The interior grade of the crawl space below the flood protection elevation
must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent exterior grade.
d. The interior height of the crawl space measured from the interior grade of
the crawl space to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point.
e. An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters from the
interior area of the crawl space within a reasonable period of time after a
flood event.
f. Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
g. Utility systems within the crawl space must be elevated above the flood
protection elevation.
C. Nonresidential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect certifies
that:
1. Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant utility
facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base
flood.
2. The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of rise,
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the impact
from debris and ice.
3. Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design and
operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
4. Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing
for the purpose of this subsection.
D. Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on site
shall be:
1. Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance with
subsection B of this section, and
2. Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being tied
down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois mobile home
tie-down act issued pursuant to 77 Illinois administrative code section 870.
E. Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of subsection
D of this section unless the following conditions are met:
1. The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck.
2. The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
3. The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as decks and
porches.
4. The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel, or
seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
5. The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than four
hundred (400) square feet.
6. The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
7. Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be safe for
movement of the floodplain.
8. Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be quick
disconnect and above the 100-year flood elevation.
9. The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or park
model, and
10. Must either:
a. Entirely be supported by jacks, or
b. Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground
and be supported by blocks in a manner that will allow the blocks to be easily
removed by use of the hitch jack.
F. Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed ancillary to
an existing residential use may be permitted provided the following conditions
are met:
1. The garage or shed must be nonhabitable.
2. The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and tools
and cannot be modified later into another use.
3. The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have the
appropriate state and/or federal permits.
4. The garage or shed must be on a single-family lot and be accessory to an
existing principal structure on the same lot.
5. Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
6. All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical must be
elevated above the flood protection elevation.
7. The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each wall not
more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening for every
one square foot of floor area.
8. The garage or shed must be less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in
market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less than five hundred
(500) square feet.
9. The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
10. All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
11. The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner advised of
the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The city of Colona planning commission and zoning board of appeals shall take
into account hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official
actions related to land management use and development.
A. New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, planned
unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and subdivisions
shall meet the damage prevention and building protections standards of sections
13-1-6 and
13-1-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
1. The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where the base
flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant shall be
responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
2. The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
3. A signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the proposed
plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1
.
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
13-1-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
A. Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
13-1-6 and
13-1-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
1. No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
13-1-7 of this chapter.
2. Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
3. Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
4. New and replacement on site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal systems
shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding. Manholes or other aboveground openings located below
the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
5. Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be
located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical
facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
B. All other activities defined as "development" shall be designed so as not to
alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the city of Colona shall notify adjacent communities in writing
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the planning commission or
zoning board of appeals for a variance. The planning commission or zoning board
of appeals shall review the applicant's request for a variance and shall submit
its recommendation to the city council. The city council may attach such
conditions to granting of a variance as it deems necessary to further the
intent of this chapter.
A. No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of
the following conditions are met:
1. The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
2. An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not granted.
3. The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
4. There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or creation of a
nuisance.
5. There will be no additional public expense for flood protection, rescue or
relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other public
facilities.
6. The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a pattern
inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
7. All other state and federal permits have been obtained.
B. The planning commission or zoning board of appeals shall notify an applicant
in writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protection
standards of section
13-1-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
1. Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
2. Increase the risk to life and property; and
3. Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and that
the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and liability.
C. Variances to the building protection requirements of section
13-1-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
13-1-6 and
13-1-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
1. The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
2. The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being removed
as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the city of Colona or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that
results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
13-1-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the zoning officer or
building inspector may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of
this chapter exists. The zoning officer or building inspector shall notify the
owner in writing of such violation.
A. If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the violation:
1. The city of Colona shall make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
2. Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense.
3. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues, and
4. The city of Colona shall record a notice of violation on the title of the
property.
B. The zoning officer or building inspector shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and
therefore may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
The zoning officer or building inspector is authorized to issue an order
requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall
be in writing, indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work
order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the zoning board of appeals. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
1. The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation, and
2. The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the zoning board of appeals
shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
C. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Colona from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-
9-2011)
13-1-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the city of
Colona to fulfill the requirements of the national flood insurance program.
However, this chapter does not repeal the original resolution or ordinance
adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does this chapter repeal,
abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 0-25-10, 5-9-2011)
