VILLAGE CODE
of
CREVE COEUR, ILLINOIS
1970
Code current through:
Ord. 767D, passed 5-22-2024
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Company
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   This code of the Village of Creve Coeur, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 767D, passed May 22, 2024. Ordinances
of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this
code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult
the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of
the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
      American Legal Publishing
      Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not affect the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO. 634B
 
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF CREVE COEUR, ILLINOIS
AMENDING TITLE 3, CHAPTER 21, AND TITLE 7, CHAPTER 8
OF THE VILLAGE CODE
 
 
WHEREAS, the Village Board of the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois (hereinafter
“Village”) has previously adopted ordinances requiring the registration of
rental dwelling units and providing for inspection of such rental residential
dwellings, as found in Title 3, Chapter 21 and in Title 7, Chapter 8 of the
Village Code; and
 
WHEREAS, the Village Board finds that amendments to the foregoing sections of
the Village Code will serve the best interests of the Village of Creve Coeur
and its citizens;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF CREVE COEUR,
TAZEWELL COUNTY, ILLINOIS, AS FOLLOWS:
 
Section 1 . The recitals set forth above are found to be true and correct.
 
Section 2 . Title 3, Chapter 21 of the Village Code is hereby deleted in its
entirety, and replaced with the following:
3-21-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to enable the village to develop a comprehensive
inventory of rental residential dwelling buildings located in the village, in
order for the village of Creve Coeur police and fire departments to have a
better understanding of the number, location and ownership of such buildings.
Additionally, the village wants to ensure that all rental residential dwelling
buildings within the village meet building and fire codes to ensure the safety
of the residents of the village of Creve Coeur.
3-21-2: DEFINITIONS:
OWNER: Except for mobile homes, any person, company, corporation, unit of
government, trust, or entity that holds title to real property upon which a
Rental Residential Dwelling Building is located shall be deemed an owner of the
Rental Residential Dwelling Building. A person, company, corporation, unit of
government, trust, or entity shall be deemed to be an owner of a Rental
Residential Dwelling Building if record title to real property subject to this
Ordinance, as reflected in the records maintained by the Tazewell County Clerk
& Recorder, is shown to have vested in such person, company, corporation, unit
of government, trust, or entity. In cases in which property governed by this
ordinance is subject to a Contract-for-Deed or similar instrument, the grantor
and grantee shall both be deemed owners until title has fully vested in the
grantee under said instrument.
 
The Owner of a mobile home shall be deemed to be that person, company,
corporation, unit of government, trust, or entity in whose name the mobile home
is registered with the Illinois Secretary of State.
   Illustrative Example A: Jim Jones is the grantee on the most recently
recorded deed to 123 Main St., upon which is located a four-unit apartment
building. The apartment building is a Rental Residential Dwelling Building, and
Jim Jones is the owner.
   Illustrative Example B: Jim Jones owns a single-family residence. Jim enters
into a contract-for-deed with Jane Doe. Jane doe then markets the residence for
rent. The residence is a Rental Residential Dwelling Building (and, for
purposes of this ordinance, such single-family residence is also a Rental
Residential Dwelling Unit). Until such time as title vests solely in Jane, Jim
and Jane are both owners of the Rental Residential Dwelling Building.
   Illustrative Example C: ABC, Inc., owns land upon which a mobile-home park
with 10 units, numbered 1 through 10, are sited. Title to the mobile homes
comprising Units 1 through 7 is registered with the Illinois Secretary of State
in the name of ABC, Inc. Title to Units 8 through 10 are registered in the
names of individual owners. ABC, Inc., is the Owner of Units 1 through 7. The
owners of Units 8 through 10 are the individuals in whose names the mobile
homes comprising Units 8 through 10 are registered with the Illinois Secretary
of State. ABC, Inc., is not also an owner of Units 8 through 10, even though
these three units are located on real property that is owned by ABC, Inc.,
because the particular Rental Residential Dwelling Buildings comprising Units 7
through 10 are mobile homes with titles registered in the individual owners’
names.
   RENTAL RESIDENTIAL DWELLING BUILDING: A building, house, mobile home, or any
other structure that is used for residential purposes and made available for
rent by occupants other than the Owner.
   RENTAL RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT: A discrete segment of a Rental Residential
Dwelling Building suitable for human habitation and made available for rent.
   Illustrative Example: An Apartment Building contains four separate
apartments each with their own living quarters, kitchen, and bathroom. The
apartment building is a Rental Residential Dwelling Building. The individual
apartments are Rental Residential Dwelling Units. A structure with a single
rental unit is considered both a Rental Residential Dwelling Building and a
Rental Residential Dwelling Unit.
3-21-3: INITIAL REGISTRATION:
All Rental Residential Dwelling Buildings must be registered with the village.
Owner occupied dwellings, including dwellings occupied by the buyer under a
contract for deed, are excluded from the registration requirement. A dwelling
is not considered to be owner occupied if the Owner does not reside in the
dwelling, even if occupied by immediate family members of the Owner (when the
Owner does not also resides in the same dwelling) and regardless of whether
actual consideration is paid to the Owner. Within thirty (30) days after first
offering any Rental Residential Dwelling Unit for rent within the village of
Creve Coeur, the owner or agents of the owner of each Rental Residential
Dwelling Building located within the limits of the village of Creve Coeur shall
register each such Rental Residential Dwelling Building with the village clerk,
identifying all Rental Residential Dwelling Units contained within each such
Rental Residential Dwelling Building, on a form to be provided by the village.
Each registration is only valid for a maximum period of one calendar year.
3-21-4: ANNUAL REGISTRATION:
Following the initial registration period, Rental Residential Dwelling
Buildings shall be registered as follows:
   (A)   Every year on or before January 1, the registration for each Rental
Residential Dwelling Building shall be renewed for the following year.
   (B)   Newly constructed Rental Residential Dwelling Buildings shall be
registered within thirty (30) days of first offering any Rental Residential
Dwelling Unit within such Rental Residential Dwelling Building for rent.
   (C)   A Rental Residential Dwelling Building sold, transferred or conveyed
shall be reregistered by the new owner within thirty (30) days of the date of
the deed, land contract, or other instrument of conveyance. At that time the
Rental Residential Dwelling Units within such Rental Residential Dwelling
Building will be removed from the previous owner's registration.
3-21-5: REGISTRATION FEE:
Each time a Rental Residential Dwelling Building is registered pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the owner shall pay a fee per Rental Residential
Dwelling Unit to cover the village's cost of administering this program, or the
prorated amount thereof. For mobile homes, the amount is $25 per mobile home
that is a Rental Residential Dwelling Building subject to this Chapter. For all
other Rental Residential Dwelling Units, the amount of that per unit fee is
established annually by the village board and is published in the office of the
village clerk.
3-21-6: REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
The following information shall be provided by the owner or owner's agent at
the time of registration:
   (A)   Owner's name, address, phone number, fax number and e-mail address
(optional).
   (B)   Agent's (if applicable) name, address, phone number, fax number and e-
mail address (optional).
   (C)   Address of each Rental Residential Dwelling Building
   (D)   The identifying address of each Rental Residential Dwelling Unit
within such Rental Residential Dwelling Building.
   (D)   Type of Rental Residential Dwelling Building (i.e., single-family
residence, duplex, apartment building, mobile home etc.).
   (E)   Signature of owner or agent attesting to the truthfulness of the
information provided. If signed by the owner, said owner being a company,
corporation or governmental or private agency, only a duly authorized officer
or administrator may sign the registration form.
3-21-7: CHANGES IN REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
Changes in the registration information, other than those listed in section 3-
21-6 of this chapter (follow up registration) shall be provided in writing to
the village clerk.
3-21-8: BUILDING INSPECTION:
Each Rental Residential Dwelling Unit located within the Village shall be
inspected at least once every five (5) years. The procedure for rental
residential dwelling inspections are detailed further in section 7-8-1 et seq.,
of this code.
3-21-9: KEEPING OF RECORDS:
The village clerk shall be responsible for maintaining all Rental Residential
Dwelling Building and Rental Residential Dwelling Unit registration data and
provide an annual report to the village board of the number and type of Rental
Residential Dwelling Buildings in the village, and the number and type of
Rental Residential Dwelling Buildings added to or deleted from the previous
registration roster. The same report shall be provided to the village police
and fire departments on an annual basis.
3-21-10: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Failure to register a Rental Residential Dwelling Building within the
applicable time period prescribed in this chapter shall subject an owner to a
fine of not less than $200 and not more than $750.00 per unregistered Rental
Residential Dwelling Unit. Every day a Rental Residential Dwelling Building
remains unregistered in violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall
constitute a new and separate violation.
The submission of false information on a Rental Residential Dwelling Building
registration form constitutes a separate and discrete offense from failure to
register and shall subject an owner to a fine not less than $500.00 and not
more than $750.00 per Rental Residential Dwelling Unit.
3-21-11: SEVERABILITY:
Should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter be
rendered or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent
jurisdiction or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining
provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall
remain in full force and effect.
 
 
  Section 3 . Title 7, Chapter 8 of the Village Code is hereby deleted in its
entirety, and replaced with the following:
 
7-8-1: GENERAL:
   (A)   Every dwelling, including Rental Residential Dwelling Buildings and
Rental Residential Dwelling Units as defined in Section 3-21-2 of this Code,
along with all accessory structures located upon the same lot or a contiguous
lot, may be inspected for compliance with the provisions and requirements set
forth in this Chapter. Such inspections may include inspection of the exterior
and interior of any dwelling, including Rental Residential Dwelling Buildings
or Rental Residential Dwelling Units, as the case may be.
Dwellings must comply with, and will be inspected for compliance with, the
following provisions of the Village Code: Title 4, Chapter 1 (“Building Code”);
Title 4, Chapter 5 (“Unsafe or Dangerous Buildings”); Title 7, Chapter 1
(“Sewers”); Title 7, Chapter 2 (“Garbage”); Title 7, Chapter 3 (“Nuisances”);
Title 7, Chapter 4 (“Littering”).
In addition, Rental Residential Dwelling Units may be inspected for compliance
with the following requirements:
A.    Smoke Detectors
a.   Smoke detectors must be installed in all hallways and bedrooms and must be
in working condition with batteries or hardwire connection to the electrical
system.
b.   Carbon monoxide detectors must be present, operable and have batteries or
a hardwire connection to the electrical system.
 
B.    Windows
a.   Windows must be capable of being opened and closed, if they are designed
to do so. Furthermore, a window designed to open must be able to stay open
without being propped with another object.
b.   All window screens must be removable.
c.   Windows must not be cracked or broken.
C.    Doors and Locks
a.   All entry doors must be equipped with working locks and dead-locking
latches.
b.   All exterior doors must be capable of opening and shutting properly.
D.    Electrical
a.   All electrical outlets must be in functional condition and have cover
plates installed.
b.   No exposed, electrified live wires may be present.
c.   All light switches must be in functional condition and have cover plates
installed on the wall.
d.   Any extension cords in use must be used properly.
e.   The panel board/fuse box must be covered and properly grounded, and all
contents therein must be properly installed. Additionally, there must be a main
power switch that is clearly labelled.
f.   All wires must be properly installed and tightened. No loose or dangling
wires may be present.
g.   All light fixtures must be in functional condition and be properly mounted
to a box.
h.   Any electrical or gas furnace in the building must have a power switch so
that power can be turned off on the unit for maintenance.
i.   All outlets within a six-foot radius of a water source and all exterior
outlets must be GCFI protected.
E.    Kitchen
a.   All sinks in the home must be present and operable and be connected to a
water supply system as well as the sewage system. All sinks and faucets must
drain properly, and no leakage may be present.
F.    Bathroom
a.   All toilets in the home must be fully operational and have properly
functioning flush valves.
b.   Any toilet tanks in the home must be fully intact, and no leakage may be
present.
G.    Heating
a.   There must be a safe, operable furnace present in the home, positioned so
that changing the furnace filters is accessible.
b.   Duct work must be in good condition and must not touch combustibles or
live wiring.
c.   The horizontal vent must run pitch upward as required.
d.   Furnaces and water heater vents must not share chimney for a fireplace or
a wood-burning stove.
e.   Any unused openings in a chimney must be sealed.
f.   The furnace may not be present in a bedroom or any other room used for
sleeping purposes.
g.   The gas supply service must be turned on and operable, and the furnace
must feature a gas shut-off valve.
h.   No gas leakage may be present.
H.    Water Heater
a.   There must be an operable, properly installed water heater in the home
that has a temperature and pressure relief valve.
b.   Any gas water heaters must feature a gas shut-off valve and draft hood and
be properly vented.
c.   Gas water heaters may not be located in a bedroom, bathroom, or kitchen.
d.   The water heater vent connector must not be rusted and must be code
compliant as applicable to the specific unit.
e.   There must be a cold water shut-off valve located within five feet of the
water heater.
f.   The relief valve discharge must have proper piping and terminate within
six inches of the floor.
g.   No threads may be present on the relief valve discharge pipe.
I.    Other
a.   The water supply service must be turned on and fully operational. All
water supply lines must be in good condition with no leakage present.
b.   All plumbing fixtures must be supplied with both hot and cold running
water.
c.   All sewer/septic drainpipes must be free from blockage.
d.   All open stairs and steps must feature the required handrails.
e.   All stairs and steps must be in good condition, secured from movement and
containing all essential parts.
f.   All ceilings and roofs must be intact, and no leaks may be present.
g.   Exit signs must be present in the common areas of multi-units as required
and be in functional condition.
h.   No nuisances, as defined by the Village Code, may be present on the
property.
i.   The paint in the interior of the dwelling must be in good condition with
no peeling present.
   (B)   The provisions of Subsection (A) shall not apply to the following:
mobile homes, hotels, motels, hospitals, and property owned by a governmental
entity.
   (C)   When a nonresidential business or activity, or a state or federally
licensed and inspected use occupies a portion of a building or premises which
would otherwise be subject to this section, the provisions of this section
shall be applicable to the residential and common or public areas of such
building or premises.
(D) MOBILE HOME INSPECTIONS. Mobile homes that qualify as Rental Residential
Dwelling Buildings in accordance with Section 3-21-2 of this Code shall comply
with the mobile home park fire protection standards adopted by the Illinois
Office of the State Fire Marshall in accordance with 210 ILCS 115/9.15.
7-8-2: FREQUENCY OF INSPECTIONS:
   (A)   All dwellings other than mobile homes that are subject to this chapter
shall be inspected at least once every five (5) years. Written notice of the
date of the inspection shall be given to the owner and/or dwelling occupant at
least five (5) days prior to the date of the inspection. Said notice shall
advise the owner and/or occupant of the inspection, his/her right to refuse
inspection of the dwelling unit, and the village's right to seek issuance of an
administrative search warrant in the event of any such refusal. No inspection
of an occupied dwelling shall occur without the consent of the owner and/or
occupant unless an administrative search warrant is obtained. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner and/or occupant to be present at the dwelling unit
on the date and time of inspection to provide access for inspection.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the inspection of any premises
other than mobile homes subject to this chapter more frequently than set forth
in subsection (A) of this section; provided, however, that any inspection more
frequent than set forth in subsection (A) of this section, shall be based upon
a citizen complaint or other indicia that are more probable than not that a
housing violation exists.
   (C)   An owner's denial of access shall not preclude a tenant from granting
access.
(D) For mobile homes subject to this Chapter, subsections (A)-(C) do not apply;
rather the inspection procedures outlined in 210 ILCS 115/9.5 apply.
7-8-3: INSPECTION PROCEDURE AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   If, upon completion of the inspection, a dwelling unit other than a
mobile home is found to be in compliance with all applicable village codes or
ordinances and other applicable laws, the village shall provide written
confirmation of same to the owner and/or occupant upon request.
   (B)   If, upon completion of the inspection, a building or dwelling unit
other than a mobile home is found to have one or more violations, the village
shall provide written notice of such violations to the owner. In cases in which
the owner is a corporation or limited liability company, notice shall be sent
to the registered agent unless the corporation or limited liability company has
not designated a registered agent with the Illinois Secretary of State.. The
Notice shall give the Owner fifteen (15) days to remedy the violation. If a
dwelling is found to have one or more health or life threatening violations, a
fifty dollar ($50.00) charge will be assessed for a reinspection fee to cover
the cost of the reinspection to ensure that the violations of the code found in
the initial inspection are abated. Each violation not corrected during the
fifteen day abatement period shall be a separate offense, and each day any such
violation continues in existence shall constitute a separate offense. Fines for
violation shall be assessed in an amount not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
(C) The procedures and penalties outlined in subsections (A) and (B) above do
not apply to mobiles homes. Rather, the procedures and penalties outlined in
210 ILCS 115/9.15 shall apply.
7-8-4: LEASED OR RENTED PREMISES:
Any dwelling unit or part thereof which, by reason of its unsanitary condition
or of its being infected with disease, is unfit for human habitation, or which
from any other cause is a source of sickness among the inhabitants of the
village or which otherwise endangers the public health, is hereby deemed a
public nuisance. This section, and the following provisions, pertain
specifically to buildings and dwellings units other than mobile homes that are
leased or rented within the village whether or not registered with the village
as required by ordinance:
   (A)   No person owning, occupying or in control of any building or dwelling
unit shall use or permit the use of the same for the existence or performance
of any thing or act dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
   (B)   No owner, agent, lessee or person in possession, charge or control of
any building or dwelling unit shall lease or let the same, or any portion
thereof, or allow the same to be occupied by any person as a dwelling unless
such building, dwelling unit, or portion thereof, is in a clean, wholesome and
sanitary condition and fully comply with all provisions of the minimum housing
regulations of this code.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any building, dwelling
unit, or portion thereof, not to remove or cause to be removed therefrom,
before vacating the same, all garbage, ashes, rubbish, refuse or miscellaneous
waste, or to leave such building, dwelling unit, or portion thereof, in any
condition detrimental or dangerous to health.
   (D)   No owner, lessee or keeper of any Building or Dwelling Unit shall
cause or allow the same to be overcrowded or so great a number of persons to
dwell, remain or sleep in any such building or dwelling unit, or any portion
thereof, as to cause any danger or detriment to health.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the village building inspector to cause an
examination to be made of any building or dwelling unit alleged to be a public
nuisance. If the village building inspector or his designee finds that a public
nuisance exists, as defined in this code, he shall serve written notice upon
the owner or person in control of the building or dwelling unit, or his agent,
or the occupant, directing such person to abate such nuisance and within forty
eight (48) hours to place such building or dwelling unit in a condition which
shall not endanger the public health.
   (F)   Upon failure of an owner or person in control to place any building or
dwelling unit in a sanitary condition within forty eight (48) hours of the
notice required by the preceding subsection, the village building inspector or
his designee shall proceed to abate such nuisance, and is authorized in
addition thereto, to post notice on the building or dwelling unit that such is
unsafe for habitation, and to enforce the provisions of this code. Such
inspector or designee shall keep an account of the costs and expenses of
placing such premises in a sanitary condition, and upon completion of the same
shall certify such costs to the village clerk. The clerk shall bill the owner
or the person in control of the premises for such costs and expenses incurred
by the village.
(G) For clarity, these subsections (A) – (G) do not apply to mobile homes given
the statutory framework already in place under 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
7-8-5: OTHER ACTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from taking action under any
applicable village code or ordinance for any violation thereof or limit the
right or authority of the village to seek injunctive relief or other
appropriate legal remedy for any violation of such code or ordinance.
7-8-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter shall be held invalid, its invalidity shall
not affect any other provisions of this chapter that can be given effect
without the invalid provision, and for this purpose the provisions of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable.
 
Section 4.   This ordinance is in addition to all other ordinances on the
subject and shall be construed therewith excepting as that part in direct
conflict with any other ordinance and, in the event of such conflict, the
provisions hereof shall govern.
 
Section 5 . This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage and approval and publication in the manner provided by law.
 
PASSED BY THE TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF CREVE COEUR, TAZEWELL COUNTY,
ILLINOIS, IN REGULAR AND PUBLIC SESSION THIS 09th DAY OF JULY, 2025.
 
APPROVED:
 
   
                        Fred Lang
ATTEST:                     Mayor
 
Kimberly Peak                Ayes:5
Village Clerk                  Nays:0
                        Absent: 1
                        Abstain:0
 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 358
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE OFFICIAL CODE OF THE VILLAGE OF
CREVE COEUR; PROVIDING FOR THE CONTINUANCE IN EFFECT OF ALL GENERAL LAWS IN
EFFECT ON THE DATE OF SUCH ADOPTION; PROVIDING FOR THE CONTINUATION OF ALL
SPECIAL ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED IN THE OFFICIAL CODE AND PROVIDING FOR THE
REGULAR SUPPLEMENTATION OF THE OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE.
BE IT ORDAINED By the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Creve
Coeur, Illinois:
Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Village
Code of the Village of Creve Coeur, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., under
the direction of the Governing Body of the Village Code containing all
ordinances of a general nature in effect at the time of such codification and
said Code shall be accepted in all courts without question as the Official Code
and Law of the Village as enacted by the President and Board of Trustees.
Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the
loose leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding to or deleting
provisions of the Official Village Code is identified by the proper catch line
and is inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies. Each such
new provision shall become effective upon the passage of the ordinance and the
insertion of the proper replacement pages in the copies of the Code, three (3)
copies of which shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk, certified as to
correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said office
is regularly open.
Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official Village
Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the
fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the Governing
Body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous effectiveness
of ordinances included in said Official Village Code.
All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond
ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a
provision of the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included
in this Official Village Code.
   Passed and Approved by the President and Board of Trustees this 7 day of
January, 1970.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1147f5e2e9733f6b2c310ca34bc981edbce4a658/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2298.png]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
CHAPTER 1
VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Interpretations
1-1-5: Code Of Conduct
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the board of trustees this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official village code of the village of Creve
Coeur. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be
understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate chapter
and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well
as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title in any
legal document. (1970 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect. (1970
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to Sterling
Codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code
within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1970 Code)
1-1-4: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth.
(1970 Code)
1-1-5: CODE OF CONDUCT:
The code of conduct of the village of Creve Coeur is predicated on the golden
rule which states, "Do unto others as you would have them do unto you". Village
meetings and hearings are forums for conducting the people's business in an
orderly and dignified way. Therefore there are certain standards of conduct
which are required:
   (A)   Board members and officials must not engage in verbal abuse of fellow
board members and officials, staff or members of the public. If any member or
official engages in such abuse, the member or official will be ruled out of
order by the chair and reprimanded by the board if such commentary continues.
   (B)   Citizens who are given the privilege of the floor to address the board
will not be permitted to verbally abuse board members, officials or village
employees. If there is a violation, the chair will interrupt the party, rule
the party out of order, and if such commentary continues, the violating party
will forfeit the privilege of addressing the village board. Complaints
regarding specific village employees can be submitted in writing to the office
of the mayor, the village clerk and/or a village board member, and/or other
relevant parties.
Under no circumstances will any portion of this code be used to limit strong
public debate on vital community issues or stifle the complete consideration of
divergent ideas, no matter how unpopular these ideas may be. Rather, the
purpose of this code of conduct is to ensure civility in the conduct of the
people's business. (Ord. 618, 2-10-2010)
CHAPTER 2
SAVINGS CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as
being still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following Section), from
which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: Tax
levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries
and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special
rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances.
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or
by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this Village Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such
provisions only.
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1969 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Definitions, General
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
   AGENT: The word "agent" as used in this Code shall mean a person acting on
behalf of another.
   CODE: The word "Code" unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this
Village Code.
   EMPLOYEES: The word "employees" shall mean the following: Whenever reference
is made in this Code to a Village employee by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words "of the Village of Creve Coeur".
   FEE: The word "fee" as used in this Code shall mean a sum of money charged
by the Village for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
   KNOWINGLY: The word "knowingly" imports only a knowledge that the facts
exist which brings the act or omission within the provisions of this Code. It
does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
   LICENSE: The word "license" as used in this Code shall mean the permission
granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
   MISDEMEANOR: The word "misdemeanor" shall mean any offense deemed a
violation of the provisions of this Code which is a lesser offense than a
felony as defined by State law.
   NEGLIGENT: The word "negligent", as well as "neglect", "negligence" and
"negligently" imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
   NUISANCE: The word "nuisance" shall mean anything offensive or obnoxious to
the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing
repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the
property of another person or to the community.
   OCCUPANT: The word "occupant" applied to a building or land shall include
any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
   OFFENSE: The word "offense" shall mean any act forbidden by any provision of
this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.
   OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
Village of Creve Coeur".
   OPERATOR: The word "operator" as used in this Code shall mean the person who
is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
   OWNER: The word "owner" applied to a building or land shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of
a part of such building or land.
   PERSON: The word "person" shall include the singular and the plural and
shall also mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, or any other form of association or organization.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY: The term "personal property" shall include every
description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action
and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation right or title to
property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged
or diminished and every right or interest therein.
   RETAILER: The word "retailer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise
specifically defined shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
   STREET: The word "street" shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards,
public square, public places and sidewalks.
   TENANT: The word "tenant" applied to a building or land shall include any
person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether
alone or with others.
   VILLAGE: The word "Village" as used in this Code shall mean the Village of
Creve Coeur, County of Tazewell, State of Illinois.
   WHOLESALER: The words "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this
Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to
the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
   WILFULLY: The word "wilfully" when applied to the intent with which an act
is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act
or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate
law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage.
   WRITTEN, IN WRITING: The terms "written" or "in writing" may include
printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the
written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public
writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such
person, or in case he is unable to write, by his proper mark. (1969 Code)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: License
1-4-3: Application
1-4-4: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code shall be fined
in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense 1
. (Ord. 575-B, 2-12-2003)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
1-4-2: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any
license previously issued to him by the village may be revoked by the court or
by the board of trustees, or by the board, commission or licensing agency given
such power by law. (Ord. 575-B, 2-12-2003)
1-4-3: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing
nature or declared to be unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code, the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach or violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 575-B, 2-
12-2003)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1970 Code; amd. Ord. 575-B, 2-12-2003)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Members
1-5-2: Meetings
1-5-3: Order of Business
1-5-4: Fiscal Year
1-5-5: President of the Board
1-5-6: Village Mail Delivery
1-5-1: MEMBERS:
The Board of Trustees shall consist of six (6) members, elected as provided by
law. The term of office of each Trustee shall be four (4) years 1 . (Ord. 84,
12-1-37; amd. Ord. 287, 2-5-64)
 
Notes
1 1. For statute authority see S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/3-5-2.
1-5-2: MEETINGS:
The regular meeting of the Board of Trustees of the Village shall hereafter be
held on the second and fourth Wednesdays in each month, beginning at the hour
of six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. and ending at the hour of eight o'clock (8:
00) P.M., unless a majority of the Village Board votes to extend or continue
said meeting beyond eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., said meetings to be held at the
Creve Coeur Council Chambers located at 101 North Thorncrest Avenue, unless
otherwise duly changed by the Village Board.
Special meetings may be called by the President or any three (3) members of the
Board of Trustees, by filing with the Clerk, a notice of such meeting in
writing, stating the time of such meeting and the object for which it is
called. The Clerk shall thereupon deliver or cause to be delivered a copy of
such notice to the President and each member of the Board of Trustees at least
one hour before the time of such meeting.
Any regular meeting may be adjourned by motion made and carried by a majority
of the Trustees to any subsequent date, and such adjourned regular meeting, and
any and all business of the Board of Trustees may be transacted at such
adjourned regular meeting without further notice to the President or Trustees
of the Village. (Ord. 84-G, 6-13-90)
1-5-3: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The following rules of order are hereby adopted for the government of the
legislative department of the Village. New rules may be made, or all or any of
these rules may be annulled, changed or suspended at any regular meeting of the
Board of Trustees upon a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Trustees elect. Such
vote to be taken by yeas and nays, and entered upon the journal:
   (A)   Order of Business:
      1. Roll Call.
      2. Reading Minutes, Correspondence.
      3. Reports of Officers.
      4. Reports of Standing Committees.
      5. Reports of Special Committees, Reading of Bills.
      6. Presentation of Petitions, Reading of Finances.
      7. Unfinished Business.
      8. New Business.
   (B)   The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board. He shall
appoint all standing committees, subject to the approval of the Board. He shall
appoint all special committees, unless otherwise ordered. He shall preserve
order and see that the rules are enforced.
   (C)   A majority of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and compel the
attendance of absentees.
   (D)   During the absence of, or disability of, the President, the Board may
select one of its number to act as President Pro Tem, who, while presiding,
shall possess all the powers of the President.
   (E)   No member shall in any way interrupt the proceedings of the Board or
interrupt any member while speaking. (Ord. 1, 8-1-21)
   (F)   The standing committees of the Board of Trustees shall be:
1. Committee on Fire and Police
2. Committee on Finance
3. Committee on Streets (Ord. 1-F, 4-28-93)
4. Committee on Water (Ord. 1-F, 4-28-93; amd. Ord. 1-G, 4-26-95)
5. Committee on Health and Safety
6. Committee on Building and Grounds (Ord. 1-F, 4-28-93)
   (G)   When two (2) members arise at the same time, the President shall
recognize one of them, but in all cases the one rising first shall be
recognized by the President. When one is recognized by the President, all
others shall resume their seats. No member shall speak more than twice on the
same subject without unanimous consent.
   (H)   No motion shall be entertained until seconded. When a motion is made
and seconded, it shall be reduced to writing, if requested by the President or
any member of the Board. No motion shall be debated until slated by the
President.
   (I)   When a question is under debate, no motion shall be entertained except
a motion to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone indefinitely, to postpone
to a certain time, to commit or to amend; which several motions shall have
precedence in order they are herein stated; but a motion to adjourn shall
always be in order except when taking a vote, and motions to adjourn or to lay
on the table shall not be debatable. (Ord. 1, 8-1-21)
1-5-4: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal and municipal year of the Village shall commence on the first Monday
in May in each year. All licenses hereafter granted by the President and Board
of Trustees shall expire at the end of the current fiscal year. (Ord. 4, 8-1-
21)
1-5-5: PRESIDENT OF THE BOARD:
The President shall preside at all meetings of the Board, shall sign all
contracts and licenses legally issued, and perform such other duties as may be
defined by the laws of the State, and provisions of this Code. (Ord. 5, 8-1-21)
1-5-6: VILLAGE MAIL DELIVERY:
The local Postmaster of the United States Postal Service shall be directed to
deliver all Village mail to the Village President and the Village President
shall then immediately distribute or cause to be distributed all Village mail
to the proper departments or entities within the Village. If the Village
President is not present to receive said Village mail, then this duty shall
fall to the Village Clerk. If the Village Clerk is not present, the duty shall
fall to the Village Treasurer. If the Village Treasurer is not present, the
duty shall fall to the most senior Village clerical worker present at the time
of delivery. (Ord. 528, 2-3-89)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICERS
SECTION:
1-6-1: Elective Officers
1-6-2: Appointive Officers (Rep. by Ord. 375, 4-21-1971)
1-6-3: Oath Of Office
1-6-4: Bonds
1-6-5: Officers Pro Tem
1-6-6: Special Policemen (Rep. by Ord. 652, 2-28-2007)
1-6-7: Salaries
1-6-1: ELECTIVE OFFICERS:
Three (3) village trustees shall be elected biennially. The village mayor and
village clerk shall be elected for four (4) year terms. (Ord. 5-A, 4-23-1997)
1-6-2: APPOINTIVE OFFICERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 375, 4-21-1971)
1-6-3: OATH OF OFFICE:
All officers of the village shall, before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, take and subscribe the statutory oaths in such cases made
and provided, which oaths shall be filed in the office of the clerk. (Ord. 5,
8-1-1921)
1-6-4: BONDS:
All officers of the village, whether elected or appointed, except trustees,
shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, execute a
bond, with security to be approved by the board of trustees, payable to said
village, in such penal sum as may be determined by resolution or ordinance
conditioned for the faithful performances of the duties of their respective
offices, and the payment of all monies received by such officers according to
law and the ordinances of the village. Such bonds, when duly executed and
approved, shall be filed in the office of the clerk. (Ord. 5, 8-1-1921)
1-6-5: OFFICERS PRO TEM:
When any officer of the village shall be absent, or is from any cause
incapacitated, or unable to perform the duties of his office, the president and
board of trustees may appoint an officer pro tempore, to perform the duties of
such office and any person so appointed shall have the same powers and be
clothed with the same authority as the officer whose place he is appointed to
fill temporarily. (Ord. 5, 8-1-1921)
1-6-6: SPECIAL POLICEMEN:
(Rep. by Ord. 652, 2-28-2007)
1-6-7: SALARIES:
   (A)   The village president shall be paid the annual sum of four thousand
two hundred dollars ($4,200.00), payable at the rate of three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) per month.
   (B)   Each trustee shall be paid the sum of one hundred seventy five dollars
($175.00) per month.
   (C)   The village clerk shall be paid using the following wage chart using a
three percent (3%) annual wage increase:
1st year  $30,443.71
2nd year  $31,357.02
3rd year  $32,297.73
4th year  $33,266.66
5th year  $34,264.06
6th year  $35,292.60
7th year  $36,351.38
8th year  $37,441.92
9th year  $38,565.18
10th year $39,722.14
11th year $40,913.80
12th year $42,141.21
 
As additional compensation, the clerk shall be entitled to participate in the
village employees' healthcare insurance program on the same basis as all full
time village employees. In addition to the statutory duties set forth in
section
1-7-1 of this title, the village clerk shall operate his/her office and
maintain office hours from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
on all days that the village hall is open. Arrangements shall be made with the
village treasurer or other village employees to discharge the clerk's duties
during his/her vacation or other absences. (Ord. 822, 10-26-2016; Ord. 822A,
10-14-2020)
CHAPTER 7
CLERK
SECTION:
1-7-1: Duties
1-7-2: Freedom Of Information Act Policies And Procedures
1-7-1: DUTIES:
The clerk shall be the custodian of the village seal and keep the same in his
office. He shall attend all meetings of the board of trustees, and keep a full
record of their proceedings in a book provided for that purpose; and copies of
all papers filed in his office, and transcripts from the journal, and all other
records and files of his office, shall be furnished by him, duly certified,
when required by the president of the board of trustees. The clerk shall file
the originals of all ordinances in his office, and is authorized and empowered
to correct any errors in the numbering of any section of any ordinance; he also
may omit words inserted erroneously, or supply in brackets words omitted by
mistake in any ordinance. He shall superintend the printing or publication of
all ordinances requiring publication. He shall record in a book kept for that
purpose all ordinances passed by the president and board of trustees and at the
foot of the record of each ordinance he shall make a memorandum of the date of
passage, approval and publication thereof. The clerk shall also perform all
other duties which may be required of him by the laws of the state or the
provisions of this code 1 . (Ord. 5, 8-1-1921)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-5-9.
1-7-2: FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:
The village clerk shall be designated as the freedom of information officer for
the village and the person to whom all initial requests for access to the
records of the village, or requests for copies thereof, are to be referred,
except that this designation shall not be effective unless or until such person
has successfully completed the required FOIA officer training curriculum as
required by law. The record requests are to be made in compliance with the
policies and procedures established by the clerk in compliance with the
Illinois freedom of information act, with the assistance of the village
attorney, and may include, subject to the written designation of the clerk,
delegation to other officials of the village including the chief of police, or
his designee, the fire chief, or his designee, or the treasurer. However, no
such designation or delegation shall be effective unless or until such person
has successfully completed the required FOIA officer training curriculum as
required by law. These policies and procedures may be amended from time to time
as directed by a majority vote of the village board of trustees. (Ord. 667, 12-
23-2009)
CHAPTER 8
TREASURER
SECTION:
1-8-1: Appointment Of Treasurer
1-8-2: Term Of Office
1-8-3: Salary
1-8-4: Duties
1-8-1: APPOINTMENT OF TREASURER:
The mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the village board of trustees,
shall appoint a village treasurer. Upon such appointment, the mayor shall
administer the appropriate oath and affirmations.
If the treasurer resigns, the treasurer shall continue in office until a
successor has been chosen and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a
village treasurer or the person appointed fails to qualify or resigns, the
person filling the position shall continue in office until a successor has been
chosen and has qualified. (Ord. 5, 6-23-1993)
1-8-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The village treasurer shall be appointed for a term of one year. This term
shall expire on April 30 of each calendar year.
The village treasurer shall be responsible for working from nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday through Friday of each week, unless
such day falls on a legal holiday. The treasurer shall also be responsible for
working at any additional times as may be necessary to effectively complete the
duties of the office. The mayor may remove any village treasurer, on any formal
charge, whenever the mayor is of the opinion that the interest of the village
demands removal. Any removal must be in accordance with this code and the
municipal code of the state. (Ord. 631, 11-9-2005)
1-8-3: SALARY:
The salary or rate of pay of the village treasurer shall be established in each
annual budget of the village. (Ord. 5, 6-23-1993)
1-8-4: DUTIES:
   (A)   The village treasurer shall receive all money belonging to the village
and shall keep a correct account of the same as prescribed by ordinance. The
treasurer shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the
debits and credits belonging thereto. These books and accounts shall be subject
to inspection by the mayor and/or board of trustees or their designee or as
provided by statute.
   (B)   The treasurer shall, at the end of each month, or more often if
required by the board of trustees, render an account showing the state of the
treasury on the date of the account and the balance of money in the treasury.
The account shall be accompanied by a statement of all money paid into the
treasury, and on what account, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by
the treasurer. This monthly account, along with all warrants and vouchers held
by the treasurer, shall be delivered to the village clerk to be filed with that
office.
   (C)   The treasurer shall give each person paying money into the treasury a
receipt therefor, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid.
The treasurer shall file copies of these receipts with the village clerk, with
the monthly reports. The treasurer shall honor any warrant on the treasury if
it is signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk, with the corporate
seal of the village affixed, and designates the particular fund drawn upon and
to whom payable. The treasurer shall keep a register of these warrants, with a
description of each showing date, amount, number, the fund from which paid and
to whom each was paid. (Ord. 5, 6-23-1993)
   (D)   The treasurer shall annually prepare and file with the clerk between
November 1 and November 10 of each year a full and detailed accounting of all
receipts and expenditures for the preceding year. (Ord. 5-B, 5-9-2001)
   (E)   The treasurer shall also perform other duties that the village
authorities may provide by ordinance or provided for by this code. The
performance of these duties shall be in accordance with the municipal code of
the state. (Ord. 5, 6-23-1993)
CHAPTER 8A
VILLAGE COLLECTOR
(Rep. by Ord. 487A, 10-26-1988)
CHAPTER 8B
VILLAGE ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-8B-1: Office Created
1-8B-1: OFFICE CREATED:
The position and office of Village Attorney is hereby created, effective
immediately, with such duties and compensation as prescribed by motion or
resolution of the Village Board of Trustees, subject to the statutes of the
State of Illinois and Village of Creve Coeur. (Ord. 524, 2-10-88)
CHAPTER 8C
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
SECTION:
1-8C-1: Appointment
1-8C-2: Term Of Office
1-8C-3: Salary
1-8C-4: Duties
1-8C-5: Uniforms
1-8C-1: APPOINTMENT:
The mayor of the village, by and with the advice and consent of the village
board of trustees, may appoint a village code enforcement officer. Upon such
appointment, the mayor shall administer the appropriate oath and affirmations.
(Ord. 542B, 8-12-2015)
1-8C-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The village code enforcement officer shall be appointed for a term of one year.
The initial term shall be from the officer's date of appointment until April
30, 2016. Thereafter, the code enforcement officer's term shall expire on April
30 of each calendar year.
The village code enforcement officer shall be responsible for working a minimum
of twenty four (24) hours per week during regular business hours plus any
additional hours that the village board feels is necessary. A set working
schedule will be agreed upon and any deviation of this set schedule must be
reported to the health and safety trustee or the village clerk. The code
enforcement officer shall also be responsible for working at any additional
times as may be necessary to effectively complete the duties of the office. The
mayor may remove the village code enforcement officer, on any formal charge,
whenever the mayor is of the opinion that the interest of the village demands
removal. Any removal must be in accordance with the code of the village and the
municipal code of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 542B, 8-12-2015)
1-8C-3: SALARY:
The salary or rate of pay of the village code enforcement officer shall be
established by the village board. (Ord. 542B, 8-12-2015)
1-8C-4: DUTIES:
The code enforcement officer shall be responsible for enforcement of the
village's public health and safety ordinances for weeds and vegetation,
abandoned and wrecked vehicles, junked and disabled vehicles, nuisances, junk
and unauthorized garbage. The code enforcement officer's duties concerning
enforcement of the village's ordinances will include investigating, inspecting,
responding to complaints, posting and serving notices of violations, issuing
citations for ordinance violations, cooperating and coordinating enforcement
actions with the village building inspector, police department, fire
department, and other governmental agencies, and working with the village
attorney and/or administrative adjudicator to assist with prosecution of
ordinance violations including providing testimony at trial for prosecution of
ordinance violations.
The code enforcement officer shall, at the end of each month, or more often if
required by the board of trustees, provide a written report to the chairman of
the health and safety committee reporting the code enforcement officer's
activities for the preceding month. The code enforcement officer will also, if
necessary, appear at village committee or board meetings if requested by the
mayor of the board of trustees.
The code enforcement officer shall also perform other duties that the village
authorities may provide by ordinance or provided for by this code. The
performance of these duties shall be in accordance with the municipal code of
the state of Illinois. (Ord. 542B, 8-12-2015)
1-8C-5: UNIFORMS:
The code enforcement officer shall have a five hundred dollar ($500.00) uniform
allowance at the start of the officer's first appointment. Items will be
replaced as needed with board preapproval for subsequent years. The board will
choose the company that will provide the uniforms. (Ord. 542B, 8-12-2015)
CHAPTER 8D
WASTE WATER TREATMENT PLANT SUPERVISOR
SECTION:
1-8D-1: Appointment
1-8D-2: Term Of Office
1-8D-3: Minimum Qualifications
1-8D-4: Duties
1-8D-5: Salary
1-8D-1: APPOINTMENT:
The Mayor of the Village, by and with the advice and consent of the Village
Board of Trustees, may appoint a Village Waste Water Treatment Plant
Supervisor. Upon such appointment, the Mayor shall administer the appropriate
oath and affirmations. (Ord. 848, 2-14-2018)
1-8D-2: TERM OF OFFICE:
The Waste Water Treatment Plant Supervisor shall be appointed by contract for a
term no longer than the term of the Mayor in office, with options for renewal
by subsequent Mayors. The initial term shall be from February 1, 2018 until
April 30, 2021, a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, Waste Water Treatment
Plant Supervisor's term shall expire pursuant to contract entered into with the
Mayor and approved by the Village Board. (Ord. 848, 2-14-2018)
1-8D-3: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS:
The Waste Water Treatment Plant Supervisor must maintain the classifications
and licensure required by the State and Federal law and regulations for the
position; failure to do so will result in immediate termination. (Ord. 848, 2-
14-2018)
1-8D-4: DUTIES:
The Waste Water Treatment Plant Supervisor is responsible for the management
and operation of the waste water treatment plant, the relationship with
Marquette Heights and the waste water treatment plant, as well as the sewer
systems and the lift stations leading to the waste water treatment plant, as
well as the waste water treatment plant employees. (Ord. 848, 2-14-2018)
1-8D-5: SALARY:
The salary or rate of pay shall be established from time to time by contract as
approved by the Village Board. (Ord. 848, 2-14-2018)
CHAPTER 9
CHIEF OF POLICE
SECTION:
1-9-1: Duties
1-9-2: Appointment of Chief of Police
1-9-1: DUTIES:
The Chief of Police shall have the care, custody and control of the Village
jail and all prisoners confined therein. He shall suppress all breaches of the
peace, and arrest, with or without warrant, all persons who may be found
violating any of the provisions of this Code or criminal laws of the State,
commit for examination, and if necessary detain such persons over night or
Sunday in the Village jail or other safe place, until they can be brought
before the proper magistrate, and shall have and exercise such other powers as
conservator of the peace as the provisions of this Code and the laws of the
State may prescribe. He shall take notice of all nuisances, obstructions or
defects in the streets and sidewalks of the Village, and (when not otherwise
provided by ordinance) shall cause the same to be abated or reapproved.
The Chief of Police shall attend all meetings of the Village Board, serve all
notices of special meetings to members, and execute all orders, warrants or
other legal processes required to be executed by him under the provisions of
this Code. He shall keep a record of all persons arrested or committed by him,
with their names, the time of each and the offenses for which they were
arrested or committed, the court before whom they were brought and the
disposition of each case, also the amount of the fine, if any, in each case,
and the amount paid, and report his doings each month to the Board.
In addition to the duties required by the laws of the State and the provisions
hereof, the Chief of Police may by resolution of the President and the Board of
Trustees of the Village be required to perform all the duties and be clothed
with all the authority of the Superintendent of Streets of the Village. (Ord.
5, 8-1-21)
1-9-2: APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
The Board of Fire and Police Commission of the Village shall make all
appointments to the regularly constituted Police and Fire Departments of all
offices hereafter to be filled, according to the ordinances creating the
various departments, when called upon to do so by the Village Board. Any
vacancy hereafter in the office of Police Chief shall be filled by appointment
by the Village President acting with the advice and consent of the Village
Board of Trustees. (Ord. 367A, 2-8-89)
CHAPTER 9A
DEPUTY POLICE CHIEF
SECTION:
1-9A-1: Duties
1-9A-2: Appointment Of Deputy Chief Of Police; Qualifications
1-9A-1: DUTIES:
   The Deputy Police Chief shall assist the Chief of Police in carrying out the
duties of that office and shall perform such other duties as ordered by the
Chief of Police or the Village Board, which shall include the following duties:
   (A)   Serve as a certified police officer;
   (B)   Serve as the Acting Chief of Police in the absence of the Chief of
Police and Incident Commander during major events as directed by the Chief of
Police;
   (C)   Assist the Chief of Police in researching and implementing
improvements in departmental services;
   (D)   Seek and manage grants;
   (E)   Provide administrative personnel support and prepare records and
reports;
   (F)   Develop and recommend police policies, procedures, rules, regulations
and programs;
   (G)   Assist the Chief of Police in investigating citizen complaints and
other misconduct allegations concerning department employees, and conduct
internal affairs investigations and report findings to the Chief of Police;
   (H)   Supervise and oversee patrol officers and investigators and evaluate
their performance with annual written performance evaluations;
   (I)   Assist the Chief of Police in the testing, evaluation and interview
process and during the promotional process;
   (J)   Assist in scheduling officers, approving leave requests and staff
timesheets, ensuring all vacant shifts are filled in compliance with the rules
established under the bargaining unit contract, and monitoring overtime;
   (K)   Prepare or direct the preparation and maintenance of necessary records
and reports;
   (L)   Review police reports for accuracy and completeness and analyze
trends;
   (M)   Assist the Chief of Police in oversight of the application and
selection process, including performing background investigations on
applicants, scheduling and conducting interviews, evaluations and exams and
making recommendations on the hiring of full and part-time officers based upon
his background investigation;
   (N)   Conduct and/or supervise criminal investigations, and be available for
call-out during off-duty hours for the purpose of responding to investigative
needs;
   (O)   Supervise subordinates;
   (P)   Conduct duties of Field Training Officer (FTO) when necessary, and
supervise the FTO Program;
   (Q)   Perform other job-related tasks as required by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 903, 3-25-2020)
1-9A-2: APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE; QUALIFICATIONS:
   Any vacancy hereafter in the office of Deputy Police Chief shall be filled
by appointment by the Village President acting with the advice and consent of
the Village Board of Trustees. No person shall be appointed Deputy Police Chief
unless he/she is a certified Illinois police officer with a minimum of five (5)
years of law enforcement experience and demonstrated management and leadership
skills.
(Ord. 903, 3-25-2020)
CHAPTER 10
CORPORATE LIMITS
SECTION:
1-10-1: Corporate Limits
1-10-1: CORPORATE LIMITS:
The corporate limits of the Village be and the same are hereby declared to
extend over and include therein the following territory:
The north half of Section One (1) in Township Twenty-five (25) North, Range
Five (5) West of the Third Principal Meridian: Also Section Six (6) and the
West half of the North West quarter of Section Seven (7) in Township Twenty-
five (25) North, Range Four (4) West of the Third Principal Meridian, all
situated in the County of Tazewell and State of Illinois. (Ord. 2, 8-1-21)
CHAPTER 11
VILLAGE SEAL
SECTION:
1-11-1: Village Seal
1-11-2: Custody of Seal
1-11-1: VILLAGE SEAL:
The Seal in circular form, with the words, "Village of Creve Coeur, Tazewell
County, Illinois", in the outer circle, and the words "Village Seal" in the
interior of the said circle, shall be the Seal of the Village to be used in all
cases that have been, or may be provided, by the laws of the United States, the
laws of the several states respectively, and the provisions of this Code; and
in all cases in which, by the customs and laws of nations, it is necessary to
use a Seal by a municipal corporation.
1-11-2: CUSTODY OF SEAL:
The Village Seal shall be and remain in the custody of the Clerk, to be by him
used as is provided by law and Section
1-11-1 hereof. (Ord. 3, 9-1-21)
CHAPTER 12
INVOICES OR BILLS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Requests For Payment
1-12-2: Process Of Payment
1-12-3: Orders On The Treasury
1-12-1: REQUESTS FOR PAYMENT:
All persons desiring payment from the village shall send the village clerk an
itemized statement, detailing the character of the work done or the good or
service provided with sufficient detail to enable anyone reading the invoice to
determine the nature of the good or service provided. (Ord. 805, 2-24-2016)
1-12-2: PROCESS OF PAYMENT:
Regular invoices or bills to the village shall be paid upon receipt and
reported to the finance committee and approved by the board of trustees at
their next regular meeting.
Regular invoices or bills are recurring bills that arrive on a regular basis
for services, products, or expenses and are specifically identified by payee
and maximum amount below. A regular invoice or bill must be specifically
identified herein and must meet the following conditions to be paid prior to a
board of trustees regular meeting:
   (A)   Funds are available in the village account(s) to pay the invoice or
bill.
   (B)   The item or service covered by the invoice or bill is payable to one
of the following providers for the village in general, or the village
department as listed, and does not exceed the dollar amounts listed herein:
Company Name Request To Pay Up To
Company Name                                         Request To Pay Up To
Recurring bills for the village of Creve Coeur:       
 AT&T                                               $ 150.00
 Aetna                                              150.00
 Ameren                                             6,000.00
 Aramark                                            700.00
 CDS Leasing                                        350.00
 CDS Office                                         150.00
 Call One                                           1,500.00
 City of East Peoria                                6,000.00
 Comcast                                            200.00
 Elese Johnson                                      360.00
 Employee medical reimbursement                     2,000.00
 Guardian Insurance                                 2,000.00
 Hinkley Springs                                    250.00
 Legal Shield                                       375.00
 Markely's Pest Control                             250.00
 Mayor's cellphone allowance                        50.00
 Pitney Bowes                                       300.00
 Senior street employee cellphone allowance         50.00
 Tazewell County animal control                     600.00
 U.S. postmaster                                    300.00
 United Healthcare                                  18,000.00
 Verizon                                            450.00
 WEX fuel                                           3,600.00
Recurring bills for the water department (water and   
sewer):
 Ameren                                             6,000.00
 Call One                                           550.00
 Comcast                                            300.00
 Hinkley Springs                                    50.00
 Markely's Pest Control                             50.00
 Pitney Bowes                                       300.00
 Verizon                                            50.00
Recurring bills for the water department (wastewater  
treatment):
 Ameren                                             7,000.00
 Call One                                           75.00
 Markely's Pest Control                             50.00
 PDC                                                100.00
 U.S. Voyager Fleet (gas)                           150.00
 
   (C)   The item or service covered by the invoice or bill has been supplied
or rendered in conformity with the authorization provided by the village board
previously.
   (D)   All payments made in this manner are reported to the finance committee
and approved by the board of trustees at their next regular meeting.
Other invoices or bills that are not defined as regular invoices or bills will
be paid only after the invoice or bill is presented to the board of trustees
and approved.
In the event that a person desiring payment from the village does not present
an invoice or bill, the clerk shall furnish potential payees with the proper
blanks on which to make out their invoice without charge. Provided this section
shall not apply to salaries of officers. (Ord. 805, 2-24-2016)
1-12-3: ORDERS ON THE TREASURY:
All checks issued by authority of the board of trustees, shall have endorsed on
the stub of the check, the amount, to whom issued, and the fund drawn upon. All
such checks shall be signed by the village president, village treasurer, and
countersigned by the village clerk. All checks shall be numbered in regular
order at the beginning of each municipal year. (Ord. 805, 2-24-2016)
CHAPTER 13
ELECTION PRECINCTS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Precincts
1-13-1: PRECINCTS:
For all Village elections, both general and special, hereinafter held in the
Village of Creve Coeur, Tazewell County, Illinois, and commencing with the
general election to be held on April 15, A.D., 1975, the Village of Creve
Coeur, shall be and the same is hereby divided and established into two (2)
voting precincts, numbered one and two (2).
The division line for said two (2) precincts is hereby designated as follows:
Starting at the intersection of the northerly limits of the Village of Creve
Coeur with North Main Street, then southerly along North Main Street to its
intersection with Rusche Avenue, thence northeasterly and easterly along Rusche
Avenue to its intersection with the west line of Hilltop Manor extended, thence
south along the Westline of Hilltop Manor, Hilltop Manor Annex, and Creve Coeur
Farms to the South Corporate Limits of the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois.
   PRECINCT NUMBER ONE shall be all that portion of said Village lying westerly
and southerly of said division line, and the polling place for said precinct
number one shall be the new Utilities Building, located at 101 North Thorncrest
Avenue.
   PRECINCT NUMBER TWO shall be all that portion of said Village lying easterly
and northerly of said division line, and the polling place for said precinct
number two (2) shall be the Creve Coeur Community Center, located at 586
Goveland Avenue, in the Village of Creve Coeur. (Ord. 418, 2-26-75)
CHAPTER 14
TAX RATES
(Rep. by Ord. 654, 5-14-2008)
CHAPTER 15
PUBLIC BENEFIT TAX
SECTION:
1-15-1: Tax Imposed
1-15-2: Warrants
1-15-3: Fund Established
1-15-1: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby provided for the levy of a tax in addition to the taxes now
authorized by law, and in addition to the amount authorized to be levied for
general purpose, as provided by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-3-1, of a
direct annual tax not exceeding five hundredths percent (.05%) of the full,
fair cash value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue, of all
taxable property in this Municipality. This tax shall be known as a Public
Benefit Fund Tax. The fund arising therefrom shall be known as the Public
Benefit Fund, which shall be used solely for the purpose of paying that portion
of the several amounts heretofore assessed against the Municipality for public
benefit as well as paying any such amounts as may be hereafter assessed for
public benefit under and in pursuance of any ordinance that may be hereafter
passed. However, where and whenever any road or street is constructed or
reconstructed by the State or any county or both jointly with any municipality,
the Municipality may consider, accept and use, the amount estimated by the
State or the County, or both, to be its or their portion of the cost of
construction, as a part or all of the municipal public benefit. (Ord. 314, 6-
21-67)
1-15-2: WARRANTS:
Where any such tax has been so levied, warrants may be drawn against the tax,
as and in the manner and with like effect as is provided by 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-1-9, 5/9-1-11 and 5/8-1-12 of the Illinois Municipal
Code. (Ord. 314, 6-21-67)
1-15-3: FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a special fund, separate in itself, designated as
the "Public Benefit Tax Fund" and all moneys received and to be anticipated to
be received, shall be placed in such fund and used for such purpose. (Ord. 314,
6-21-67)
CHAPTER 16
PUBLIC WORKS WAGE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
1-16-1: Prevailing Rate Of Wage
1-16-2: Exceptions
1-16-3: Public Inspection
1-16-4: Requested Copies Of Determination
1-16-5: Certified Copies Filed
1-16-6: Published In Newspaper
1-16-1: PREVAILING RATE OF WAGE:
To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by anyone under
contract for public work", approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other
workmen engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of the village of Creve Coeur is hereby ascertained to be the same
as the prevailing rate of wages for construction work in Tazewell County as
determined by the department of labor of the state of Illinois as of June 2005,
a copy of that determination being attached hereto and incorporated herein by
reference. As required by said act, any and all revisions of the prevailing
rate of wages by the department of labor and of the state of Illinois shall
supersede the department's June determination and apply to any and all public
works construction undertaken by the village of Creve Coeur. The definition of
any terms appearing in this chapter which are also used in the aforesaid act
shall be the same as in said act. (Ord. 628, 6-8-2005)
1-16-2: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general prevailing
rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except public
works construction of this village of Creve Coeur to the extent required by the
aforesaid act. (Ord. 628, 6-8-2005)
1-16-3: PUBLIC INSPECTION:
The clerk of the village of Creve Coeur shall publicly post or keep available
for inspection by any interested party in the main office of this village this
determination or any revisions of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this
determination or of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of
wages then in effect shall be attached to all contract specifications. (Ord.
628, 6-8-2005)
1-16-4: REQUESTED COPIES OF DETERMINATION:
The clerk of the village of Creve Coeur shall mail a copy of this determination
to any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting
copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular
class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates. (Ord. 628, 6-8-
2005)
1-16-5: CERTIFIED COPIES FILED:
The clerk of the village of Creve Coeur shall promptly file a certified copy of
this chapter with both the secretary of state index division and the department
of labor of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 628, 6-8-2005)
1-16-6: PUBLISHED IN NEWSPAPER:
The clerk of the village of Creve Coeur shall cause to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the area a notice of this chapter, and
such publication shall constitute notice that the determination is effective
and that this is the determination of this public body. (Ord. 628, 6-8-2005)
CHAPTER 17
PUBLIC BIDDING AND PURCHASING
SECTION:
1-17-1: Competitive Bidding Required
1-17-2: Formal Contract Procedure
1-17-3: Advertisements For Bids
1-17-4: Scope Of Notice
1-17-5: Bid Deposits
1-17-6: Bid Opening Procedure
1-17-7: Rejection Of Bids
1-17-8: Bidders In Default To Village
1-17-9: Award Of Contract
1-17-10: Performance Bonds
1-17-11: Open Market Procedure
1-17-12: Professional Services Exempt From Bidding Requirements
1-17-13: Emergency Purchases
1-17-14: Cooperative Purchasing
1-17-1: COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED:
Any work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in
part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases of and
contracts for supplies, materials, and services shall, except as specifically
provided herein, be based whenever possible on competitive bids. (Ord. 557, 8-
13-1997)
1-17-2: FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE:
All work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in
part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases, orders, or
contracts for supplies, materials, equipment, or contractual services, except
as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed
twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be purchased from the lowest
responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding
is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees then holding office.
(Ord. 635, 4-12-2006)
1-17-3: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR BIDS:
A notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper with
general circulation not less than ten (10) days prior to bid opening. The
village shall also advertise all pending work or purchases by posting a notice
on the public bulletin board in the village hall. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-4: SCOPE OF NOTICE:
The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the
work to be performed or the articles to be purchased, shall state where
specifications may be secured, and shall specify the time and place for opening
bids. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-5: BID DEPOSITS:
When deemed necessary by the board of trustees, bid deposits shall be
prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be
entitled to the return of their bid deposits upon the award of the contract by
the board of trustees. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit
required by the board of trustees upon failure on his part to enter into a
contract within ten (10) days after the award. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-6: BID OPENING PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
   (B)   Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated
in the public notice.
   (C)   Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
board of trustees or by a village employee, in which event a tabulation of the
bids shall be furnished to the board of trustees at its next regular meeting.
(Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-7: REJECTION OF BIDS:
The village, through its corporate authorities, shall have the authority to
reject all bids or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served
thereby. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-8: BIDDERS IN DEFAULT TO VILLAGE:
The village shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the
payment of taxes, licenses, or other money due the village. (Ord. 557, 8-13-
1997)
1-17-9: AWARD OF CONTRACT:
   (A)   Authority In Village: The board of trustees has the authority to award
contracts within the purview of this section.
   (B)   Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interests of the
village to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the board of
trustees shall consider:
      1.   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
      2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder;
      4.   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services;
      5.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
      6.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service;
      7.   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
      8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract;
      9.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. (Ord. 557,
8-13-1997)
1-17-10: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The board of trustees shall have the authority to require a performance bond,
before entering into a contract, in such amounts as it shall find reasonably
necessary to protect the best interests of the village and to conform to the
statutory requirements for such bonds. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-11: OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE:
All work and purchases of supplies, materials, and services of less than the
estimated value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be made in the open
market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure
prescribed by this Section for the award of contracts in such a manner so as to
ensure the best interests of the public after solicitation of bids on proposals
by mail, telephone, facsimile transmission, or otherwise. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-12: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES EXEMPT FROM BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
All contracts for professional services, including, but not limited to,
attorneys, engineers, real estate appraisers, architects, and any other
profession whose ethical code prohibits or discourages involvement in normal
bidding procedures, may be entered into by the Village without observing the
bidding procedures prescribed by this Section for the award of formal
contracts.
Regular employment contracts in the Municipal service shall likewise be exempt
from the provisions of this Ordinance. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-13: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an apparent emergency that requires immediate work or purchasing of
supplies, materials, or services, the Board of Trustees shall be empowered to
secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable
price, any work, supplies, materials, or services regardless of the amount of
the expenditure. A finding of such an emergency shall be made in an affirmative
vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the Board of Trustees at the time of such
emergency contract or no later than the first regular Village Board meeting
thereafter. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
1-17-14: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The Village shall have the authority to join with other units of government in
cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the Village would be
served thereby. (Ord. 557, 8-13-1997)
CHAPTER 18
PROHIBITED GIFTS POLICY
SECTION:
1-18-1: General Policy
1-18-2: Definitions
1-18-3: Gifts Prohibited
1-18-4: Exceptional Gifts
1-18-5: Enforcement
1-18-6: Ethics Officer
1-18-1: GENERAL POLICY:
It is the policy of the Village to comply with the State Gift Ban Act through
the promulgation of this policy. Neither the Open Meetings Act nor the Freedom
of Information Act of Illinois, or any policies of this Municipality in
furtherance of those Acts shall be applicable to proceedings, meetings or
documents involved here, which are exempt therefrom. (Ord. 565A, 7-28-1999)
1-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms "gift" and "prohibited source", whether used in the singular or
plural form and as used in this Chapter, have the meanings as defined in the
State Gift Ban Act. The term "employee" means all full-time, part-time, and
contractual employees, appointed and elected officials, and Village Trustees.
(Ord. 565A, 7-28-1999)
1-18-3: GIFTS PROHIBITED:
The solicitation and acceptance of any "gifts", from any "prohibited source",
are banned and prohibited for all Municipality employees except as provided in
Section
1-18-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 565A, 7-28-1999)
1-18-4: EXCEPTIONAL GIFTS:
The restrictions in the foregoing Section do not apply to the following:
   (A)   Anything for which the employee pays market value or anything not used
and promptly returned to the donor or given to an appropriate charity;
   (B)   A contribution, lawfully made under the election code or attendance at
a fundraising event sponsored by a political organization;
   (C)   A gift from a relative as defined in the State Act;
   (D)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship, unless there is reason to believe that under the circumstances the
gift was provided because of the employee's position and not because of
personal friendship;
   (E)   A commercially reasonable loan evidenced in writing with repayment due
by a date certain made in the ordinary course of the lender's business;
   (F)   Payments to a legal defense fund established for the employee that is
otherwise lawfully made;
   (G)   Intraoffice and interoffice gifts meaning any gifts from an employee
of the Municipality to an employee of the Municipality;
   (H)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities if they have not been
enhanced by the position of employment with the Municipality and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances or in connection with
bona fide employment discussions by a prospective employer, or provided in
connection with a fundraising or campaign event sponsored by the organization;
   (I)   Pension and other benefits resulting from continued participation in
an employee welfare and benefits plan maintained by a former employer;
   (J)   Informational materials sent to the employee in the form of books,
articles, periodicals, other written materials, audiotapes, videotapes, or
other forms of communication;
   (K)   Awards or prizes that are given to competitors in contests or events
open to the public, including random drawings;
   (L)   Honorary degrees (and associated travel, food, refreshments and
entertainment provided in the presentation of degrees and awards);
   (M)   Training (including food and refreshments furnished to all attendees
as an integral part of the training) if the training is in the interest of the
Municipality;
   (N)   Educational missions, including meetings with government officials
intended to educate them on matters of public policy;
   (O)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death;
   (P)   Anything that is paid for by the Federal Government, the State or the
Municipality or secured by the government under a government contract;
   (Q)   A gift of personal hospitality of an individual other than a
registered lobbyist or foreign principal including hospitality extended for a
nonbusiness purpose by an individual at their personal residence or facilities
owned by that individual or the individual's family;
   (R)   Free attendance at a widely attended event permitted under subsection
(X) of this Section;
   (S)   Opportunities and benefits that are available to the public or to all
employees whether or not geographically restricted, offered to a class of
members which is unrelated to employment or official positions, offered to
members such as an employees' association or credit union, offered to a group
that is not defined in a manner that specifically discriminates on the basis of
branch of government or type of responsibility or on the basis that favors
those of higher rank or pay, in the form of loans on terms generally available
to the public or in the form of reduced membership or other fees for
participation in organization activities offered to all government employees;
   (T)   A plaque, trophy or other item that is substantially commemorative in
nature and that is extended for presentation;
   (U)   Golf or tennis; food or refreshments of nominal value and catered food
or refreshments, meals or beverages consumed on the premises from which they
were purchased;
   (V)   Donations of products from an Illinois company that are intended
primarily for promotional purposes and are of minimal value;
   (W)   An item of nominal value such as a greeting card, baseball cap or T-
shirt;
   (X)   An employee may accept an offer of free attendance at a widely
attended convention, conference, symposium, forum, panel discussion, dinner,
viewing, reception, or similar event provided by the sponsor of the event if
the employee participates as a speaker or panel participant or by performing a
ceremonial function appropriate to their employment or position or attendance
at the event is appropriate to the performance of civic affairs in Illinois or
the official duties of the employee. The acceptance of a sponsor's unsolicited
offer of free attendance at such an event may include an accompanying
individual. An employee may accept a sponsor's unsolicited offer of free
attendance at a charity event except reimbursement for transportation and
lodging may not be accepted in connection with the event. This "free
attendance" may include waivers of all fees and unless otherwise stated the
provision of transportation, food, refreshments, entertainment and instruction
materials but does not include entertainment collateral to the event or food or
refreshments taken other than in the group setting with substantially all of
the attendees except as permitted under subsection (U) of this Section. (Ord.
565A, 7-28-1999)
1-18-5: ENFORCEMENT:
Any employee who violates this policy shall be subject to termination or other
discipline, including, but not limited to, suspension (with or without
compensation) of employment for a stated term, a requirement to reimburse,
return or turnover of any prohibited gift as directed by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 565A, 7-28-1999)
1-18-6: ETHICS OFFICER:
The Mayor of the Village shall designate an Ethics Officer who shall review
statements of economic interests and disclosure forms for members, officers and
employees of the Municipality before they are filed and provide guidance to
members, officers and employees in the interpretation and implementation of the
State Gift Ban Act. (Ord. 565A, 7-28-1999)
CHAPTER 19
INVESTMENT OF PUBLIC FUNDS
SECTION:
1-19-1: Purpose And Scope
1-19-2: Responsibilities
1-19-3: Delegation Of Authority
1-19-4: "Prudent Person" Standard
1-19-5: Objectives
1-19-6: Guidelines
1-19-7: Reporting
1-19-8: Internal Controls
1-19-9: Authorized Financial Dealers And Institutions
1-19-10: Conflicts Of Interest
1-19-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
The purpose of this policy statement is to outline the responsibilities,
general objectives, and specific guidelines for management of public funds by
the Village. Its scope is all public funds held by the Village. (Ord. 573, 7-
14-1999)
1-19-2: RESPONSIBILITIES:
All investment policies and procedures of the Village will be in accordance
with Illinois law. The authority of the Village Trustees to control and invest
public funds is defined in the Illinois Public Funds Investment Act and the
investments permitted are described therein. Administration and execution of
these policies are the responsibility of the Treasurer who is hereby designated
as the "Chief Investment Officer" of the Village acting under the authority of
the Village Trustees. (Ord. 573, 7-14-1999)
1-19-3: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY:
Management and administrative responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Chief Investment Officer. The Chief Investment Officer
is responsible for establishing internal controls and written procedures for
the operation of the investment program. (Ord. 573, 7-14-1999)
1-19-4: "PRUDENT PERSON" STANDARD:
All Village investment activities shall use a "prudent person" standard of
care. This standard shall be applied in the context of managing an overall
portfolio and specifies that investments shall be made with judgment and care,
under circumstances then prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and
intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for
speculation, but for investment, considering the probable safety of their
capital, as well as the probable income to be derived. Investment officers,
acting in accordance with this Chapter and the written procedures of the
Village and exercising due diligence, shall be relieved of personal
responsibility for a security's credit risk or market price/value changes,
provided deviations from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and
appropriate action is taken to control adverse developments. (Ord. 573, 7-14-
1999)
1-19-5: OBJECTIVES:
In selecting financial institutions and investment instruments to be used, the
following general objectives should be considered in the priority listed:
   (A)   Legality (conforming with all legal requirements).
   (B)   Safety (preserving capital and including diversification appropriate
to the nature and amount of the funds).
   (C)   Liquidity (maintaining sufficient liquidity to meet current
obligations and those reasonably to be anticipated).
   (D)   Yield (attaining a market rate of return on investments).
   (E)   Simplicity of management. (Ord. 573, 7-14-1999)
1-19-6: GUIDELINES:
The following guidelines should be used to meet the general investment
objectives:
   (A)   Legality And Safety:
1. Investments will be made only in securities guaranteed by the U.S.
Government, or in FDIC insured institutions including SAIF of the FDIC. Deposit
accounts in banks or savings and loan institutions will not exceed the amount
insured by FDIC coverage (unless adequately collateralized pursuant to
Regulations of the Federal Reserve regarding custody and safekeeping of
collateral).
2. Authorized investments include and will primarily consist of: certificates
of deposit, Treasury bills and other securities guaranteed by the U.S.
Government, participation in the State of Illinois Public Treasurer's
Investment Pool, and any other investments allowed under State law that satisfy
the investment objectives of the library district.
   (B)   Liquidity: In general, investments should be managed to meet liquidity
needs for the current month plus one month (based on forecasted needs) and any
reasonably anticipated special needs.
   (C)   Yield; Return On Investment: Within the constraints on Illinois law,
considerations of safety, and this investment policy, every effort should be
made to maximize return on investments made. All available funds will be placed
in investments or kept in interest-bearing deposit accounts.
   (D)   Simplicity Of Management: The time required by staff to manage
investments shall be kept to a minimum. (Ord. 573, 7-14-1999)
1-19-7: REPORTING:
Investments, fund balances and the status of such accounts will be reported at
each regularly scheduled meeting of the Village Board and at least quarterly
include information regarding securities in the portfolio by class or type,
book value, income earned, and market value as of the report date. At least
annually, the Chief Investment Officer shall review this Chapter for any needed
modifications and report to the Board on the investment portfolio, its
effectiveness in meeting the Village's need for safety, liquidity, rate of
return, diversification and general performance. These reports will be
available to the general public upon request. (Ord. 573, 7-14-1999)
1-19-8: INTERNAL CONTROLS:
In addition to these guidelines, the Chief Investment Officer shall establish a
system of internal controls and written operational procedures designed to
prevent loss, theft or misuse of funds. (Ord. 573, 7-14-1999)
1-19-9: AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS:
Any investment advisors, money managers and financial institutions shall be
considered and authorized only by the action of the Village Trustees upon the
recommendation of the Chief Investment Officer. The Chief Investment Officer
will maintain a list of financial dealers and institutions authorized to
provide investment services. (Ord. 573, 7-14-1999)
1-19-10: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST:
Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activities that might conflict with the proper execution and
management of this investment program, or that could impair their ability to
make impartial decisions, or that could give the appearance of impropriety.
(Ord. 573, 7-14-1999)
CHAPTER 20
TRAVEL AND EXPENSE REGULATIONS
SECTION:
1-20-1: General Policy
1-20-2: Definitions
1-20-3: Types Of Travel For Which Travel Expenses Will Be Allowed
1-20-4: Types Of Expenses Allowed Or Prohibited
1-20-5: Maximum Allowable Reimbursement Without Board Action
1-20-6: Procedure For Reimbursement
1-20-7: Expenses Incurred By Board Members
1-20-1: GENERAL POLICY:
It is the policy of the village to comply with the local government travel and
expense control act through the promulgation of these regulations. (Ord. 823,
10-12-2016)
1-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
   ENTERTAINMENT: Includes, but is not limited to, shows, amusements, theaters,
circuses, sporting events, or any other place of public or private
entertainment or amusement, unless ancillary to the purpose of the program or
event.
   TRAVEL EXPENSE: Any expenditure directly incident to official travel by
employees, members of the governing board, and officers of the village for a
specific village purpose. (Ord. 823, 10-12-2016)
1-20-3: TYPES OF TRAVEL FOR WHICH TRAVEL EXPENSES WILL BE ALLOWED:
The village will only approve travel expenses for employees or officers if the
travel is necessary to complete official village business, for the education of
employees or officers, or necessary to obtain information for the betterment of
the village in some capacity. (Ord. 823, 10-12-2016)
1-20-4: TYPES OF EXPENSES ALLOWED OR PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Allowed:
      1.   The actual cost of transportation is allowed (for example, airline
tickets, train tickets, taxi fare and the like), as well as personal vehicle
costs reimbursed at the current IRS mileage rate for business.
      2.   The costs of lodging at a hotel or motel are allowed if an overnight
stay is necessary.
      3.   The costs of meals while traveling are allowed.
      4.   The costs of conference fees, supplies and books for educational
purposes are allowed.
   (B)   Prohibited:
      1.   "Entertainment" expenses, as defined above, are not allowed and must
be paid for personally by the traveler, and no costs for alcohol or liquor are
permitted. (Ord. 823, 10-12-2016)
1-20-5: MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE REIMBURSEMENT WITHOUT BOARD ACTION:
   (A)   Village employees and officers may receive reimbursement for travel
expenses without specific board action as long as the expenses are under the
maximum allowable reimbursement as stated herein and the procedure for
reimbursement below is followed.
      1.   The board will post the maximum allowable reimbursement for food,
lodging, and transportation in the office of the village clerk which shall
change from time to time at the direction of the board. The board shall use the
following overriding principles to determine the maximums:
         (a)   Cost of travel shall be the actual expense incurred. Only coach
flight expenses will be approved, any upgrades to first or business class will
be at the expense of the traveler. Any personal automobile expenses will always
be approved at the IRS rate for business travel if the traveler uses their own
automobile (as opposed to a village automobile).
         (b)   Cost of food shall not include the cost of alcoholic beverages
and should be reasonable and customary for the area.
         (c)   Cost of lodging should be reasonable and customary for the area
where the traveler is staying.
      2.   The total maximum for any travel for village purposes allowed is
three thousand dollars ($3,000.00).
      3.   In the event of an emergency or extraordinary circumstance,
reimbursement may be approved over the three thousand dollar ($3,000.00)
maximum reimbursement limit if approved by a majority of the board at a
properly noticed and regularly scheduled board meeting subject to a roll call
vote. (Ord. 823, 10-12-2016)
1-20-6: PROCEDURE FOR REIMBURSEMENT:
No expenses shall be reimbursed without a reimbursement request form (as
attached to the ordinance codified herein) is completely filled out with
receipts or estimates (with reservations and confirmation numbers) attached. In
the event that travel expense is prepaid, actual receipts must be turned in and
attached to the reimbursement request form within thirty (30) days of the
completion of travel. Any amount paid in excess of the actual receipts filed
must be repaid to the village within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 823, 10-12-2016)
1-20-7: EXPENSES INCURRED BY BOARD MEMBERS:
Expenses may only be approved for reimbursement by the board as a whole at a
normally scheduled board meeting subject to a roll call vote. (Ord. 823, 10-12-
2016)
CHAPTER 21
LATE FEES FOR LICENSE RENEWALS
SECTION:
1-21-1:    Late Fees For License Renewals
1-21-1:  LATE FEES FOR LICENSE RENEWALS:
For every license issued by the Village that requires renewal, on an annual
basis or at any other specified interval, there is hereby imposed a late fee in
the amount of ten percent (10%) of the applicable license renewal fee if such
license renewal fee is not paid within five (5) business days following the
date upon which the license otherwise expires. For every license issued by the
Village that requires renewal, on an annual basis or at any other specified
interval, and for which the license holder fails to pay the applicable license
renewal fee within thirty (30) days following the date upon which the license
otherwise expires, such license shall be deemed to have permanently expired.
(Ord. 887, 7-24-2019)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
BOARD OF HEALTH
(Rep. by Ord. 572, 5-26-1999)
CHAPTER 2
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
(Rep. by Ord. 572, 5-26-1999)
CHAPTER 3
CIVIL DEFENSE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Establishment
2-3-2: Officers
2-3-3: Directors
2-3-4: Duties of Directors
2-3-5: Functions
2-3-6: Service as Mobile Support Team
2-3-7: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-3-8: Emergency Action
2-3-9: Compensation
2-3-10: Reimbursement by State
2-3-11: Purchases and Expenditures
2-3-12: Oath
2-3-13: Office
2-3-14: Appropriation; Levy of Taxes
2-3-15: Emergency Municipal Government
2-3-16: Plans Approved
2-3-17: Blackout and Air Raid Regulations
2-3-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby established a local Civil Defense organization to prevent,
minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused
by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural disaster or
catastrophe, in accordance with the provisions of "the Illinois Civil Defense
Act of 1951", as amended.
2-3-2: OFFICERS:
The local Civil Defense organization shall consist of a Director, two (2)
assistant Directors and such additional members as may be selected by the
Director.
2-3-3: DIRECTORS:
The Directors of the Creve Coeur Civil Defense organization shall consist of
persons appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees, with the consent
of the Village Board, and they shall serve until removed, for cause, by the
same.
2-3-4: DUTIES OF DIRECTORS:
The Director shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the Civil Defense organization,
subject to the direction and control of the Village President, as provided by
Statutes.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death, or inability to serve of the
Director, an assistant Director shall assume his position, and the President or
any other person appointed by him, shall act as Director until a new
appointment is made, should such be necessary, as provided by this Chapter.
2-3-5: FUNCTIONS:
The Creve Coeur Civil Defense organization shall perform such civil defense
functions within this Municipality as shall be prescribed in and by the State
Civil Defense plan and program prepared by the Governor, and in addition shall
perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to
any Mutual Aid agreement with any other political subdivision, municipality or
quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the "Illinois Civil Defense Act
of 1951", as amended.
2-3-6: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any member of the Creve Coeur Civil Defense organization may be
designated as members of a Mobile Support Team created by the State Director of
Civil Defense as provided by law.
The leader of such Mobile Support Team shall be designated by the Director of
the Creve Coeur Civil Defense Organization.
Any member of a Mobile Support Team is a municipal employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director of Civil
Defense, and shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties,
rights, and immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member
who is not a paid officer or employee of this municipality, while so serving
shall receive from the State reasonable compensation as provided by law.
2-3-7: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Director of the Creve Coeur Civil Defense organization may negotiate Mutual
Aid agreements with other municipal corporations or political subdivisions of
the State, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved
by the Village Board and by the State Director of Civil Defense.
2-3-8: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor declares that a Civil Defense emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy action or attack upon the United States or the occurrence within
the State of Illinois of major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other
hostile action or from natural causes or disaster, it shall be the duty of the
Creve Coeur Civil Defense organization to cooperate fully with the State
Director of Civil Defense and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency
powers as provided by law.
2-3-9: COMPENSATION:
Members of the Civil Defense organization who are paid employees of this
Village, if called for training by the State Director of Civil Defense, shall
receive for time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to
the position held; members who are not such Municipal employees or officers
shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by
the Village Board to justly compensate for time and expense lost.
2-3-10: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund and
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the Civil Defense, compensation for services and expenses of members
of a Mobile Support Team while serving outside the Village in response to a
call by the Governor or State Director of Civil Defense, as provided by law,
and any reimbursement made by the State incident to Civil Defense activities,
as provided by law.
2-3-11: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village Board may, on recommendation of the Creve Coeur Civil Defense
Director, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in
a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of
any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and
safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to victims in the
case of such disaster, or from natural causes.
In the event of enemy caused or natural disaster, the Creve Coeur Director of
Civil Defense is authorized, on behalf of this Village, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment, or materials as may be necessary for such
purpose, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or
obligations, as authorized by "The Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951", as
amended, or obligations, provided that, if the Village Board meets immediately
at such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed
by this Village Board.
2-3-12: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Creve Coeur Civil
Defense organization, shall, before entering upon his duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Director:
"I,                  , Local Civil Defense Director of the Creve Coeur Civil
Defense Organization of Creve Coeur, Illinois, do solemnly swear (or affirm)
that I will support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public
and private, against all enemies, foreign or domestic; that I take this
obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and
that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to
enter, and I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor
have I been a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence; and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Creve Coeur
Civil Defense organization, I will not advocate nor become a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence."
2-3-13: OFFICE:
The Village President is authorized to designate adequate space in the Village
Hall or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village Board for the Creve
Coeur Civil Defense Organization as its office.
2-3-14: APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES:
The Village Board may have an appropriation for Civil Defense purposes in the
manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for Civil Defense purposes
only, a tax not to exceed five cents (5¢) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
the assessed value of all taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as
provided by "The Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951", as amended.
2-3-15: EMERGENCY MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT:
In the event of any disaster, herein referred to, should it be necessary or
advisable, the municipal government of the Village shall establish such seat of
government, within or without the corporate limits of this Village, or within
or without this State, and any such action taken by them, shall be as binding
as if held within the usual, designated seat of government, as provided by the
said "The Illinois Civil Defense Act of 1951", as amended.
2-3-16: PLANS APPROVED:
The Civil Defense organization of this Village and the plans, tables,
agreements, mutual aid agreements and programs, heretofore adopted and
established, are hereby approved, and any such changes as may be made and as
are authorized from time to time, as provided by law, are approved by this
Chapter. (Ord. 257, 9-16-59)
2-3-17: BLACKOUT AND AIR RAID REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Authority: In order to protect life and property in the Village from
enemy action the President of the Board of Trustees is authorized and directed
to carry out blackouts and air raid protection measures in said Village at such
times and for such periods as are authorized or ordered by the Army or Navy and
to promulgate such orders, rules and regulations as may be necessary to insure
the success of blackouts and air raid protection measures and to protect life
and property during said periods. Said orders, rules and regulations shall
include traffic movements of emergency or other vehicles, evacuation of
residents, congregation of persons on public streets and sidewalks and in
public places or buildings, but this enumeration shall not be a limitation on
the power to promulgate orders, rules and regulations governing any other
subject, persons or property which must be regulated in order to insure the
proper carrying out of any duly authorized blackout or air raid protection
measure. Practice blackouts and air raid drills may be carried out at such
times and for such periods as the President shall in his discretion deem
appropriate or necessary, but subject always to the orders and directions of
the Army or Navy and the orders, rules and regulations authorized herein.
   (B)   All orders, rules and regulations authorized by this Section for the
conduct of the general public shall be in writing and shall be available for
public inspection at the place and during the hours fixed by the President.
   (C)   Any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the authority
conferred by this Section shall be in force and effect from the time of
promulgation until amended or repealed by the President or until repealed by
the President and Board of Trustees.
   (D)   The President may appoint for a specified time as many temporary
special police, without pay, from among residents of the Village as may be
deemed advisable for service in connection with any blackout or air raid
protection measure. During the term of service of such temporary special
police, they shall possess all the powers and perform all the duties of members
of the standing police force of the Village. Said temporary special police must
wear such identifying emblem as may be prescribed by the President and it shall
be unlawful for any said temporary special policeman to attempt to carry out
any order, rule or regulation promulgated under the authority conferred by this
Section when he is not wearing said identifying emblem.
   (E)   Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so
as to simulate a blackout signal or air raid warning, or the termination of a
blackout or air raid, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Section.
   (F)   This Section is an exercise by the Village of its governmental
functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither
the Village, the agents and representatives of said Village, nor any individual
in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any
order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this
Section shall be liable for any damage sustained to person or property as the
result of said activity.
   (G)   Any light displayed contrary to any order, rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this Section constitutes a public
nuisance, and when deemed necessary in order to protect life or property during
a blackout or air raid the police, or the temporary special police authorized
herein, are authorized and directed to enter upon any premises within the
Village, using reasonable force if necessary, and extinguish lights or take
other necessary action to make effective any order, rule or regulation
promulgated under the authority conferred by this Section.
   (H)   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this Section shall be in effect, they shall supersede
all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter
may be inconsistent therewith.
   (I)   This Section shall not be construed so as to conflict with any State
or Federal Statute or with any Military or Naval order, rule or regulation.
(Ord. 128, 7-15-42)
CHAPTER 4
WATERWORKS COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 572, 5-26-1999)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-5-1: Commission Created
2-5-2: Members
2-5-3: Duties
2-5-4: Rules And Regulations
2-5-5: Duties Adopted
2-5-6: Removal
2-5-7: Rates Of Pay
2-5-8: Payment
2-5-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
Pursuant to action of the electors upon February 25, 1967, the Act of the
General Assembly providing for the creation of a Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners is adopted in this Village, and there is hereby created a Board
of Fire and Police Commission consisting of three (3) members appointed by the
President of the Village Board, with the consent of the Trustees. (Ord. 311, 2-
8-1967)
2-5-2: MEMBERS:
All members of the Fire and Police Commission heretofore appointed under prior
act of this Board, for the terms of their respective appointments, shall remain
in the office until the expiration of their respective terms, and all of the
acts and doings of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, heretofore
taken, are hereby confirmed and validated and all appointments taken as
strictly in compliance with their duties and the law, and all future
appointments and actions of said Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
be in accordance with the provision of the Illinois Municipal Code and of the
amendatory act of 1965 and all amendments thereto. (Ord. 311, 2-8-1967)
2-5-3: DUTIES:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of this Village shall make all
appointments to the regularly constituted Police Department of all offices
hereafter to be filled, except for the Police Chief, which shall be made by
appointment by the Village President acting with the advice and consent of the
Village Board of Trustees. Should a member of the Department as regularly
constituted be appointed to the office of Chief, then such member shall retain
his permanent status in the rank held at the time of such hiring to the office
of the Chief of the Department. Seniority shall continue to run while that
person is serving in the Department. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
shall, except as to Chief officers, take all disciplinary actions, including
the discharge of members of the Department for cause, as provided by law and
the rules promulgated in matters therein contained. (Ord. 354B, 6-11-1997)
2-5-4: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall adopt rules and regulations
for the conduct of the duties of their office and publish the same as provided
by law. The rules and regulations approved by the Board of Trustees pertaining
to conditions of employments, as heretofore adopted and in force April 10,
1957, shall remain in full force and effect until changed by appropriate action
taken for that purpose. (Ord. 311, 2-8-1967)
2-5-5: DUTIES ADOPTED:
The duties and functions of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be
as prescribed by the Act of the General Assembly, being 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/10-2.1 et seq., State Bar Association Edition. (Ord. 311, 2-8-1967)
2-5-6: REMOVAL:
Members of the Fire and Police Commission may be removed as provided by law, as
in the case of any other appointee. (Ord. 311, 2-8-1967)
2-5-7: RATES OF PAY:
The rates of pay for members of the Board of Fire and Police Commission shall
remain the same as heretofore established by action of the Village Board and as
hereafter changed or modified from time to time. (Ord. 311, 2-8-1967)
2-5-8: PAYMENT:
Members of the Board of Fire and Police Commission shall be compensated in the
amount of ten dollars ($10.00) per meeting if each of the following conditions
are met:
   (A)   The Commissioner is present for a minimum of three-quarters (3/4) of
the meeting.
   (B)   The meeting is a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners, or, in the alternative, is a special meeting called
pursuant to sections 6(b)–(e) of the Rules and Regulations of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners.
   (C)   Commissioners shall not be compensated for more than one Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners meeting per month. (Ord. 311-A, 9-22-1993)
CHAPTER 6
ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-6-1: Commission Created
2-6-2: Members
2-6-3: Duties
2-6-4: Records
2-6-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
A Zoning Commission for the Village is hereby created under the authority of an
act of the General Assembly of the State, entitled "Revised Cities and Villages
Act being Article 73-Zoning, Sections 1 to 10 inclusive, approved August 15,
1941, and subsequent amendments thereto".
2-6-2: MEMBERS:
The Zoning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the
President and approved and confirmed by the Board of Trustees.
2-6-3: DUTIES:
Said Zoning Commission shall:
   (A)   Recommend the boundaries of districts and appropriate regulations to
be enforced therein.
   (B)   Prepare a tentative report and a proposed zoning ordinance for the
entire Village.
   (C)   Hold a hearing thereon and shall afford persons interested an
opportunity to be heard, by publishing notices of such hearings at least
fifteen (15) days in advance thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Village, which notice shall state the time and place of hearing and the
place where copies of the proposed ordinance will be accessible for examination
by interested parties. Such hearing may be adjourned, from time to time.
   (D)   Make a final report within thirty (30) days after the final
adjournment of such hearing, and submit the proposed ordinance for the entire
Village to the Board of Trustees, to be enacted with or without change, or to
be referred back to the Commission for further consideration.
2-6-4: RECORDS:
The Zoning Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall
be open to inspection by the Board of Trustees at all times. (Ord. 144, 8-1-45)
CHAPTER 7
ECONOMIC AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
SECTION:
2-7-1: Purpose
2-7-2: Members
2-7-3: Term Of Office
2-7-4: Procedure
2-7-5: Powers And Duties
2-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the council is to plan and promote the growth and betterment of
Creve Coeur through economic and business development as well as planning
community events and activities. (Ord. 801, 9-23-2015)
2-7-2: MEMBERS:
Said council shall consist of no less than eight (8) members to a maximum of
twelve (12) members, citizens or business owners and operators of this village,
appointed by the mayor with advice and consent of the village board. (Ord. 801,
9-23-2015)
2-7-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
All members will serve a two (2) year term with terms expiring May 1 of the
second year after their appointment. All members shall serve without pay,
except that the village board if it deems it advisable may fix compensation,
from time to time in accordance with appropriation made for that purpose.
Necessary expenses in connection with the council and its functions shall be
paid by the village board in the event that those expenses are preapproved by a
vote of the village board. (Ord. 801, 9-23-2015)
2-7-4: PROCEDURE:
Immediately following the appointment of the council and the taking oath of
office, the members shall meet and organize. They shall schedule their regular
meetings for the year and give that schedule to the clerk for posting to ensure
compliance with the open meetings act 1 . Further, they shall select their own
chairman, and officers. The council's meetings shall be open to the public
(unless a meeting is specifically closed as allowed in the Illinois open
meetings act) and the council shall keep a record of its proceedings through
regularly kept and approved minutes. At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
the meeting of the council, the agenda to the meeting shall be posted by the
clerk as required by law. (Ord. 801, 9-23-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
2-7-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The council shall have the powers and duties as follows:
   (A)   To recommend, plan and coordinate efforts to promote business and
economic development. Specifically, the council is charged with working with
existing businesses and property owners and reaching out to new businesses to
foster economic growth in Creve Coeur and promote the village as a location for
new business interests.
   (B)   To be aware of and willing to assist prospective business owners with
compliance with village requirements (code and zoning) so that new businesses
are viable and realistic on site plan approval.
   (C)   To recommend changes in policy to the village board that could
increase economic growth and community development.
   (D)   To develop, plan and coordinate community events within the village
that provides activities for our residents and our youth to foster a sense of
community. In this regard, the council is responsible for realistically
budgeting said events and bringing the events to the village board for
preapproval.
   (E)   To work with the zoning board of appeals to recommend amended zoning,
where necessary, in areas of the village to attract businesses and industry
according to any overarching development plan the council might suggest.
   (F)   To arrange and conduct any form or publicity relative to its
activities for the general purpose of public information and understanding.
   (G)   To cooperate with the Village Zoning Board and regional planning
commissions and other agencies or groups to further local planning programs and
to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
   (H)   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers and authority
granted under authority of the act of the general assembly of the state of
Illinois, entitled "Illinois municipal code", as amended and as may be
conferred on the village. (Ord. 801, 9-23-2015; amd. Ord. 962, 10-26-2022)
CHAPTER 8
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
CHAPTER 9
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-9-1: Organization
2-9-2: Jurisdiction
2-9-3: Appeals
2-9-1: ORGANIZATION:
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby created and established in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, and is the
Zoning Board referred to in the Village Code. The Zoning Board shall consist of
seven (7) members appointed by the President and approved by the Board of
Trustees, one (1) of whom shall be named as Chairperson at the time of his or
her appointment. The amount of compensation to be paid to members, if any,
shall be fixed by the Village Board in its annual budget.
   (B)   All meetings of the Zoning Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such times as the Zoning Board may determine. All hearings
conducted by the Zoning Board shall be open to the public. The Chairperson, or
in his or her absence the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. The Zoning Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its
hearings, rulings and other official actions. No hearing shall be conducted
without a quorum of the Zoning Board being present. A quorum shall consist of a
majority of all the members. Any absent member who certifies that he or she has
read the transcript of the proceedings before the Board may vote upon any
question before the Zoning Board. A copy of every rule or regulation, every
order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning Board shall be
filed immediately with the Building Inspector and shall be a public record. The
Zoning Board shall adopt its own rules and procedures, not in conflict with
Title 10 of this Code or with the Illinois Municipal Code, and select or
appoint such officers as it deems necessary.
   (C)   All decisions and findings of the Zoning Board on appeal or upon
application after a hearing shall, in all instances, be final administrative
decisions and shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law.
   (D)   The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Building Inspector or any other authorized official; to decide in favor of
the applicant upon any matter which it is required to pass; or to recommend any
amendment to Title 10 of this Code. (Ord. 882, - -2019)
2-9-2: JURISDICTION:
The Zoning Board is hereby vested with the following jurisdiction and
authority:
   (A)   To adopt rules of procedures for public hearings before the Board,
including, but not limited to, participation in the hearing, the right to cross
examine witness, present testimony and evidence, and any other relevant matter.
   (B)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, permit,
refusal, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector or any other
authorized official in carrying out or enforcing any of the provisions of Title
10 and Title 11 of this Code.
   (C)   To hear and pass upon all applications for variations from the terms
of Title 10 and Title 11 of this Code in the manner prescribed by and subject
to the standards established therein.
   (D)   To hear all applications for special use permits and report said
findings and recommendations to the Village Board in the manner provided in
Title 10 of this Code.
   (E)   To hear all applications for amendments to Title 10 of this Code, and
report said findings and recommendations to the Village Board in the manner
prescribed therein.
   (F)   To hear and decide all matters referred to in or upon which it is
required to pass under Title 10 and Title 11 of this Code or as prescribed by
the Illinois Municipal Code. (Ord. 882, - -2019; amd. Ord 962, 10-26-2022)
2-9-3: APPEALS:
   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board by any person or by any
office, department, board or bureau within the Village aggrieved by a decision
of the Building Inspector or other authorized official. Such an appeal shall be
taken within forty-five (45) days from the date of the action complained of, by
filing with the Building Inspector and the Zoning Board a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds thereof. The Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit
to the Zoning Board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Building Inspector or other authorized official
certifies to the Zoning Board, after notice of the appeal has been filed with
Building Inspector, that by reason of facts stated in the certification a stay
would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the proceedings shall not be stayed unless by a restraining order which may be
granted by the Zoning Board or the Tazewell County Circuit Court on application
of the Building Inspector and upon due cause shown.
   (C)   The Zoning Board shall fix a reasonable time and place for the hearing
of an appeal, give due notice thereof to the applicable parties, and render a
written decision without unreasonable delay. At the hearing, any party may
appear in person or by a duly authorized agent or attorney. The Zoning Board
may affirm or may, upon the concurring vote of four (4) members, reverse,
wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination,
which in its opinion out to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers
of the Building Inspector. (Ord. 882, - -2019)
CHAPTER 10
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
2-10-1: Creation, Jurisdiction, And Purpose
2-10-2: Personnel And Duties
2-10-3: Notice
2-10-4: Service
2-10-5: Administrative Hearing Procedure
2-10-6: Default
2-10-7: Review Of Final Orders
2-10-7-1: Notification Of Debts Due
2-10-8: Enforcement Of Hearing Officer's Order
2-10-8-1: Interest On Fines And Collection Fees
2-10-9: Fines Payable To The Village Treasurer
2-10-10: Posthearing Motions
2-10-11: Ex Parte Disclosures
2-10-12: Waiver, Suspension Or Reduction Of Fines
2-10-13: Schedule Of Fines/Penalties
2-10-14: Severability
2-10-1: CREATION, JURISDICTION, AND PURPOSE:
   (A)   The Village hereby creates a Code Hearing Department pursuant to the
authority in the Illinois Municipal Code found at 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/1-2.2-1 et seq., allowing the administrative adjudication of ordinance
violations and 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., allowing the
administrative adjudication of violations of Building Code violations; as well
as the authority in the Illinois Vehicle Code found at 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3, allowing the administrative adjudication of traffic
regulations concerning the standing, parking, or condition of vehicles.
   (B)   1.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Code Hearing
Department is authorized to conduct administrative adjudication of any
violation of the Village Code, including ordinances that establish
construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation,
violations of zoning, or other health and safety standards that are applicable
to structures in a municipality, or any Municipal ordinance that requires,
after notice, the cutting of weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the
removal of inoperable motor vehicles or the abatement of nuisances from private
property.
      2.   Additionally, the Code Hearing Department is authorized to conduct
administrative adjudication of violations of any provision of title 9 of this
Code, restricting or regulating the standing or parking of vehicles or the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle and the violation of any provision
of the Illinois Compiled Statutes adopted by reference in title 9 of this Code
that restricts or regulates the standing or parking of vehicles or the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle.
   (C)   Pursuant to statute, the Code Hearing Department may not conduct
administrative adjudication of the following violations of the Village Code:
      1.   Any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense
that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles.
      2.   Any reportable offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code.
   (D)   All fines imposed for any violation of village ordinances, including
the Building Code and any other provision of the Village Code, shall bear
interest at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum on the unpaid balance from
the date of imposition of the fine. A default in the payment of a fine and
costs or any installment imposed by the circuit court or by a hearing officer
may be collected by any and all means authorized for the collection of money
judgements. The Village may retain attorneys and private collection agents for
the purpose of collecting any default in payment of any fine or installment of
that fine. The fees and costs incurred by the Village in any such collection by
attorneys or private collection agents retained by the Village shall be charged
to the offender, provided that the amount shall not exceed thirty-five percent
(35%) of the unpaid fines and accrued interest. (Ord. 847, 1-10-2018; amd. Ord.
847B, 2-27-2019)
2-10-2: PERSONNEL AND DUTIES:
The Code Hearing Department shall consist of, upon appointment by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Village Board and under the direct
supervision of the Mayor, a Hearing Officer and an Administrative Assistant
(or, in the event an Administrative Assistant is not hired, the Village Clerk
shall perform the duties of the Administrative Assistant as listed below) and
any other such positions as may be approved by the Village Board of Trustees
with the powers and duties as set forth herein. Compensation for the Hearing
Officer and the Administrative Assistant (or additional compensation for the
Village Clerk for additional duties) shall be as approved by the Village Board.
   (A)   Hearing Officer Duties And Qualifications: A Hearing Officer must be,
prior to appointment, an attorney licensed to practice law for at least three
(3) years in the State of Illinois. The Hearing Officer shall have the
following powers and duties:
      1.   To administer oaths;
      2.   To hear testimony, to accept relevant evidence and to rule upon
motions and objections to the admissibility of evidence;
      3.   To issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give relevant
testimony at the hearing upon requests of the parties and their
representatives;
      4.   To preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      5.   To issue a written finding, decision and order stating whether a
Village Code violation exists;
      6.   To impose penalties, sanctions or other relief consistent with
applicable Village Code provisions and to assess costs upon finding a party
liable for the charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the
Hearing Officer have any authority to impose a penalty of incarceration;
      7.   To review final determination of liability for an ordinance
violation in accordance with administrative review procedures hereinafter set
forth; and
      8.   To hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of issues.
   (B)   Training For Hearing Officers: Prior to conducting administrative
adjudication proceedings under this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall have
successfully completed a formal training program which includes the
requirements mandated by law including, but not limited to:
      1.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative hearings
over which the Hearing Officer shall preside;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of code violations that he/she will
adjudicate;
      3.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   (C)   Administrative Assistant Duties:
      1.   Receive violations from the Code Enforcement Officer and/or building
inspector, create an administrative adjudication file for each case and issue a
unique docket number to the case, set a hearing date at least thirty (30) days
from the date the violation is received but not more than forty (40) days from
the date the violation is received;
      2.   Create a proper notice and summons for the defendant as required by
law;
      3.   Have the summons and notice served on the defendant and schedule the
hearing with the Hearing Officer;
      4.   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed,
if any, fines and penalties assessed and paid;
      5.   Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final determination
of liability;
      6.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of liability;
      7.   Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation
adjudicated pursuant to this chapter and any factual reports verifying the
final determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance
with this chapter;
      8.   Collect paid fines and penalties; keep records; and issue payment
receipts;
      9.   If fines and penalties are not paid as agreed, set up payment plans
with the violators, employ a private collection agency to obtain the past due
amounts and/or direct the pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by
law. (Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-3: NOTICE:
The administrative adjudication of any ordinance violation shall afford a party
due process of law. The notice charging a violation of this Code shall be
accompanied by a summons and shall contain, but not necessarily be limited to,
the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the defendant.
   (B)   The date, time, and place the violation was observed.
   (C)   A citation for the ordinance violated.
   (D)   A description of the act or omission which violated the ordinance.
   (E)   The names of the witnesses to the violation(s).
   (F)   The signature of the person issuing the notice.
   (G)   The address of the structure where the violation is observed (if
applicable). (Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-4: SERVICE:
Service of summons and the notice as listed above shall be served on the owner
of the property (if applicable) and/or the violator by first class mail or in
person with proof of service placed in the administrative adjudication file. If
the owner of the property cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner
cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing
a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the structure where
the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is
scheduled. (Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-5: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE:
Any hearing must take place before a proper Hearing Officer.
   (A)   An attorney who appears on behalf of any person shall file with the
Hearing Officer an entry of appearance.
   (B)   The Hearing Officer may grant continuances only in cases where a
continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the defendant.
Lack of preparation by either party shall not be grounds for a continuance.
   (C)   All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
   (D)   The Hearing Officer may issue subpoenas to secure the attendance and
testimony of relevant witnesses and production of relevant documents. Issuance
of subpoenas shall be subject to the restrictions contained herein.
   (E)   The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply to the
conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it
is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct
of his or her affairs.
   (F)   No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance
of the evidence (which means that the offense, more likely than not, occurred).
   (G)   Upon timely request of any party to a proceeding, any person, who the
Hearing Officer determines may reasonably be expected to provide testimony
which is material and which does not constitute a needless presentation of
cumulative evidence, shall be made available for cross examination prior to a
final determination of liability.
   (H)   The record of all hearings before a Hearing Officer shall include:
      1.   All documents presented at the hearing;
      2.   A copy of the notice of the violation or notice of the hearing;
      3.   A recording of the proceedings (either by tape recorder or digital
recorder); and
      4.   A copy of the findings and decisions of the Hearing Officer.
   (I)   Upon conclusion of a hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make a final
written determination on the basis of the evidence as to whether or not a code
violation exists. Upon issuing a final determination of liability, the Hearing
Officer shall:
      1.   Impose penalties and/or fines that are consistent with the
applicable provisions of this Code;
      2.   Issue orders that are consistent with the applicable provisions of
this Code, including, but not limited to, orders to cure or abate any
continuing violations of this Code; and
      3.   Assess costs reasonably related to instituting the hearing.
   (J)   In the issuance of the final determination of liability, a Hearing
Officer shall inform the defendant of defendant's right to seek judicial review
of the final determination in the Circuit Court of Tazewell County. (Ord. 803,
2-24-2015)
2-10-6: DEFAULT:
If at the time set for a hearing the recipient of a violation notice or a
notice of hearing, or the recipient's attorney of record, fails to appear, the
Hearing Officer may find the recipient in default and proceed with the hearing
and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation and conclude
with a finding, decision and order. A copy of the order of default shall be
served in the same manner as the notice of hearing.
Within twenty one (21) calendar days from the issuance of an order of default,
a recipient of a violation notice or a notice of hearing who has been found to
be in default may petition the Hearing Officer to set aside the determination
and set a new hearing date on the basis that the failure to appear at the
hearing was for good cause. If the petition is granted, the Hearing Officer
shall serve notice of the new hearing date upon the petitioner, in the same
manner as the notice of hearing is served, no less than seven (7) calendar days
prior to the hearing date. (Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-7: REVIEW OF FINAL ORDERS:
A final order of a Hearing Officer shall constitute a final determination and
shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law. (Ord.
803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-7-1: NOTIFICATION OF DEBTS DUE:
   (A)   Any debt that arises from a Hearing Officer's order, or any other
expenses detailed in section
 2-10-8 of this chapter, or any other monies due for Village of Creve Coeur
services will be submitted for debt collection through the following process:
      1.   An original bill will be sent to the party with a due date,
      2.   If the debt is not satisfied prior to the due date, a second notice
will be sent, with any late fees applied,
      3.   If the debt is still not satisfied by the expiration of the final
due date, a final notice will be sent stating total amount owed.
      4.   In the event the debt is still not satisfied, the Village will
commence all debt collection efforts allowable under the law. (Ord. 847, 1-10-
2018)
2-10-8: ENFORCEMENT OF HEARING OFFICER'S ORDER:
Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed by a Hearing Officer's order and any
expenses incurred by the Village to enforce the order, including, but not
limited to, attorney fees, court costs and costs related to property demolition
or foreclosure, that remain unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to
exhaust, judicial review of a Hearing Officer's final determination of
liability for a code violation, shall be a debt due and owing the Village. As
such, the Village may collect that debt in accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-8-1: INTEREST ON FINES AND COLLECTION FEES:
All fines imposed by this Code and the ordinances of the Village shall bear
interest at the rate of nine percent (9%) per annum on the unpaid balance from
the date of imposition of the fine. A default in the payment of a fine and
costs or any installment imposed by the Circuit Court or by a Hearing Officer
may be collected by any and all means authorized for the collections of money
judgments. The Corporation Counsel may retain attorneys and private collections
agents for the purpose of collecting any default in payment of any fine or
installment of that fine. The fees and costs incurred by the Village or by
another governmental entity through an intergovernmental agreement in any such
collection by attorneys and private collections agents retained by the
Corporation Counsel or by another governmental entity through an
intergovernmental agreement for those purposes shall be charged to the
offender. (Ord. 854, 5-9-2018)
2-10-9: FINES PAYABLE TO THE VILLAGE TREASURER:
All fines and other monies paid to the Village in accordance with this chapter
shall be remitted to the Village Treasurer for deposit for the Village's
General Fund. (Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-10: POSTHEARING MOTIONS:
There shall be no posthearing motion practice before the Code Hearing
Department. (Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-11: EX PARTE DISCLOSURES:
The Village adopts and incorporates canon 3(A)(6) of the Code of Conduct of
Administrative Law Officers. Therefore Hearing Officers and other personnel of
the Code Hearing Department are required to refrain from public comment about a
pending proceeding before the Code Hearing Department. (Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-12: WAIVER, SUSPENSION OR REDUCTION OF FINES:
In instances where this Code calls for the imposition of a mandatory minimum
fine upon a finding of liability by a Hearing Officer, a Hearing Officer may
not waive, suspend or reduce the imposition of said mandatory minimum fine.
(Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-13: SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES:
For an ordinance violation of this Code, fine and penalties shall be as
established from time to time by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees. In no
event shall the fines and penalties exceed the amount allowed by law. (Ord.
803, 2-24-2015)
2-10-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application of this chapter is held to
be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such ruling shall not affect any other provision of this chapter which is not
specifically included in such ruling or which can be given effect without the
unconstitutional or invalid provision. (Ord. 803, 2-24-2015)
CHAPTER 11
PARK AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
SECTION:
2-11-1: Board Created; Membership; Appointment; Term
2-11-2: Organization
2-11-3: Powers And Duties
2-11-1: BOARD CREATED; MEMBERSHIP; APPOINTMENT; TERM:
There is hereby created a Parks and Recreation Advisory Board consisting of no
less than four (4) members with a maximum of eight (8) members to be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees. The
members shall hold office for three (3) year terms. (Ord. 834, 3-8-2017)
2-11-2: ORGANIZATION:
One Trustee of the Village Board will serve as Chairperson. The members of the
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall organize by election a Co-Chairperson
and Secretary. The board shall meet at least monthly. (Ord. 834, 3-8-2017)
2-11-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall manage the Park and
Recreation Department and shall serve as an advisory board, making
recommendations to the Village Board for the following items:
      1.   Park master planning.
      2.   Budget and financial planning.
      3.   Policies related to the use of the parks and recreational
facilities.
      4.   Fee structures.
      5.   Capital improvements.
      6.   Volunteer and employee procurement and coordination, and
      7.   Other matters as directed by the Village Board.
   (B)   The Advisory Board shall have the authority to develop and implement
recreational activities and programs without the Board of Trustees' approval,
provided such activities and programs are financially feasible. The board shall
forward a summary of the recreational programs offered at least once each
quarter to the Village Board for informational purposes. (Ord. 834, 3-8-2017)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1: Short Title
3-1-2: Definitions
3-1-3: Licenses
3-1-4: Administration
3-1-5: Powers Of Local Liquor Control Commission
3-1-6: Applicant For Licenses
3-1-7: Bond
3-1-8: Licenses; How Granted
3-1-9: Renewal Of Licenses
3-1-10: Posting Of License
3-1-11: Persons Ineligible For License
3-1-12: Limitation On Location (Rep. by Ord. 303-A, 2-8-1995)
3-1-13: Closing Hours
3-1-14: Sale Without License Prohibited
3-1-15: Obstructions Prohibited
3-1-16: Plan For Premises Licensed
3-1-17: Sales To Minors, Others
3-1-18: Limitation On Number Of Licenses
3-1-19: Revocation Of Licenses
3-1-20: Address And Transfer Of Licenses
3-1-21: Licenses Revoked For Nonuser
3-1-22: Class A, C, D And G Licenses
3-1-23: Revocation, Hearing, Notice
3-1-24: Location Or Relocation
3-1-25: Liquor Service Permit Required (Rep. by Ord. 366-B, 6-8-1994)
3-1-26: Age Of Employees
3-1-27: Fingerprinting And Recording Of Licensees
3-1-28: Alcoholic Liquor In Unsealed Or Opened Containers
3-1-29: Immediate Report Of Unlawful Or Disorderly Conduct Required
3-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the LIQUOR CONTROL ORDINANCE. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-
2018)
3-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise provides, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, or used in the "Liquor Control
Act" of this State.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Includes any alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and other
vinous or malt products, and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing
alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and capable of being consumed as a beverage by
a human being, containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol
by volume; excepting those alcoholic beverages, however exempted by State laws.
   CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some lawful object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring, or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable or comfortable use and accommodation
of its members and their guests and provided with suitable and adequate kitchen
and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of
servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for
its members and their guests; provided that such club files with the Local
Liquor Control Commission at the time of the application for a license under
this chapter two (2) copies of a list of names and residences of its members,
and similarly files within ten (10) days of the election of any additional
member his name and address; and, provided further, that its affairs and
management are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting and that no member
or any officer, agent, or employee of the club is paid, or directly or
indirectly receives, in the form of a salary or other compensation any profits
from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to the club, or the members
of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond the amount of such
salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting of the members or by its
board of directors or other governing body out of the general revenues of the
club.
   DISTRIBUTOR: Any person, other than a manufacturer, who is engaged in
purchasing, storing, possessing or warehousing any alcoholic liquor for resale
or reselling at wholesale.
   DRAMSHOP OR TAVERN: Any person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic
liquor for use or consumption, and not for resale.
   MOTEL-HOTEL LICENSE: Any building or buildings or other structures kept,
used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where
food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered
for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or
residential, in which thirty five (35) or more rooms are used for sleeping
accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms where
meals are served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms
being conducted in the same building or buildings, in connection therewith, and
such building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with
adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity. (Ord.
820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-3: LICENSES:
No person shall conduct an alcoholic liquor business, either as a dramshop or
tavern, or in any other manner in any stand, place, room, building, enclosure,
suite or rooms in the Village, unless such person shall have first secured a
license so to do, and has paid to the Local Liquor Commission the license fee
for such alcoholic liquor business, and provided further, that no such
alcoholic liquor business shall be conducted other than as provided in the
Illinois Liquor Control Act, as amended. All license fees are payable annually,
due prior to May 1st of every year and upon payment the license is good for a
calendar year. The fees for all licenses are established by the Board annually
and are on file with the Village Clerk. The following license classifications
shall be in effect:
Class (Name) Of License Description Closing Time
Class (Name) Of License Description                           Closing Time
Class A                 Taverns or dramshops                  4:00 A.M.
Class B                 Taverns or dramshops                  1:00 A.M.
                        Cabaret license, where music and live
Class C                 dancing by employees are also         4:00 A.M.
                        permitted
                        Taverns or dramshops where music is
Class D                 permitted (without live dancing by    4:00 A.M.
                        employees)
                        For gasoline stations permitted to
                        sell only beer and wine for
Class G                 consumption on the premises and for   4:00 A.M.
                        package sale of carryout alcoholic
                        beverages
                        A temporary license specifically
                        designated for use at an "all-
                        inclusive event" ("all-inclusive
                        event" here is defined as an event in
Class I                 which guests pay a pre-determined,    License to define
                        fixed price that includes all food,
                        alcohol and entertainment) only on
                        the premises described on the
                        license. The period of such license
                        shall not exceed 5 days
                        A temporary license specifically
                        designated for use at a specific
                        property owned by the Village or
                        library district for a specific
                        private function ("private function"
Class J                 here is defined as an event not open  1:00 A.M.
                        to the general public but only to
                        invited guests). The period of such
                        license shall not exceed 5 days.
                        Limitations to this license set forth
                        in subsection (A) of this section
                        Authorizes the retail sale or service
                        of alcoholic liquor as part of a
                        public event which has been approved
                        by either the Village Board or the
                        Public Library Board to be held on
                        Village or library district owned
                        property for between 1 and 5 days.
                        The licenses shall only be issued for
                        events which are civic, patriotic,
                        fraternal, educational, religious or
                        benevolent in nature. Furthermore,
                        the licensee may only be granted a
                        license if they themselves are
                        governmental units or subsets of
Class K                 governmental units within the Village 1:00 A.M.
                        of Creve Coeur, or if the licensee is
                        a not for profit organization, a
                        fraternal organization, an
                        educational organization, a religious
                        organization, or a civic organization
                        who has been in active and continuous
                        existence for at least 9 months prior
                        to the public event and who have, in
                        good faith, maintained a membership
                        role during such 9 month period, or
                        any such organizations that are
                        actively incorporated under State
                        law. Limitations to this license are
                        set forth in subsection (A) of this
                        section
                        Liquor stores having no liquor served
Class L                 on the premises and for package sale  1:00 A.M.
                        of carryout alcoholic beverages
                        For hotels or motels - allowing
                        service and consumption of alcoholic
                        beverages throughout the building or
Class M                 buildings comprising the hotel or     1:00 A.M.
                        motel and at 1 or more bars therein
                        operated as temporary service bars in
                        connection with the main bar to which
                        the license is granted
                        This is a temporary license for use
                        by a not for profit organization for
                        use at picnics, festivals, dinners or
                        similar events, for a period of not
                        to exceed 6 days in any 1 calendar
                        year. The license fee for such
                        license is established by the Board
                        annually and published at the Office
Class T                 of the Village Clerk. The license fee License to define
                        is payable, in full, prior to the
                        issuance of the license. Should there
                        be a separation of events, then each
                        period of separation of more than 5
                        days shall require a new application
                        and fee. No more than a total of 6
                        days shall be permitted under a Class
                        T license in any 1 calendar year
                        For duly organized veterans'
                        organizations created and recognized
Class V                 by Act of Congress of the United      4:00 A.M.
                        States as such a veterans'
                        organization
Class W                 For taverns or dramshops permitted to 1:00 A.M.
                        sell only beer and wine
 
   (A)   Limitations On Class J And K Licenses:
      1.   The Village shall design and provide for all interested applicants
in the Office of the Village Clerk an application that describes the event's
hours, and expected attendance, the Village or library district owned property
to be used, the area where alcoholic beverages will be served, the type of
beverages to be served, who will serve the beverages, how the licensee will
prevent consumption of alcohol by minors, and proof of adequate dramshop
(liability) insurance coverage. The application shall be given to the Liquor
Commission or its designee who shall either approve or deny the application
within ten (10) working days.
      2.   The license is only valid for the specific Village or library
district owned property described in the license application and only for the
days and times as approved by the Liquor Commission or designee. Liquor may
only be served and consumed in a well-defined and designated area on Village or
library district owned property. The licensee must make sure that alcoholic
beverages do not leave the defined area.
      3.   The licensee must carry adequate dramshop liability insurance and
proof of purchase of insurance must be provided to the Village before the
event. If the licensee seeks to sell alcoholic beverages in a building or on
property owned or operated by the Village, as opposed to just serving alcohol
to attendees, the licensee must include the Village as an additional insured.
(If you are a private party, contact your homeowners' insurance provider to
determine how to obtain coverage for your event.)
      4.   A photocopy of the liquor license approval must be displayed on the
premises during any such function.
      5.   The service and consumption of alcoholic liquor shall only be
permitted on the premises and not outside of the premises. If the premises
where alcohol is to be served are out of doors (in a Village owned park), those
premises where alcohol is served must be clearly marked and alcohol may not be
removed from the clearly marked premises.
      6.   The service of alcoholic liquor must be by a person at least twenty
one (21) years of age who is an agent or employee of the licensee and the
licensee must implement measures to ensure that minors are not served alcoholic
liquors and do not consume alcoholic liquor on the premises.
      7.   No private event catered under this license shall exceed eight (8)
hours in duration and no alcoholic liquor shall be served earlier than ten
o'clock (10:00) A.M. and no later than one o'clock (1:00) A.M.
      8.   In the case of a K license for a public event, private security must
be employed by the licensee, unless the licensee is the Village itself or
library district itself, in proportion to the amount of people expected at the
event in consultation with the Creve Coeur Police Department. The cost of
security will be entirely paid for by the licensee. A K license will not be
granted without a security plan, approved by the CCPD and paid for by the
licensee.
      9.   In the case of a K license for a public event, after preliminary
approval from the Liquor Commission, the event is only given final approval
after a majority vote approving the same at a regularly scheduled and properly
noticed Village Board, or Library Board (only in the case that the library will
be used for the event) meeting.
      10.   The licensee shall comply with all applicable ordinances and State
law and obtain all applicable permits for the private catered event.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or permit the
consumption of alcoholic liquor outside of the principal building located on
the licensed premises unless the license granted by the Local Liquor Control
Commission grants such right with respect to specifically delineated outside
areas shown on the site plan provided with the licensee's application. Where
outdoor sales and/or consumption have been approved, the approved outdoor area
must be enclosed with some permanent fencing or temporary enclosure (such as
plastic snow fencing), and the licensee shall require all ingress to and egress
from the licensed premises to take place through the principal building on the
premises and not through any openings in the outdoor enclosure. (Ord. 820B, 7-
11-2018; amd. Ord. 820E, 8-28-2019)
3-1-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The Mayor shall be charged with the administration of all liquor laws. Pursuant
to 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-2, the Mayor, as Liquor Control
Commissioner, may appoint additional persons to assist him in the exercise of
the powers vested in him and in the performance of his duties as Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, and collectively the Mayor and such additional appointees
shall be referred to as Local Liquor Control Commission. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-5: POWERS OF LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION:
The Local Liquor Control Commission shall also have the following powers:
   (A)   To grant and/or suspend for not more than thirty (30) days or revoke
for cause all local licenses issued to persons for premises within the Village.
   (B)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter or any rules or regulations adopted by him or by the
State of Illinois or the State Commission have been or are being violated, and
at such time to examine said premises of said licensee in connection therewith.
   (C)   To receive complaint from any citizen that any of the provisions of
this chapter, or the rules or regulations adopted pursuant thereto, have been
or are being violated and to act upon such complaints.
   (D)   To receive local license fees provided for herein, and to pay the same
forthwith to the Village Treasurer.
   (E)   To hold hearing, take testimony, examine applicants and to do and
perform all acts necessary or incidental to such office.
   (F)   To levy fines in accordance with 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-5.
Whenever in this chapter the Local Liquor Control Commission is referred to,
this office shall include any committee or other person appointed by such Local
Liquor Control Commissioner acting for him. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-6: APPLICANT FOR LICENSES:
Any person desiring an alcoholic liquor license under the provisions of this
chapter shall submit to the Local Liquor Control Commission an application in
writing under oath setting forth the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant, and his age, in the case of an
individual; in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, for profit, or a club,
the date of incorporation, the objects for which it was organized, the names
and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority in interest of
the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominees, the name
and address of such person.
   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place (with proof) of his naturalization.
   (C)   The character of business of the applicant; and in the case of a
corporation, the objects for which it was formed.
   (D)   The length of time the applicant has been in business of that
character, or in the case of a corporation, the date on which it was chartered.
   (E)   The amount of goods and wares and merchandise on hand at the time
application was made.
   (F)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license, together with a site plan showing
the property boundaries, the building improvements, and clearly identifying any
outdoor areas that the applicant intends to be used for outdoor sale and/or
consumption of alcoholic liquor.
   (G)   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar or other license on premises other than described in the application,
and the disposition of such application.
   (H)   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is
not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter or by State laws.
   (I)   Whether a previous license by a state or subdivision thereof has been
revoked, or by the Federal government has been revoked, and the reasons for the
same.
   (J)   That applicant will not violate any of the laws of the State of
Illinois, the provisions of this Code or the United States in the conduct of
such business.
   (K)   That the proposed location is not within one hundred feet (100') of
any church, school other than an institution of higher learning, hospital, home
for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children,
military or naval station, undertaking establishment, mortuary, or at any place
of business where the majority of customers are minors of school age or where
the principal business transacted consists of school books, school supplies,
food, or school lunches or drinks for such minors.
   (L)   Whether the application is for a dramshop, tavern or distributor's
license, club license or such other license as may by ordinance be provided.
   (M)   Fee for filing of said application shall be in the amount of fifty
dollars ($50.00), which is not applicable to license fee and is nonrefundable.
   (N)   All fees payable to the Clerk for said liquor license shall be applied
to such license. In the event a license is forfeited or revoked, said fee for
license is nonrefundable to said applicant and license holder. (Ord. 820D, 4-
24-2019; amd. Ord. 820E, 8-28-2019)
3-1-7: BOND:
Each person desiring a license hereunder shall be required to show that such
applicant is of good moral character and shall also execute a penal bond in the
form and with security satisfactory to the Local Liquor Control Commission,
conditioned upon the faithful observation of the provisions of the laws of the
State of Illinois, and of this chapter, relating to the alcoholic liquor
business. Such bond shall be in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and
shall, upon approval by the Local Liquor Control Commission, be filed in the
Office of the Clerk. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-8: LICENSES; HOW GRANTED:
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be presented to the
Local Liquor Control Commission; said application shall be investigated by such
Local Liquor Control Commission to his own satisfaction, and he shall, within a
reasonable time, either approve or reject said application. Upon the approval
of such application and of the bond in amount heretofore provided, and the
payment of the license fee as heretofore specified, the Local Liquor Control
Commission shall designate in writing his order of approval and direct the
Clerk to issue a license to such applicant; such license shall also be signed
by said Local Liquor Control Commission. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-9: RENEWAL OF LICENSES:
All applications for renewal of licenses must be filed with the Local Liquor
Control Commission, in writing, containing substantially the same information
as may be deemed advisable by the Local Liquor Control Commission as in the
first application for license. All applications for renewal shall be made at
least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of expiration of said license, and
shall be accompanied by the license fee.
Any person, who shall fail to make application and pay the fee as herein
provided, shall be deemed to have forfeited and abandoned such license, and no
renewal thereof shall thereafter be permitted. Any such license so forfeited or
abandoned shall not be re-issued, and any person seeking thereafter to procure
a license shall be considered as a new applicant and shall be subject to the
limitation as to the number of licenses to be issued, as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-10: POSTING OF LICENSE:
Every person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
immediately post and keep posted in some conspicuous place plainly readable by
the public within said premises, the said license so issued. Whenever any such
license shall be lost or destroyed, such licensee shall make application
stating the circumstances of the loss or destruction and a duplicate, so
designated, shall be issued by the Local Liquor Control Commission. (Ord. 820B,
7-11-2018)
3-1-11: PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE:
No license of any kind shall be issued by the Local Liquor Control Commission
to:
   (A)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which he resides.
   (B)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
State of Illinois.
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
   (F)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   (G)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   (H)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co- partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license.
   (I)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
political subdivision.
   (J)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   (K)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of the State Liquor Control Act, or shall have
forfeited his bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
   (L)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for a full period for which the license is to
be issued.
   (M)   Any law enforcing public official, including members of the Local
Liquor Control Commission, any Mayor, any President of the Village Board of
Trustees, any member of the Village Board of Trustees, or other disqualified
official by reason of State law; and no such official shall have a direct
interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor, except
that a license may be granted to such official in relation to premises that are
not located within the territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official
if the issuance of such license is approved by the State Liquor Control
Commission and except that a license may be granted to any member of the
Village Board of Trustees in relation to premises that are located within the
territory subject to the jurisdiction of that official if: 1) the sale of
alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license is incidental to the selling of food,
2) the issuance of the license is approved by the State Commission, 3) the
issuance of the license is in accordance with all applicable local ordinances
in effect where the premises are located, and 4) the official granted a license
does not vote on alcoholic liquor issues pending before the Board to which the
license holder is elected. Notwithstanding any provision of this paragraph to
the contrary, a member of the Village Board of Trustees other than the
President of the Village Board of Trustees, may have a direct interest in the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor as long as he or she is
not a law enforcing public official or the Village Board President. To prevent
any conflict of interest, the elected official with the direct interest in the
manufacture, sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor shall not participate in
any meetings, hearings, or decisions on matters impacting the manufacture,
sale, or distribution of alcoholic liquor. Furthermore, the President of the
Village Board may have an interest in the manufacture, sale, or distribution of
alcoholic liquor as long as the Board over which he or she presides has made a
Local Liquor Control Commissioner appointment that complies with the
requirements of section 4-2 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934. (Ord.
820C, 11-28-2018)
3-1-12: LIMITATION ON LOCATION:
(Rep. by Ord. 303-A, 2-8-1995)
3-1-13: CLOSING HOURS:
The hours of business for such dramshop or tavern in the Village shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Class A, Class C, Class D, Class V, and Class G licenses: The closing
hour shall be at four o'clock (4:00) A.M. each morning. At the designated
closing hour, the bar or the dramshop, or in the case of a Class G licensee,
the area where alcohol is served shall be closed and all patrons or customers
shall be vacated from said place not later than fifteen (15) minutes after the
closing hour.
   (B)   Class B, Class L, Class M, Class J, Class K, and Class W licenses: The
closing hour shall be one o'clock (1:00) A.M. each morning.
   (C)   In all classes of license, the bar shall be closed at the designated
hour, herein set forth, and all customers or patrons shall be vacated from the
barroom within fifteen (15) minutes thereafter, whether their drinks have been
consumed or not. No drink shall be served after the closing hour.
No tavern holding any class of license issued hereunder shall open prior to six
o'clock (6:00) A.M., Monday through Saturday, nor before nine o'clock (9:00)
A.M. on Sundays; all times herein referred to shall be the prevailing time in
force in the Village.
For the purpose as herein used, the word "closed" shall be construed to apply
to the operation of the bar and the extinguishment of all signs. No drinks
shall be served after the closing time, above, and the whole of the licensed
premises shall be locked and vacated except for the owner, bartender and actual
employees, or a watchman.
The fact that food is being served on the licensed premises shall not affect
the closing requirements pertaining to the closing of the whole of the licensed
premises, and no intoxicating beverages may be served from the licensed
premises to any other part of those or any other premises. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-
2018)
3-1-14: SALE WITHOUT LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No person shall keep for sale, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic liquor in
the Village unless such person shall have first obtained an alcoholic liquor
license and the same is in full force and effect as by this chapter provided.
(Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-15: OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
In premises upon which a license is issued for the sale of alcoholic liquors,
other than a restaurant (principally licensed as such), hotel, club or veterans
organization, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be
permitted in the windows or upon the doors, nor inside such premises, which
shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such premises from the street
or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition, or other obstruction
nor any arrangements of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the
interior of such licensed premises which shall prevent a full view of the
entire interior of such premises from the street or sidewalk. All rooms where
liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously lighted
during business hours by natural or artificial white light so that all parts of
the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In the event that the
view of any licensed premises is wilfully obstructed, such license shall be
subject to revocation or suspension in the manner hereinafter provided. Windows
may be obstructed up to sixty inches (60") above ground level, outside
measurement or sidewalk level, in order to prevent small children from
observing the interior of any such dramshop or tavern. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-16: PLAN FOR PREMISES LICENSED:
The Liquor Control Commission is hereby authorized to require all persons to
whom liquor licenses are or have been issued to file plans or drawings of the
licensed premises to which such license is issued showing all of the premises
and appurtenances, rooms, basements and restrooms, necessary or advisable to
enable him to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-17: SALES TO MINORS, OTHERS:
No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
minor, unless that minor is a waiter or waitress who is serving the alcoholic
liquor under subsection
3-1-26(B) of this chapter, or to any intoxicated person or to any person known
to him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally
deficient or in need of mental treatment. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-18: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF LICENSES:
There shall be no limit on the number of licenses of any class issued by the
Liquor Control Commission. (Ord. 830A, 7-11-2018)
3-1-19: REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
The Local Liquor Control Commission may suspend or revoke any license issued
under the provisions of this chapter for any one or more of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Violations of the Federal laws, the laws of this State, including the
rules and regulations of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, or any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The willful making of any false statement as to a material fact in the
application for a license or a renewal thereof.
   (C)   Permitting any disorderly conduct or immoral practices upon the
premises where the license is issued as herein provided.
   (D)   Permitting any person other than the licensee to operate a dramshop or
tavern under the license issued to the licensee. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-20: ADDRESS AND TRANSFER OF LICENSES:
All licenses shall be issued to a particular address and the consent in writing
of the Local Liquor Control Commission shall be required before any license is
transferable to any address other than that stated in the application for such
license. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-21: LICENSES REVOKED FOR NONUSER:
No person shall hold a license issued to an address unless such address is an
approved tavern or dramshop, and the location is approved by the Local Liquor
Control Commission as being in compliance herewith, and in addition, that such
licensee is actively engaged in such dramshop or tavern business. In the event
that a person to whom a license has been issued loses the lease to such
premises, or the same are destroyed by act of God, or by reason of condemnation
or similar proceedings, through no fault of such licensee, such licensee may
continue such class of license in effect for a period of time up to ninety (90)
days from the closing of the said business of alcoholic liquors, provided such
license fees are kept current. However, such license shall be automatically
cancelled if not placed in use by the person to whom it was issued and carried,
by consent of the Local Liquor Control Commission, within ninety (90) days from
its last use and is within such period of time actively used for the operation
of such tavern or dramshop. This provision is intended to require the licensee
to re-establish his business, closed for one of the reasons in this section
contained, and none other, within ninety (90) days or forfeit such license. Any
license so forfeited shall not be renewed or reissued, but in the event that
the number of outstanding licenses have been reduced below ten (10), then any
applicant can have such license upon application and approval by the Local
Liquor Control Commission, provided such applicant has a place of business to
actively engage in the operation of an approved tavern or dramshop. (Ord. 820B,
7-11-2018)
3-1-22: CLASS A, C, D AND G LICENSES:
Class A, C, D or G licenses shall be issued only to those locations outside of
the Residential District, and shall be issued only within the Industrial or
Business District of this Village. Applications for the Class A, C, D or G
privilege shall be submitted to the Local Liquor Control Commission and they
shall determine within a reasonable time which of the applicants should be
allowed the Class A, C, D or G privilege, taking into consideration the
character of the establishment, its location, and the interests of public
welfare; which of the four (4) of said classes of licenses is permitted to any
applicant, shall be final, and nothing shall grant any right to any licensee to
have another class of license. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-23: REVOCATION, HEARING, NOTICE:
The Local Liquor Control Commission may revoke or suspend any license issued by
him if he determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of
the Illinois Liquor Control Act, any State or Federal law, and/or any
provisions of this Code, or any lawful regulation established by such
commission. However, no such license shall be so revoked or suspended except
after a public hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commission with a three (3)
day written notice to the licensee affording such licensee an opportunity to
appear and defend; provided, however, that if the Local Liquor Control
Commission has reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular
licensed premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community, he
may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason for such
conclusion and without notice of hearing, order the licensed premises closed
for not more than seven (7) days, giving the licensee an opportunity to be
heard during that period, except that if such licensee shall also be engaged in
the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed premises such
order shall not be applicable to such other business or businesses.
The Local Liquor Control Commission shall within five (5) days after such
hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license shall be revoked
or suspended, state the reason or reasons in such determination in a written
order of revocation or suspension and shall serve a copy of such order within
the said five (5) days upon said licensee.
The licensee shall thereafter have such privilege of appeal to the State Liquor
Commission on the official record of the proceedings taken and prepared by a
certified reporter pursuant to 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/7-9 as provided
for him by law. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-24: LOCATION OR RELOCATION:
   (A)   No tavern, dramshop or place where alcoholic liquor is sold or kept
for sale shall locate (except those locations now established) or relocate
within one hundred feet (100') of any church, school other than an institution
of higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for
veterans, their spouses or children, military or naval station, mortuary, or
undertaking establishment. Nothing herein shall affect those locations now
established as or operated as a tavern or dramshop unless such locations are
abandoned in favor of another business.
   (B)   No tavern, dramshop or place where alcoholic liquor is sold or kept
for sale shall locate or relocate at any place of business where the majority
of customers are minors of school age or where the principal business
transacted consists of school books, school supplies, food, or school lunches
or drinks for such minors.
   (C)   Whenever in this chapter, a licensed premises is required to be
located a specific distance from a church, the distance shall be measured from
the lot line or property line of the licensed premises to the nearest part of
the exterior portion of the church used for worship or educational programs;
provided, however, that such measurement shall not apply to an exemption
granted by the Mayor as the Liquor Control Commissioner in accordance with this
section.
   (D)   Whenever in this chapter, a licensed premises is required to be
located a specific distance from school other than an institution of higher
learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their
spouses or children, military or naval station, mortuary, or undertaking
establishment, the distance shall be measured from the lot line or property
line of the licensed premises to the lot line or property line of the
applicable use identified in this sentence.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or this section to the
contrary, the Mayor as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may grant an
exemption for the location of a tavern or dramshop within one hundred feet
(100') of any church as authorized by section 6-11 of the Illinois Liquor
Control Act 1 , provided that no such tavern or dramshop may be located within
one hundred feet (100') of any church where such distance is measured from the
main or principal entrance of the licensed premises to the main or principal
entrance of the church, or in the case of a licensed premises located within a
building or structure that contains multiple units, measured from the main or
principal entrance of the unit in which the licensed premises is located to the
main or principal entrance of the church. In order to obtain said exemption,
the applicant must include a request for location exemption in the license
application as required under this chapter. (Ord. 820D, 4-24-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 235 ILCS 5/6-11(a-5).
3-1-25: LIQUOR SERVICE PERMIT REQUIRED:
(Rep. by Ord. 366-B, 6-8-1994)
3-1-26: AGE OF EMPLOYEES:
The following conditions shall control the employment of persons twenty one
(21) years of age and under in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic liquor
under this chapter:
   (A)   Subject to the exceptions in subsection (B) of this section, it shall
be unlawful for any licensee to suffer or permit the employment of any person
under the age of twenty one (21) whether such person is paid or not to draw,
pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor or to serve as a cashier or check-out clerk
for the sale of any alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   Persons aged eighteen (18) through twenty one (21) may be employed as
waiters, waitresses or busboys or girls in any restaurant licensed under this
chapter. Persons aged eighteen (18) through twenty one (21) may serve beverages
containing alcoholic liquor to patrons if that beverage was poured or mixed by
an employee over twenty one (21).
   (C)   Persons aged sixteen (16) and seventeen (17) may also be employed as
waiters, waitresses or busboys or girls in any restaurant licensed under this
chapter, but sixteen (16) and seventeen (17) year olds may not serve beverages
containing alcoholic liquor to patrons under any circumstances.
   (D)   Any underage employee, aged sixteen (16) through twenty one (21) may
be employed as stock boys or girls in any grocery store or package liquor store
licensed under this chapter. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-27: FINGERPRINTING AND RECORDING OF LICENSEES:
All licensees including all applicants for licenses, shall, in addition to
furnishing a complete personal history, be fingerprinted and be subjected to a
police record check to be included as a part of their licensee's record. (Ord.
820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-28: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN UNSEALED OR OPENED CONTAINERS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic liquors
in an unsealed or open container in any public place within the Village except
on the premises where the alcoholic liquor was purchased.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry any alcoholic liquor in
an unsealed or opened container from the licensed premises where such alcoholic
liquor was purchased.
   (C)   No licensee or person as proprietor, agent, servant or employee of
such licensee shall knowingly permit any patron to violate this section or
continue to sell alcoholic liquors to such person knowing that such person
intends to carry the alcoholic liquor from the premises in an open or unsealed
container. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
3-1-29: IMMEDIATE REPORT OF UNLAWFUL OR DISORDERLY CONDUCT REQUIRED:
   (A)   Any person licensed under this chapter shall report to the Creve Coeur
Police Department any and all of the following conduct which occurs on or near
the premises from which the licensee operates his dramshop or tavern:
      1.   Fights, disturbances, arguments or other disorderly conduct; or
      2.   Violations of any provision of this Code, State law or Federal law.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report any such conduct which
comes to the attention of the licensee or any employee or agent of the
licensee.
   (B)   The report required by subsection (A) of this section shall be made
immediately after the unlawful or disorderly conduct comes to the attention of
the licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee. It shall be unlawful for
any licensee to delay reporting any such unlawful or disorderly conduct which
comes to the attention of the licensee or any employee or agent of the
licensee. (Ord. 820B, 7-11-2018)
CHAPTER 2
BILLIARDS 1
SECTION:
3-2-1: License Required
3-2-2: License Fees
3-2-3: Application For License
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2.
3-2-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall keep any billiard table, pool table, bagatelle table,
pigeonhole table, or pool or tenpin alley, or any other kind of alley, table or
ground to be used or played upon by others for hire or gain without having
first procured a license therefor. (Ord. 15, 8-1-1921)
3-2-2: LICENSE FEES:
There shall be taxed and collected for license fees to keep such table, alleys
or grounds mentioned in the preceding section hereof, rates established by the
village board annually and published in the office of the village clerk.
Provided all applications for license under this and preceding sections of this
chapter shall be made to the trustees of the village, who may grant or reject
such applications at their discretion. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-2-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license under the provisions of sections
3-2-1 and
3-2-2 of this chapter shall make application, in writing, to the board of
trustees, stating therein the kind and number of tables, alleys or grounds upon
which he desires to take out such licenses, also describing the building in
which the same are to be located and the lot and block on which the building is
situated. The applicant shall also file with such application the treasurer's
receipt for the license fee as provided in section
3-2-2 of this chapter. Such license, if granted, shall be signed by the
president of the board of trustees and the clerk, and shall not be transferable
to any person without the consent of the village board; provided, the village
board may grant such licenses for a less than one year period. (Ord. 15, 8-1-
1921)
CHAPTER 3
TAXICABS 1
SECTION:
3-3-1: License Required--Taxicab Business; Taxicab Vehicles
3-3-2: Definitions
3-3-3: Business License Qualifications
3-3-4: Vehicle License Application; Contents
3-3-5: Drivers
3-3-6: Insurance Requirements
3-3-7: Financial Responsibility; Failure To Discharge
3-3-8: Traffic Rules
3-3-9: Unlawful Use
3-3-10: Drug And Alcohol Testing
3-3-11: Passengers
3-3-12: Route
3-3-13: Rates Of Fare
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-6.
3-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED-TAXICAB BUSINESS; TAXICAB VEHICLES:
   (A)   Business License: It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of
operating a taxicab in the village without first having secured a license
therefor. Applications for such licenses shall be made in writing to the clerk,
and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the intended place of
business and the number of cabs to be operated. If the applicant is a
corporation, the names and addresses of the president and secretary thereof
shall be given.
   (B)   Vehicle License: No person, whether acting as owner, principal, agent,
employees, lessee or licensee, shall operate a taxicab or motor vehicle as
defined in section
3-3-2 of this code, for the carriage of persons, for hire in the village,
without first making application, in writing, for a license to do so to the
village clerk. A copy of the certificate of compliance issues pursuant to
section
3-3-3 of this Code shall be carried in the taxicab at all times while the same
is for hire. (Ord. 925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-2: DEFINITION:
 
PERSON:       An individual, corporation, partnership, unincorporated
              association, joint venture or other legal entity.
              Any vehicle used to pick up, carry and discharge passengers for
              hire within the village, but not operating on a fixed route.
              Vehicles operated from points outside the village limits and
              entering such limits solely for the purpose of discharging a
              passenger or for picking up a passenger for transportation beyond
              such limits shall not be held to be taxicabs hereunder; provided,
TAXICAB:      however, that this term shall not include motor vehicles rented
              by special contract to be operated by the customer, or any
              vehicle operating under authority by special ordinance or
              franchise or, licensed under an ordinance licensing motor
              vehicles for the transportation of passengers or freight over a
              specific route, or railroad cars and motorbuses operating under
              the authority and jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce
              Commission.
              Any meter instrument or device which is designed to measure
TAXIMETER:    distance driven and the waiting time and which indicates in
              dollars and cents the fare to be charged.
WAITING TIME: The period of time consumed while standing at the direction of a
              passenger. (Ord. 925, 2-24-2021)
 
3-3-3: BUSINESS LICENSE QUALIFICATIONS:
No license to engage in the business of operating a taxicab in the village
shall be issued to or held by:
   (A)   A person who is not of good character and reputation, in the village.
   (B)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
   (C)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of the
state of Illinois or of the United States.
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of other crimes or misdemeanors
opposed to decency or morality.
   (E)   A co-partnership unless all of the members of such co-partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license.
   (F)   A corporation or other business entity, if any officer, manager or
director thereof or any stockholder(s) or member(s) owning in the aggregate
more than five percent (5%) of the stock or membership interests of such
business would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason
other than citizenship and residence within the county.
   (G)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless such manager or agent possess the same qualifications required of the
licensee.
   (H)   The president or any member of the board of trustees of the village,
and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the ownership or the operation of a taxicab. (Ord. 925, 2-24-
2021)
3-3-4: VEHICLE LICENSE APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
   (A)   Application: Applications for licenses for taxicabs shall be made by
the owner upon forms provided for by Village Clerk, and such applications shall
contain the full name and address of the owner, the length of time the vehicle
has been in use, the number of persons it is capable of carrying, a description
thereof, including the make, model, VIN number, and vehicle registration number
of each vehicle, as well as the principal place of business and office address
of and the names of the officers, or the person, firm or corporation owning and
operating the same, and, if a partnership, the names and addresses of each
partner, and such other information as the Chief of Police may require.
   (B)   Certificate of Compliance: A certificate of compliance shall be issued
by the Village to any taxicab passing an inspection by an authorized company
approved by the Chief of Police. Such compliance shall take place at such place
or places as may be designated by, or agreed upon, by the Chief of Police. The
certificate of compliance shall be issued upon a determination by the Chief of
Police that the taxicab and the taximeter therein, meet all the requirements of
this chapter, and said certificate shall be valid until January of the next
year following the date of issuance. At the end of that period and annually
thereafter on or prior to January 1, a new certificate can be issued upon
satisfactory re-inspection.
   (C)   Transferability: No taxicab license issued under this division may be
sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred, without the consent of the
village.
   (D)   Suspension Or Revocation:
      1.   The Chief of Police is hereby given authority to suspend or revoke
the certificate of compliance issued under this chapter for any taxicab that
does not comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or other ordinances
of the Village, or laws of the state. However, a certificate of compliance may
not be revoked or suspended without notice to the owner and an opportunity to
present evidence on his behalf.
      2.   No person or entity owning or operating taxicabs not licensed and
equipped in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or a taxicab, the
license of which has been revoked, or whose license is at the time suspended,
shall operate a taxicab within the Village during any such period of revocation
or suspension.
      3.   Any aggrieved person or entity may appeal any decision of the Chief
of Police made pursuant to the provisions under this chapter. An appeal may be
taken to the Chief of Police within thirty (30) days from the date of the
decision appealed from, by filing with the Village Clerk a notice. of appeal
specifying the grounds on which the appeal is based. The Village Board shall
hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days of its filing. At the
hearing the person or entity appealing the decision, may present witnesses and
relevant proof in support of its position. Every decision of the Village Board
pursuant to this section shall be entered and filed in the records of the
office of the Village Clerk. If a decision of the Village Board reverses or
modifies the decision of the Chief of Police, the Chief shall take immediate
action in accordance with the council's decision.
   (E)   Qualifications Of Applicant: No such license or certificate of
compliance shall be issued to or held by any person or business entity that
does not qualify for a license pursuant to Section
3-3-3 of this code.
   (F)   Fees: The annual fee payable in advance for such licenses shall be
established by the Village Board annually and published at the office of the
Village Clerk. Whenever the number of cabs so operated shall be increased
during the license year, the licensee shall notify the clerk of such change and
shall pay the additional fee within ten (10) days of such increase in number of
cabs.
   Such fee shall be in lieu of any other vehicle fee required by the
provisions of this code, and the clerk shall issue suitable tags or stickers
for the number of cabs covered by each license. Such tag or sticker shall be
displayed in a prominent place on each taxicab while it is in use and may be
transferred to any taxicab put into service to replace one withdrawn from
service. The licensee shall notify the Village Clerk of the VIN and
registration number of each cab operated and of the corresponding municipal tag
or sticker number. A licensing fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per taxi
vehicle is required annually with a maximum amount of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) per taxi company if the company is based in the village, and if not
based in the village, then a maximum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00)
per company is required for issuance of a certificate under this chapter.
   (G)   No taxicab shall be operated unless it bears a state license duly
issued; and no such cab shall be operated unless it is equipped with proper
brakes, lights, tires, horn, muffler, rear vision mirror, and windshield wiper
in good condition. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to inspect every
taxicab so often as may be necessary to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this section. Each taxicab, while operated, shall have on each
side, in letters readable from a distance of twenty feet (20'), the name of the
licensee operating it. If more than one cab is operated by a licensee, each cab
shall be designated by a different number, and such number also shall so appear
on each side of such cab.
   (H)   Inspection By The Police Department: In addition to any other
inspections that may be required it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to
inspect taxicabs when there is a complaint from the public, or from another
police officer, or at any time the Chief determines an inspection may be
necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. Such
inspections may be conducted by the police department at reasonable times and
places and without notice when, in the opinion of the police department, public
safety would be benefited by such an inspection.
   (I)   Standards: It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate or cause to be
operated, a taxicab for hire in this village unless such taxicab:
      1.   Bears a duly issued livery license issued by the Illinois Secretary
of State;
      2.   Is in safe operating condition;
      3.   Is equipped with properly operating brakes, lights, tires, rear
vision mirror, horn, muffler, turn signals, and windshield wipers in good
condition;
      4.   Has a clean interior of good appearance;
      5.   Has no protruding parts which could create a hazard to any person,
vehicle or thing;
      6.   Is in compliance with all laws and regulations of the state
pertaining to such vehicles and with all provisions of this chapter;
      7.   Every taxicab licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall
have plainly the name of the owner or the operating company and the number of
the cab painted or affixed in the center of the main panel of each door of each
taxicab. If more than one cab is operated by a licensee, then each cab shall be
designated by a different number, and such number shall also appear on each
side of such cab;
      8.   While in operation, the interior of each cab shall have:
         a.   The taxi driver's picture,
         b.   The taxi driver's license or registration number,
         c.   The exterior identification number, and
         d.   A telephone number for a passenger to call if the taxi driver is
operating the taxicab in a reckless manner. (Ord. 925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-5: DRIVERS:
   (A)   No person shall drive a taxicab, or be hired or permitted to do so,
unless he has a valid Illinois Driver's License, and has a good driving record,
as determined by the Chief of Police. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a
taxicab while on duty to drink any intoxicating liquor, or to use any profane
or obscene language, to shout or call to prospective passengers, or to disturb
the peace in any way. A driver will be disqualified if they have, in the last
five (5) years, had:
      1.   A conviction or court-assigned supervision for driving under the
influence (DUI), or a similar provision of a local ordinance; or
      2.   A conviction in any other state for DUI or a similar offense where
the cause of action is the same or substantially similar to the Illinois
Vehicle Code; or
      3.   A driver's license suspension/revocation for violating Section 11-
501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, except in cases where you submitted to a
chemical test(s) disclosing an alcohol concentration of .08 or more or any
amount of a drug, substance or intoxicating compound resulting from the
unlawful use or consumption of cannabis as listed in the Cannabis Control Act;
a controlled substance as listed in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act; an
intoxicating compound as listed in the Use of Intoxicating Compounds Act' or
methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act, and were subsequently
found not guilty of the associated DUI charge; or
      4.   A conviction or court-assigned supervision for reckless driving; or
      5.   A conviction or court-assigned supervision for fleeing & eluding
police.
   (B)   The licensee shall provide a list of authorized drivers to the Chief
of Police at the time of application and will update the list when drivers are
added. The Chief of Police shall examine the driver's license status and
driving record of the driver to determine the competency of the applicant.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees may revoke the license of any taxicab business
for repeated violations of traffic laws or ordinances by such business's
drivers, or for a violation of any ordinance provision regulating the conduct
of such drivers. (Ord. 925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-6: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Before any certificate of compliance for a taxicab shall be issued,
the owner shall file with the chief of police a certificate of insurance issued
by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, providing
insurance coverage for each and every taxicab owned, operated or leased by the
applicant with a minimum liability providing against public liability in the
amount of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for the injury or
death of any person, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury or
death per accident, and a minimum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for
property damage, growing out of any accident regardless of whether such taxicab
was being driven by the owner, his agent, employee, licensee or lessee. Such
policy shall further provide that insolvency or bankruptcy of the insured shall
not release the insurance company from any payment due under such policy, and
if by reason of such insolvency or bankruptcy, an execution or a judgment
against the insured is returned unsatisfied, the judgment creditor shall have a
right of action against the insurance company to recover the amount of such
judgment to the same extent that the insured could have had to recover against
the company had the insured paid the judgment such policy shall further provide
that it cannot be cancelled until thirty (30) days' notice of such cancellation
shall have been given to the chief of police.
   (B)   Unless the licensee provides another policy of insurance complying
with this section within thirty (30) days after receipt by the Chief of Police
of notice of cancellation, the certificate of compliance for each taxicab
operated by the licensed taxicab business shall automatically become null and
void, and the license to operate shall be suspended until such time as the
Chief of Police receives another policy of insurance.
   (C)   Licensees must comply with any Illinois statute requiring additional
coverage limits. (Ord. 925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-7: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY; FAILURE TO DISCHARGE:
Any certificate of compliance issued hereunder may be cancelled by the Chief of
Police at any time when for a period of forty (40) days there has not been full
satisfaction of a final judgment, of any court, against any persons for damages
sustained by third parties and arising out of the operation of the taxicab;
provided, however, that such person against whom judgment is taken is the owner
or his agent, employee, licensee or lessee. (Ord. 925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-8: TRAFFIC RULES:
It shall be the duty of every driver of a taxicab to obey all traffic rules and
regulations established by statute or the provisions of this code. (Ord. 925,
2-24-2021)
3-3-9: UNLAWFUL USE:
It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any taxicab to be used in the
perpetration of a crime or misdemeanor. (Ord. 925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-10: DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING:
If a taxi driver collides with a pedestrian while operating a taxicab,
resulting in bodily injury, then any responding law enforcement officers must
test the taxi driver for drug and alcohol use.(Ord. 925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-11: PASSENGERS:
It shall be the duty of the driver of any taxicab to accept as a passenger any
person who seeks to so use the taxicab, provided such person is not intoxicated
and conducts himself in an orderly manner. No person shall be admitted to a
taxicab occupied by a passenger without the consent of the passenger. (Ord.
925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-12: ROUTE:
The driver shall take his passenger to his destination by the most direct
available route from the place where the passenger enters the taxicab. (Ord.
925, 2-24-2021)
3-3-13: RATES OF FARE:
   (A)   No taxicab shall be operated and no license shall be issued to any
applicant pursuant to this chapter until such time as the applicant has
submitted to the Chief of Police a fee schedule which shows all fees and rates
associated with transportation of passengers for hire. The fee schedule should
be submitted annually thereafter on or prior to January 1.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any licensed operator to operate a taxicab
within the village without a proper functioning taximeter. Upon complaints by
any person that a taximeter is out of working order or does not accurately
register the lawful rates of charge, it shall be inspected and tested by been
inspected by an authorized company approved by the Chief of Police, and if
found to be in improper working condition or inaccurate, it shall be unlawful
to operate the taxicab to which it is attached until such taxicab is equipped
with a taximeter which had been inspected by an authorized company approved by
the Chief of Police and found to be in proper working condition and accurate
and a new certificate of compliance for the taxicab is issued. In the event an
operator is found to be operating taxicabs within the village with inoperable
or inaccurate taximeters on two (2) or more occasions in any twelve (12) month
period, the village may revoke the operator's license to operate taxicabs
within the village following a hearing before the village board. (Ord. 925, 2-
24-2021)
CHAPTER 4
TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SECTION:
3-4-1: Definitions
3-4-2: License Required
3-4-3: Fees
3-4-4: Ownership; Display
3-4-5: Location Restrictions
3-4-6: Prohibited Sales And Delivery; Signs
3-4-7: Minimum Age To Sell
3-4-8: Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
3-4-9: Vending Machines; Locking Devices
3-4-10: Acts And Omissions
3-4-11: Suspension; Revocation Of License; Fines; Costs
3-4-12: Use Of Premises After Revocation
3-4-13: Purchase By Minors; Fines
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping
tobacco.
   VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electric or electronic self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
3-4-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away
or delivering, tobacco products within the village without having first
obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the
village clerk. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
3-4-3: FEES:
The annual license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be for each vending
machine or for each location where tobacco products are sold and dispensed. The
fee shall be established by the village board annually and published in the
office of the village clerk.
   (A)   However, one license only shall be required where tobacco products are
dispensed in a place of business having more than one checkout counter in that
individual business.
   (B)   Also, where tobacco products are sold and dispensed at a checkout
counter or counters and by vending machine, said machine shall be required to
pay an annual fee and an annual fee will be required for the sale of tobacco
products over checkout counter or counters even though located within the same
business operation. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-4-4: OWNERSHIP; DISPLAY:
   (A)   Ownership: The license shall be issued to the owner or proprietor of
the place or building in which the tobacco products are sold or dispensed.
   (B)   Display: The license or a copy thereof shall be displayed upon each
machine from which tobacco products are dispensed, and a valid license for the
sale of tobacco products shall be displayed at the place where the same are
sold over the counter. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
3-4-5: LOCATION RESTRICTIONS:
No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any tobacco products
within one hundred feet (100') of any school, childcare facility or other
building used for educational or recreational programs for persons under the
age of eighteen (18). This prohibition shall not apply to the renewal of any
existing license. The distance of one hundred feet (100') shall be measured
from the main or principal entrance of the licensed premises to the main or
principal entrance of the school, childcare facility or other building used for
educational or recreational programs for persons under the age of eighteen
(18). (Ord. 874, 4-24-2019)
3-4-6: PROHIBITED SALES AND DELIVERY; SIGNS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years.
   (B)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products
and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale.
Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW.
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
3-4-7: MINIMUM AGE TO SELL:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit
any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products in any
licensed premises. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
3-4-8: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling
or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any
employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such
licensee's or person's business, or any other person, to distribute, give away
or deliver tobacco products free of charge to any person in any right-of-way,
park, playground or other property owned by the Village, or any property owned
by any school district, park district or public library. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
3-4-9: VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or
delivering tobacco products by the use of a vending machine, unless such
vending machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking
device controlled by the licensee so as to prevent its operation by persons
under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   (B)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of eighteen (18)
years is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not
permitted and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of
the business located at such premises shall be exempt from the requirements of
subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
3-4-10: ACTS AND OMISSIONS:
Every act or omission of whatever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other agent
or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of such
licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such
act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord. 89A,
1-13-1999)
3-4-11: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES; COSTS:
   (A)   The Mayor shall be charged with the administration of this chapter.
The Mayor may suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this
chapter, if the Mayor determines that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a license,
the Mayor may instead levy a fine on the licensee of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (B)   However, no license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee
shall be fined except after a hearing with the Mayor with a seven (7) day
written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear
and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day
notice provision shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by
personal service.
   (C)   The mayor shall, within seven (7) days after such hearing, if the
mayor determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or
suspended, or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such
determination in a written order and either the amount of the fine, the period
of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such
order upon the licensee within fourteen (14) days after such hearing.
   (D)   Any licensee determined by the mayor to have violated any of the
provisions of this chapter shall pay to the village the costs of the hearing
before the mayor on such violation. The mayor shall determine the costs
incurred by the village for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court
reporter fees, the costs of transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of
preparing and mailing notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses
incurred by the village or such lesser sum as the mayor may allow.
   (E)   The licensee shall pay said fine and/or costs to the village within
thirty (30) days of notification of the costs by the mayor. Failure to pay said
costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter
and may be cause for license suspension, revocation, levy of a fine or other
civil remedy. (Ord. 575-A, 1-23-2002)
3-4-12: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the
conduct of the business of selling "tobacco products" as defined in section
3-4-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
3-4-13: PURCHASE BY MINORS; FINES:
   (A)   False Identification: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent his
or her identity or age, or to use any false or altered identification for the
purpose of purchasing tobacco products.
   (B)   Possession By A Minor: It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of eighteen (18) years to possess any tobacco products; provided that the
possession by a person under the age of eighteen (18) years under the direct
supervision of the parent or legal guardian of such person in the privacy and
confines of the parent's or guardian's home shall not be prohibited.
   (C)   Fine: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the following fines:
      1.   Twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first offense;
      2.   Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second offense and subsequent offenses
within a twelve (12) month period.
The twelve (12) month period shall be measured from the date of conviction of
any offense. (Ord. 89A, 1-13-1999)
CHAPTER 5
PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS, JUNK DEALERS, AND GARAGE SALES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Definitions
3-5-2: License Required
3-5-3: Exemptions
3-5-4: Application
3-5-5: Investigation
3-5-6: Issuance
3-5-7: License Fee; Transferability And Posting
3-5-8: License Revocation
3-5-9: Bond
3-5-10: Records Required
3-5-11: Records Inspections
3-5-12: Memorandum To Be Given By Pawnbroker And Secondhand Dealers
3-5-13: Report To Police
3-5-14: Removal Or Redemption Of Pledged Property
3-5-15: Hours Of Business
3-5-16: Minors, Taking Pledges From
3-5-17: Minors, Employing
3-5-18: Taking Pledges From Thieves, Etc.
3-5-19: Display Of Certain Weapons
3-5-20: Garage Sales
3-5-20-1: Garage Sale Signs
3-5-20-2: Limitation Of Garage Sales
3-5-20-3: Penalty
3-5-20-4: Exception
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
   JUNK DEALER: Any person who shall keep a junk shop or store or junkyard or
place for the purchase, sale or exchange of junk, wire or sheet material; old
iron, brass, copper, tin, or lead; junk motor vehicles (wrecked, damaged,
disabled or inoperable motor vehicles) or parts thereof, old appliances, glass,
plastic, plastic or paper bags, bottles or any articles or things composed of
or consisting of any combination of any one or more of the materials or
articles listed in this section.
   PAWNBROKER: Any person who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal
property, or who deals in the purchase of personal property on condition of
selling the same back at a stipulated price, or who publicly exhibits a sign of
"Money To Loan On Personal Property, Or Deposit Or Pledge", is hereby declared
to be a pawnbroker. A pawnbroker may also be a secondhand dealer, but does not
have to be a secondhand dealer if they do not also meet the definition herein.
   SECONDHAND DEALER: Any person which operates a business for profit which
buys, sells, possesses on a consignment for sale or trades jewelry, stamps,
electronic equipment or any precious metals or stones which have been
previously owned by a consumer, or which derives more than thirty five percent
(35%) of its gross receipts from the sale, consignment for sale, pledge or
trade of any goods, wares or merchandise which have previously been owned by a
consumer, including, but not limited to, cellular phones, appliances,
televisions, automobile parts and accessories, metals, whether in bulk or
manufactured state, computers, computer parts or equipment, video/camera/stereo
parts or equipment, electronic video consoles and games, videos, music, musical
instruments, collectibles and memorabilia, sporting goods, bicycles, motorized
tools/vehicles, collectible artwork, firearms, including their accessories and
ammunition.
The term "secondhand dealer" also includes "junk dealer" as defined herein, but
shall not include pawnbrokers (who are not also selling secondhand goods within
the village), coin dealers, providers of commercial mobile services, as defined
in 47 USC 33d(d), retail merchants that do not purchase previously owned items
directly from the public at the retail location, or any of the exemptions
listed in section
3-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall exercise or carry on the business of pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer without being duly licensed by the village clerk after completing the
application process as explained in section
3-5-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter and are
specifically not secondhand dealers:
   (A)   Garage sales, which are bound by the requirements listed in section
3-5-20 of this chapter;
   (B)   Sales conducted by governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal,
educational, religious, or benevolent organizations which have been in active
and continuous existence for at least one year prior to holding a sale, or
which are incorporated as a not for profit corporation by the state;
   (C)   Antique dealers who derive seventy five percent (75%) of their gross
sales each year from the sale of "antiques" and/or "primitives" which are
defined as an old and valuable art object or article no longer in production
which is at least fifty (50) years old. The term "sale" as used herein does not
include an exchange, trade or swap of items;
   (D)   Sales of furniture, clothing, homemade crafts and/or books and
magazines;
   (E)   Consumer shows or exhibitions of collectibles, other than a show or
convention that offers to buy secondhand jewelry from attendees;
   (F)   Auctioneers;
   (G)   Coin dealers who are primarily engaged in the business of buying and
selling coins because of their numismatic value; and
   (H)   Providers of commercial mobile services or their authorized dealers.
(Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-4: APPLICATION:
An application for license as required by section
3-5-2 of this chapter shall be made in writing to the village of Creve Coeur's
clerk which shall set forth the following:
   (A)   The name of the individual, partnership, corporation or association
applying for a license.
   (B)   The residence, phone number, date of birth and driver's license number
of the applicant or partners; or, if a corporation or association, the
residence, phone number and driver's license number of the officers and all
shareholders owning more than five percent (5%) of the outstanding shares of
stock.
   (C)   The location for which the license is required.
   (D)   Whether the applicant, its partners, officers, or listed shareholders
have been convicted of any criminal offense or ordinance violation (other than
traffic or parking offenses) in any jurisdiction, and, if so, a list of such
convictions with date and prosecuting jurisdiction.
   (E)   Whether the applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders
have held a license or had an interest in a license issued by the village or
any other jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of secondhand property
revoked for cause, and, if so, list the date of revocation and the
jurisdiction.
   (F)   Whether the applicant desires to deal in, or buy or sell or otherwise
display firearms, derringers, bowie knives, dirks or other deadly weapons (and
if so, if the applicant possesses a valid and current license or permit
pursuant to federal and/or state law pertaining to the buying or selling of
such items, and if so, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the same to the
village). (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-5: INVESTIGATION:
Upon receipt of an application for license and the fee for such license paid in
full (fee is explained in section
3-5-7 of this chapter) which will be paid in full whether or not the license is
issued under section
3-5-6 of this chapter, the village shall cause a copy of the license to be sent
to the police department, the village board and the building inspector. The
police department and building inspector shall report back to the village clerk
in fifteen (15) days whether or not the applicant meets the requirements for
issuance listed under section
3-5-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-6: ISSUANCE:
Upon receipt of the report from the police department and the building
inspector, and any comments from the members of the village board, the clerk
shall issue the license requested unless:
   (A)   The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
   (B)   The location requested is not in a permanent structure.
   (C)   The location requested is not zoned properly for use in accordance
with this section.
   (D)   The location requested is not in compliance with basic building codes
and the life safety codes of the village.
   (E)   The applicant, its partners, officers, or listed shareholders have
been convicted of or have plead guilty to any offense related to theft,
burglary, or purchasing or receiving stolen items under the laws of this state,
village or any other jurisdiction within the past ten (10) years, or have
forfeited a bond to appear in court to answer for charges for such offenses
during the past ten (10) years.
   (F)   The applicant, its partners, officers or listed shareholders have held
a license or had an interest in a license issued by the village or any other
jurisdiction regulating the purchase or sale of secondhand property that was
revoked for cause.
   (G)   The applicant, its partners, officers, or listed shareholders have
knowingly furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant
information on any application for a license required by this chapter or any
investigation into any application, or
   (H)   In the case of an applicant who desires to deal in or buy or sell or
display firearms, derringers, bowie knives, dirks or other deadly weapons, the
applicant, its partners, officers, or listed shareholders have been convicted
of or had pled guilty to any offense related to the unlawful possession, sale
or delivery of firearms or other deadly weapons. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-7: LICENSE FEE; TRANSFERABILITY AND POSTING:
Every applicant for a license to be a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall,
before the same is issued, pay to the village treasurer the current license fee
amount as is established annually by the village board and published at the
office of the village clerk. Payment of the license fee is good for the term or
period of one year and such license shall not be transferable to any person or
persons, except upon the written consent of the village clerk endorsed
specifically on the license.
The license issued shall, at all times during the period for which it is
effective, be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the principal entrance
to the premises for which the license is issued. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-8: LICENSE REVOCATION:
It shall be the duty of all members of the police force to report to the
village clerk any failure of a license holder under this section to comply with
provisions of this chapter, or any convictions of any offense related to theft,
burglary, or purchasing or receiving stolen items under the laws of this state,
or any convictions of any offense related to the unlawful possession, sale or
delivery of firearms or other deadly weapons. Upon such report, the village
board may revoke the license of any person who shall be convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter, whether such judgment of conviction
shall have been appealed from or not. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-9: BOND:
Every person so licensed as required by this chapter shall, at the time of
receiving such license, give bond with two (2) or more sureties, to be approved
by the village attorney, in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00),
conditioned for the due observance of all ordinances of the village, or that
may be passed during the term for which such license is granted. (Ord. 807, 3-
9-2016)
3-5-10: RECORDS REQUIRED:
Every pawnbroker shall keep a book in which shall be plainly written in ink, at
the time of each loan, an accurate account and description, in the English
language, of the goods, articles or things pawned or pledged, the amount of
money loaned thereon, the time and date of pledging the same, the rate of
interest to be paid on such loan, and the name and residence of the person
pawning or pledging such goods, articles or things. No such entry made in the
book shall be erased, obliterated or defaced. Every secondhand dealer shall
keep a similar book showing the description of the goods, articles or things
purchased, the time and date of purchase, the amount paid and the name and
residence of the person from whom the goods, articles or things were purchased.
(Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-11: RECORDS INSPECTIONS:
The book required by this chapter as well as every article, or other thing of
value pawned, pledged or purchased shall, at all reasonable times, be open to
the inspection of the village president or any member of the police force.
(Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-12: MEMORANDUM TO BE GIVEN BY PAWNBROKER AND SECONDHAND DEALERS:
Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall, at the time of each loan or
purchase, deliver to the person pawning, pledging or selling of any goods,
articles or thing, a memorandum or note signed by him containing the substance
of the entry required to be made in his book by the preceding section; also
giving the location of his place of business in the village. No charge shall be
made or received by any pawnbroker or secondhand dealer or keeper of a loan
office for any such entry, memorandum or note. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-13: REPORT TO POLICE:
It shall be the duty of every person licensed under this chapter, to make out
and deliver to the chief of police every day, before the hour of twelve o'clock
(12:00) noon, a legible and correct copy from the record book required in
section
3-5-10 of this chapter, of all personal property and other valuable things
received during the preceding day, together with the time, meaning the hour,
when received and a description of the person who pledged or from whom the same
were purchased. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-14: REMOVAL OR REDEMPTION OF PLEDGED PROPERTY:
No personal property received on deposit, pledged or purchased by any
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, shall be sold or permitted to be redeemed or
removed from the place of business of such licensed person for the space of
forty eight (48) hours after the copy of the statement required to be delivered
to the chief of police shall have been delivered as required by the preceding
section. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-15: HOURS OF BUSINESS:
No person licensed under this chapter shall receive, deposit, pledge or
purchase any personal property, or other valuable thing, before the hour of six
o'clock (6:00) A.M., nor after the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. during the
months of January, February, March, April, October, November and December of
each year; nor before the hour of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. nor after the hour
of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. during the months of May, June, July, August and
September of each year. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-16: MINORS, TAKING PLEDGES FROM:
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall take or receive in pawn or pledge, for
money loaned or purchase, any property, bonds, notes, securities, article or
valuable thing from any minor, or the ownership of which is claimed by any
minor, or which may be in the possession or under the control of any minor.
(Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-17: MINORS, EMPLOYING:
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall employ any person under sixteen (16)
years of age, to take pledges in pawn or purchase junk or secondhand items.
(Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-18: TAKING PLEDGES FROM THIEVES, ETC.:
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall take any article in pawn or purchase
any article from any person appearing to be intoxicated, nor from any person
known to be a notorious thief, or to have been convicted of theft or burglary.
(Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-19: DISPLAY OF CERTAIN WEAPONS:
No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall show, display or exhibit any pistol,
revolver, derringer, bowie knife, dirk or other weapon of like character which
can be concealed on the person, in any show window or in or on any premises
immediately abutting upon any public way in the village in such a way that the
same may be seen from such public way. (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016)
3-5-20: GARAGE SALES:
3-5-20-1: GARAGE SALE SIGNS:
Garage Sale signs shall not be located on private property without the consent
of the property owner. Signs posted away from the sale location can be placed
up to (three) 3 days prior to the sale and must be removed within twenty-four
(24) hours of the conclusion of the sale. Signs must not impair the view of
motorists in regard to traffic safety or otherwise create a hazardous or unsafe
condition. (Ord. 957, 6-22-2022)
3-5-20-2: LIMITATION OF GARAGE SALES:
No person shall be permitted to conduct a house or garage sale from his or her
premises or participate in a garage or house sale conducted on another
residence more than three (3) times during any calendar year.
Under no circumstances shall the duration of any single house or garage sale
permitted under this section 3-5-20 last for more than three (3) full days.
(Ord. 957, 6-22-2022)
3-5-20-3: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this section
3-5-20, shall, upon conviction, be fined a minimum of two hundred dollars
($200.00) and a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 807, 3-9-2016;
amd. Ord. 957, 6-22-2022)
3-5-20-4: EXCEPTION:
The entirety of this section
3-5-20 shall not apply to bankruptcy, estate, auctioneer or other sales under
judicial process and temporary sales conducted at church, school or municipal
buildings by nonprofit religious, civic or charitable organizations. (Ord. 807,
3-9-2016; amd. Ord. 957, 6-22-2022)
CHAPTER 6
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
SECTION:
3-6-1: Tax Imposed
3-6-2: Accounting
3-6-3: Failure to Pay
3-6-4: Violation
3-6-1: TAX IMPOSED:
Any corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of the
State, which is engaged in the Village in effective fire insurance, shall pay
to the Treasurer, for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department
of the Village, a sum of money equal in amount to two percent (2%) of the gross
receipts received for premiums by any and all agents of any such corporation,
company or association during the year ending on every July 1, for any
insurance affected or agreed to be effected in said Village by or with any such
corporation, company or association during such year 1 .
 
Notes
1 1. For statute authority see S.H.A. 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1.
3-6-2: ACCOUNTING:
Every person who shall act in the Village as agent or otherwise for or on
behalf of any such corporation, company or association shall on or before July
15 of each and every year, render to the Treasurer a full, true and just
account verified by his oath, of all premiums which during the year ending on
July 1 preceding such report, shall have been received by him, or by any other
person for him in behalf of any such corporation, company or association, and
shall specify in said report the amounts received for fire insurance. Such
agent shall also at the time of rendering the aforesaid report, pay to the
Treasurer the sum of money for which such corporation, company or association
represented by him is chargeable by virtue of the provisions of this Chapter.
3-6-3: FAILURE TO PAY:
The sum or sums of money for which such corporation, company or association is
so chargeable may be recovered of it, or its agent or agents, by an action in
the name of and for the use of the Village, as for money had and received.
Nothing in this Section shall be held to exempt any corporation, company or
association, or agent of the same, from indictment and conviction under the
provisions of an Act entitled: "An Act to Enable Cities, Towns, Villages and
Fire Protection Districts, organized under any General or Special Law, to Levy
and Collect a Tax or License Fee from Foreign Fire Insurance Companies for the
Benefit of Organized Fire Departments", as amended by Act approved July 13,
1939.
No insurance broker or agent in the Village shall place any insurance with any
corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of this
State, which shall be in default for not reporting or making payment of fees as
hereinbefore provided, until it shall have complied with all the requirements
of this Chapter.
3-6-4: VIOLATION:
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any corporation, company or association to
engage in or transact any business of fire insurance in said Village while in
default by not complying with any of the requirements of this Chapter, and
until such requirements shall have been fully complied with; but this provision
shall not relieve any corporation, company or association from the payment of
any risk that may be undertaken in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 110, 1-17-
40)
CHAPTER 7
AMUSEMENTS; ENTERTAINMENTS
SECTION:
3-7-1: License Required
3-7-2: Types Of Amusements Needing Licensure And Requiring Fee Payment To
Village Clerk
3-7-3: Applications For Licenses
3-7-4: Clerk's Duties
3-7-5: Revocation Of Licenses
3-7-6: Assignment Of Licenses
3-7-7: Record Of Licenses
3-7-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be engaged in, or carry on, any business
occupation or pursuit hereinafter mentioned, within the corporate limits of the
village without having first obtained a license therefor in the manner
hereinafter provided. (Ord. 9, 9-2-1924)
3-7-2: TYPES OF AMUSEMENTS NEEDING LICENSURE AND REQUIRING FEE PAYMENT TO
VILLAGE CLERK:
Auctioneer licenses are available per day, per week or annually.
Carnivals require a license for each day in operation.
Circuses require a license for each day in operation.
Huckster stands require a license for each day in operation.
Menageries require a daily license whether or not the show is part of a circus
(although menageries as part of a circus pay a lesser fee amount).
Shooting galleries require a license for either daily or annual operation.
Sideshows require a license for each day in operation whether or not the show
is part of a circus (although sideshow performances as part of a circus pay a
lesser fee amount).
All license fees as necessary herein are established annually by the village
board and published in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-7-3: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Any person desiring a license for any purpose under the provisions hereof shall
make application therefor in writing to the clerk, stating therein the purpose
for which the license is desired, and for what length of time, and the place
where the business is to be carried on. (Ord. 9, 9-2-1924)
3-7-4: CLERK'S DUTIES:
The clerk shall receive all applications for licenses, and when properly made,
may grant the same, but he may refer any application for license to the
president and board of trustees for action thereon; provided, no license shall
be granted for a longer period than the end of the municipal year in which it
is granted. All licenses shall be signed by the president and attested to by
the clerk, who shall attach the corporate seal thereto. (Ord. 9, 9-2-1924)
3-7-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSES:
All licenses granted shall be subject to all the provisions of this code
relating thereto, which may be in force at the time, or which may be enacted
thereafter, and any person violating any of the provisions of this code
relating to the business so licensed, may be not only prosecuted for such
violation, but his license shall, on conviction under such prosecution be
revoked, and forfeited, in the discretion of the president and board of
trustees of the village. (Ord. 9, 9-2-1924)
3-7-6: ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSES:
No license shall be assignable or transferable, nor shall any person be
authorized to do business, or act under such license, but the person to whom it
is issued, nor shall such business be carried on under such license at any
other place than the one named in such license, without the consent of the
president and board of trustees of the village. (Ord. 9, 9-2-1924)
3-7-7: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The clerk shall keep a license register in which he shall enter the date,
number, purpose for which license is issued, to whom issued, amount paid and
date of expiration of license. (Ord. 9, 9-2-1924)
CHAPTER 8
PEDDLERS 1
SECTION:
3-8-1: Definitions
3-8-2: Peddler's License Required
3-8-3: License Requirements
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-5.
3-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The village defines "peddlers" as "solicitors" and "transit merchants". Every
person who shall sell, peddle or offer to sell or for sale, or solicit, barter,
or exchange any services, goods, foodstuffs, wares, magazines, materials, or
merchandise, traveling from place to place in, along or upon any street, alley
or public place of this village, or who shall sell or deliver from any vehicle,
shall be known as a solicitor/peddler. A person who sells, peddles or offers to
sell or for sale or solicits, barters, or exchanges any services, goods,
foodstuffs, wares, magazines, materials or merchandise from a temporary stand
or stall in the village, whether to regular customers or not, shall be deemed a
"transit merchant". Both "solicitors" and "transit merchants" are known as a
"peddler".
Girl Scouts, Boy Scouts and schoolchildren who attend local district schools
who are raising funds for extracurricular or other school and local activities
and/or charities are specifically not defined as peddlers and are exempt from
these requirements. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-8-2: PEDDLER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler
without a license. Licenses for peddlers are available in the following
categories and for the following terms:
   (A)   Solicitor's license: Available for a daily or annual fee.
   (B)   Transit merchant's license: Available for a daily, monthly or annual
fee.
   (C)   Pushcart/food vendor's license: Available for a daily, monthly or
annual fee. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-8-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENTS:
The clerk shall grant licenses as required in section
3-8-2 of this chapter, either on a daily or annual basis upon application. The
license fee is established annually by the village board and published in the
office of the village clerk.
Pushcart/food vendors, specifically, must meet all requirements of the Tazewell
County health department. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
Said license shall not be transferable. License fees may be waived for
charitable organizations with the approval of the mayor and village board.
(Ord. 242B, 4-28-1999)
CHAPTER 9
THEATERS
SECTION:
3-9-1: License Required
3-9-2: Applications
3-9-3: Fees
3-9-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall hereafter be unlawful to conduct or present any theatrical show,
motion picture, exhibition or other public shows, without first having obtained
a license therefor, as in this chapter provided; provided, however, that this
chapter shall not apply to local talent or school shows or theatricals. (Ord.
150, 3-20-1946)
3-9-2: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for such license shall be made to the clerk in writing and shall
state thereon the name of the applicant and the intended place of business. If
the applicant is a corporation, names and addresses of the president and
secretary thereof shall be given. Such application shall also designate the
nature and type of the theatrical or show, and each application shall be
accompanied by the payment of the fee required, and no license shall be issued
until the fee is paid. (Ord. 150, 3-20-1946)
3-9-3: FEES:
The fee for such license per day shall be established annually by the village
board and published at the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
CHAPTER 10
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
SECTION:
3-10-1: Terms Defined
3-10-2: License Required
3-10-3: License Fee
3-10-4: Minors
3-10-5: View
3-10-6: Application For License
3-10-7: Inspection
3-10-8: Revocation Of License
3-10-9: Coin Operated Musical Instruments
3-10-1: TERMS DEFINED:
   (A)   The term "mechanical amusement device" is hereby defined to be any
machine which upon the insertion of a coin or slug operates or may be operated
as a game or contest of skill or amusement of any description, and which
contains no automatic payoff device for the return of money, coins, checks,
tokens or merchandise, or which provides for no such payoff by any other manner
or means, or which awards free plays according to an indicator on said device,
and which said device in itself does not constitute a gambling device. The term
"mechanical amusement device" shall also include any machine or apparatus which
is used or may be used as a game of skill or amusement and in which the player
propels any ball or other device by any force exerted by himself or in which
the player uses or directs any force generated by the device itself.
Shuffleboards are excepted from the provisions of this chapter.
"Mechanical amusement devices" also means "noncoin operated amusement devices"
operated in the manner of a slot machine, but without a slot for the insertion
of coins to operate said machine and without receptacle in said machine for
making payment by reason of certain arrangements on the wheels on said machine,
and which said device is commonly referred to as a "slotless slot machine".
(Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-10-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall maintain, use or operate any device as defined in section
3-10-1 of this chapter, without first having obtained the license therefor in
the manner hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 186, 1-17-1951)
3-10-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee required in the preceding sections for a mechanical amusement
device shall be required to be paid annually for each such device operated or
set up for operation, and which said fee shall be paid in advance; and in no
case shall any portion of said license fee be repaid to the licensee. The
amount of the fee for the license for operation of such devices is established
annually by the village board and published at the office of the village clerk.
(Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-10-4: MINORS:
No license shall issue hereunder for the operation of any such device hereunder
licensed to be operated in any place of business within the village, patronized
customarily by minors or children, and no person under the age of twenty one
(21) years shall be allowed to play, use or operate any device licensed under
this chapter. (Ord. 186, 1-17-1951)
3-10-5: VIEW:
All such devices licensed hereunder shall at all times be kept and placed in
plain view of all persons who may frequent or be in any place of business or
other place where such devices are kept or used. Nothing in this chapter shall
be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature
whatsoever which is prohibited by the provisions of this code or by the laws of
the state of Illinois. (Ord. 186, 1-17-1951)
3-10-6: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person desiring to procure a license for any such device hereinabove
mentioned and defined shall file with the clerk an application in writing
setting forth the name and address of the applicant and the location at which
it is proposed to operate such device. So, application shall be signed by the
applicant. It shall be referred to the president of the board of trustees and
the chief of police for investigation of the character of the applicant, the
premises on which it is proposed to carry on the business of the applicant and
the type of machine to be used. If the president and the chief of police
approve such application, the clerk shall thereupon issue a license to said
applicant. All licenses shall be placed in a conspicuous place in the
establishment of the licensee. Such license shall be nonassignable and
nontransferable, and shall apply only to the premises for which the license is
issued. The clerk shall also issue a tag or seal for each device licensed
hereunder, which said tag or seal shall at all times be firmly affixed to such
machine in a conspicuous place, and no such tag or seal shall be transferred
from one device to another. No machine shall be installed for operation, taken
out of the location thereof or changed from one location to another without
making a proper application in writing to the clerk, as hereinabove set forth.
(Ord. 91, 4-20-1938)
3-10-7: INSPECTION:
The village through its officers, agents or employees shall have the right to
enter at all times, any establishment, place or building in which any of such
devices are operated or set up for operation, and to inspect, investigate and
test such device. (Ord. 91, 4-20-1938)
3-10-8: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued hereunder may be revoked by the president whenever in his
judgment the public welfare required such revocation. The acceptance of any
license under this chapter shall constitute an agreement between the parties to
such license that the same may be so revoked by said president in his judgment.
(Ord. 186, 1-17-1951)
3-10-9: COIN OPERATED MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to install or operate any
coin operated musical instrument or musical device in any public place or place
of business in the village without first obtaining a license so to do.
Application for such license shall be made in writing to the clerk. The annual
fee for a license to operate a coin operated musical instrument or device in
any public place or place of business shall be the sum of ten dollars ($10.00)
for each such machine. (Ord. 91, 4-20-1938; amd. Ord. 632, 11-30-2005)
CHAPTER 11
MOBILE HOMES, MOBILE HOME PARKS, AND CAMPGROUNDS
SECTION:
3-11-1: Definitions
3-11-2: Restrictions With Respect To Mobile Homes
3-11-3: Requirements For Mobile Homes Not Within Mobile Home Parks
3-11-4: Mobile Home Parks
3-11-5: Campgrounds
3-11-6: Recreational Vehicles And Trailers As Mobile Homes
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
   CAMPGROUND: An area or place that is used for camping, a place where people
can put up a tent or park a recreational vehicle.
   MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or similar portable structure of any floor area
under nine hundred (900) square feet, so constructed as to permit its being
used as a conveyance upon public streets or highways and designed to permit the
occupancy thereof as a dwelling place of one or more persons for year round
living without a permanent foundation; excepting, however, those structures
considered to be recreational vehicles and trailers as hereinafter defined.
Dependent Mobile Home: Any mobile home that does not contain a toilet and bath
or shower facilities.
Independent Mobile Home: Any mobile home with self- contained toilet and bath
or shower facilities.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: Any premises upon which five (5) or more occupied mobile
homes are harbored, either free of charge or for revenue, and shall include any
buildings, structures, tents, vehicles or enclosures used or intended for use
as part of the equipment of such mobile home park.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any vehicular portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation
uses and having a body width not exceeding eight feet (8'), being of any
length, provided its gross weight does not exceed four thousand five hundred
(4,500) pounds, or being of any weight provided its body length does not exceed
twenty nine feet (29'). Recreational vehicle types include the motor home
(class A, B, B+, and C), travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, toy hauler, pop
up trailer, and slide in camper (which fits in the bed of a pickup truck).
   TRAILER: An unpowered vehicle designed to be pulled by a powered vehicle. A
trailer can be covered, open, fully or partially enclosed, is available in all
shapes and sizes and is typically used to pull equipment, cars, snowmobiles,
all- terrain vehicles, or goods. (Ord. 812, 6-22-2016)
3-11-2: RESTRICTIONS WITH RESPECT TO MOBILE HOMES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a mobile home in the village
outside of a mobile home park which is duly licensed hereunder and by the state
pursuant to the Illinois mobile home park act, except as herein specifically
permitted.
No mobile home may be placed in an O-1, B-1 or B-2 zoning classification unless
that mobile home is a temporary structure to be utilized during construction
only pursuant to the permitting process below. (Ord. 812, 6-22-2016)
3-11-3: REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOMES NOT WITHIN MOBILE HOME PARKS:
   (A)   Permit Process Required For Mobile Homes: No person shall park or
place any mobile home upon any private lot within the village other than in a
mobile home park without first obtaining a license to do so by the village of
Creve Coeur.
   (B)   Mobile Homes Not Within Mobile Home Parks: All mobile homes not within
mobile home parks in the village of Creve Coeur must be independent mobile
homes (in that they must have self-contained toilet and bath/shower
facilities).
   (C)   License Application Process: To obtain a license, the owner of the
home, or the lot, must fill out an application with the village clerk and pay
the application fee (which will be set by the village board and published on a
fee schedule in the office of the village clerk). The application will consist
of:
      1.   The proposed location of the placement of the mobile home and proof
of ownership of the property where the mobile home will be placed and/or
written consent of the owner of the property.
      2.   The written consent of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the residents
and three-fourths (3/4) of the property owners within a one thousand foot
(1,000') radius of the property of the proposed mobile home placement.
      3.   Completion of a site plan that details not only the placement of the
mobile home, but also details the sewer, water, electric, and gas service
connections to be used (so that the village can ensure compliance with the
provisions below).
      4.   A description of the purpose of the mobile home structure and if it
is to be permanent or a temporary structure to be used during construction
alone.
   (D)   Public Hearing Required: Once the application is complete, the Creve
Coeur zoning board of appeals will hold a public hearing at a regularly
scheduled meeting and either recommend approval of the mobile home or not after
reviewing the site plan, ensuring compliance with zoning regulations, and
considering the effect mobile home usage will have on the property values of
neighboring parcels. Upon recommendation of the zoning board of appeals, the
village board will either grant approval or not at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. In the event that the zoning board of appeals denies approval, or the
village board declines to approve on the zoning board of appeals'
recommendation, the decision may be appealed pursuant to the Illinois
administrative review act.
   (E)   Village Board Approval, Annual Fee And Village License Required: Once
approval is granted by the village board, the clerk shall issue an annual
license to the mobile home. The license shall be renewed by the owner of the
mobile home annually once the annual fee is paid in the amount listed on the
fee schedule published at the office of the village clerk.
   (F)   Placement Restrictions: No mobile home shall be parked upon a private
lot closer than fifty feet (50') from a public street or thoroughfare, nor
within less than twenty five feet (25') of any other building or dwelling of
another.
   (G)   Sewer Connections: Each mobile home placed upon a private lot shall be
connected with the sanitary sewer, whenever the same is conveniently available,
or when such sewer is not conveniently accessible, then the same shall be
connected with a proper septic tank or cesspool.
   (H)   License To Be Displayed: Each mobile home shall have conspicuously
displayed the current license issued by the clerk, and the same shall be
readable from the outside of such mobile home. The owner of the lot upon which
the mobile home is to be set is liable for the license fees heretofore
provided.
   (I)   Additional Regulations:
      1.   Each mobile home shall be connected with electricity, and each shall
have a fuse block concealed from the weather.
      2.   Each mobile home shall have a metal covered garbage container and
such container shall be covered and flytight.
      3.   No mobile home upon a private lot shall have any structure or lean
to nor attached room, not a part of the mobile home proper. (Ord. 812, 6-22-
2016)
3-11-4: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish any mobile home park
unless such person shall first have obtained a license therefor pursuant to the
Illinois mobile home park act, 210 Illinois Compiled Statutes 115/1 et seq.
   (B)   Only one mobile home park shall be allowed in the village, and the
license having been granted, no additional licenses shall be granted nor
authority given to operate such a park, home or subdivision, so long as there
is one such installation in the village. This section shall apply to additional
annexations as well as those already in the village. In the event that another
or a new mobile home park is specially allowed in the village of Creve Coeur,
through later ordinance no mobile home park hereafter created shall be
permitted in any residential area, where the majority of the property within a
radius of one thousand feet (1,000') is used or designed for residence
purposes.
   (C)   Any mobile home park in the village of Creve Coeur must have an
annually renewed village license to operate. The license shall be granted by
the village clerk, annually, upon proof of active state licensure under the
mobile home park act and payment of the maximum fee allowed by statute to be
charged by a municipality for such license as found at 210 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 115/18. The current annual fee for a village mobile home park license
is published on the fee schedule in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 812,
6-22-2016)
3-11-5: CAMPGROUNDS:
All campgrounds within the village shall be licensed by the state under the
campground licensing and recreational area act and shall follow all
requirements of the law and the regulations of the Illinois department of
public health. Campgrounds may allow tent camping and camping in recreational
vehicles and trailers. There is no requirement that campgrounds be licensed by
the village.
The manager of the campground shall keep a registry, available to police
inspection at all times, of each camper, the time and date of arrival and
departure, the full name of the owner or occupants, the license number of the
trailer or recreational vehicle if applicable, and the address of the owner or
occupants. (Ord. 812, 6-22-2016)
3-11-6: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS AS MOBILE HOMES:
Within the village of Creve Coeur, recreational vehicles and/or trailers cannot
be used as residences or places of business in the style of a mobile home.
(Ord. 812, 6-22-2016)
CHAPTER 12
DANCE HALLS
SECTION:
3-12-1: License Required
3-12-2: License Prohibited
3-12-3: Alcoholic Liquors Prohibited
3-12-4: Police To Supervise
3-12-5: Building Regulations
3-12-6: License Fee
3-12-7: Exceptions
3-12-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or establish a public dance hall,
club or association where dancing is permitted, authorized, encouraged or
presumed as a consequence of the business there being conducted, first
obtaining a license thereof, at the address licensed for such purpose. (Ord.
309, 1-18-1967)
3-12-2: LICENSE PROHIBITED:
No license shall be issued for a dance hall within one hundred feet (100') of a
tavern. (Ord. 309, 1-18-1967)
3-12-3: ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the manager, operator or person in charge of any dance
hall to suffer or permit the sale, gift, serving or use of "setups" for
intoxicating liquor, wines, malt products or spirits of liquor, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to possess, drink or furnish any intoxicating liquor,
wines, malt products or spirits of liquor in any dance hall. (Ord. 309, 1-18-
1967)
3-12-4: POLICE TO SUPERVISE:
Every dance hall, during the hours of music or dancing, shall have an approved
police officer, authorized by the chief of this village to act as such, in
attendance and such additional number as may be deemed by the chief as required
to preserve order and assure compliance with the provisions of this code. (Ord.
309, 1-18-1967)
3-12-5: BUILDING REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Every public dance hall shall be well lighted and shall be so arranged
as to permit clear vision of the dance floor from the exterior of the building.
   (B)   No premises shall be licensed as a dance hall unless there is at least
one parking place for average sized automobiles for every five (5) persons that
may be accommodated at any dance; such parking places shall be on the premises
where the dance hall is located and shall be of the "off street" type, arranged
so that no vehicles will block other vehicles in the parking lot.
   (C)   Each dance hall shall be equipped with two (2) restrooms, one for
ladies and one for gentlemen, with lavatories, soap and paper towels at all
times. The lavatories shall be so located as to require patrons leaving the
restroom to pass the lavatories. (Ord. 309, 1-18-1967)
3-12-6: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee shall be required annually. If a license is requested midyear,
the fee may be prorated by quarter for the first year of operation. The amount
of such fee for the license for operation is established annually by the
village board and published in the office of the village clerk. All licenses
shall issue only after approval by the village board, and shall be signed by
the president and clerk. Each application for a license shall set forth the
name and address of the applicant and all persons interested in the business or
the dance hall enterprise, together with such pertinent facts as may be
required. No license shall be used at a location other than that for which it
is issued without the approval of the village board. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-12-7: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to taverns, dramshops for which licenses have been
issued by the village, nor to functions of recognized religious organizations
nor to functions sponsored by public institutions, nationally recognized
veterans' organizations owning their own premises, nor to schools or
municipalities or their departments. (Ord. 309, 1-18-1967)
CHAPTER 13
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-13-1: Tax Imposed
3-13-2: File Report; Payment
3-13-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in this Village at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this Chapter is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-1. (Ord. 349, 8-20-69)
3-13-2: FILE REPORT; PAYMENT:
Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file on or
before the last day of each calendar month the report to the State Department
of Revenue required by section three of "An Act in Relation to a Tax upon
Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling Tangible Personal Property to
Purchasers for Use or Consumption", approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month. (Ord. 349, 8-
20-69)
CHAPTER 14
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-14-1: Tax Imposed
3-14-2: File Report; Payment
3-14-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this Village in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by said serviceman either
in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5. (Ord. 348, 8-20-69)
3-14-2: FILE REPORT; PAYMENT:
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal Service
Occupation Tax for the benefit of this Village shall file, on or before the
last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of Revenue
required by section nine of the "Service Occupation Tax Act", approved July 10,
1961, as amended.
At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed. (Ord. 348, 8-20-69)
CHAPTER 15
FORTUNE TELLING
SECTION:
3-15-1: Compliance
3-15-2: License To Be Obtained
3-15-3: License Fee
3-15-4: Penalty
3-15-1: COMPLIANCE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation or advertise or
solicit patronage under the representation that such person is engaged or
gifted in the matters of clairvoyance, fortune telling, palmistry, mystics or
occultism, as an occupation of possessing such powers or to receive or accept
any money, gift, charge or other thing of value, unless such person complies
with this chapter. (Ord. 376, 5-19-1971)
3-15-2: LICENSE TO BE OBTAINED:
Any person seeking to follow any of the pursuits or occupations above mentioned
in the preceding section shall first apply to the village clerk for a license,
listing previous addresses, time and place of residences, arrest records and
the like, giving a personal history statement to be supplied by the village
clerk. Thereafter, such information shall be furnished to the chief of police
for a police check and he shall within six (6) days thereafter, report back his
findings with recommendations for or against the issuance of any such license.
Appeals from his determination shall be to the village board at their next
regular public meeting and action of the village board shall be final. (Ord.
376, 5-19-1971)
3-15-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for the above license is established annually by the village
board and is published in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-15-4: PENALTY:
Any person who violates this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), and each day the offense occurs shall be a separate fine. (Ord. 575,
11-14-2001)
CHAPTER 16
MUNICIPAL USE TAX
SECTION:
3-16-1: Tax Imposed
3-16-2: Collection of Tax
3-16-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-6 upon the privilege of using in the Municipality any
item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside Illinois at
retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an agency of
Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%) of the
selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the meaning
as defined in the Use Tax Act, approved July 14, 1955. (Ord. 414A, 10-2-75)
3-16-2: COLLECTION OF TAX:
Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued. (Ord. 414A,
10-2-75)
CHAPTER 17
WRECKERS AND TOWING SERVICES
SECTION:
3-17-1: Definitions
3-17-2: Policy
3-17-3: Application for Contract
3-17-4: Licensing
3-17-5: Insurance
3-17-6: Duties and Requirements of Wrecker Owners Licensed by the Village of
Creve Coeur
3-17-7: Cost and Inspections
3-17-8: Wreckers Called by the Police
3-17-9: Termination of License
3-17-10: Fees
3-17-11: Other Regulations
3-17-12: Solicitation of Business
3-17-13: Penalty for Violation
3-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Ordinance:
   WRECKER: A person engaged in the business of, or offering the services of, a
vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed
or otherwise removed from one place to another by the use of a motor vehicle
adapted to and designed for that purpose.
   CHIEF OF POLICE: The executive head of the Police Department of the Village
of Creve Coeur, Illinois, or any one designated by him.
   TOWING LIST: A list maintained by the Police Department containing the names
of those "wreckers" licensed by the Village of Creve Coeur to respond to
requests for the towing of vehicles made by the Police Department.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois.
3-17-2: POLICY:
In order to protect persons who operate motor vehicles inside the Village, it
is desirable and necessary to adopt this Chapter to insure proper licensing,
storage, availability and other controls over persons and firms licensed to
provide wrecker service.
3-17-3: APPLICATION FOR CONTRACT:
Any person desiring to perform towing work at police request shall submit an
"Application for Wrecker Service License" in duplicate to the Chief of Police.
Application forms shall be obtained from the office of the Chief of Police.
These forms shall include the name of the owner, home and business address,
home phone and name under which the person does or will trade, the location,
size and security features of the storage lot on which towed vehicles will be
stored, the location to which the public must come to claim stored vehicles, a
statement of willingness to provide wrecker service on a continuous twenty four
(24) hour a day basis each day of the year, a list of the towing equipment, its
size and capacity, a complete listing of the insurance policies, carriers and
agents the owner should place into effect upon license approval, a statement
that the wrecker owner will accept responsibility for any and all personal
property left in towed and stored vehicles along with a description of the
place he would use to adequately protect the property left in towed or stored
vehicles, a description of the two (2) way mobile communications and base
station to be used on each wrecker and at the office where calls are received.
No applicant shall be eligible for licensing under this Chapter unless the
business address and storage lot of applicant shall be located within the
corporate limits of the Village.
3-17-4: LICENSING:
Within thirty (30) days after receiving an "Application for Wrecker Service
License", the Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to determine the
truth and accuracy of the information contained in said "Application for
Wrecker Service License". Upon completion of his investigation, the Chief of
Police shall forward a copy of the "Application for Wrecker Service License" to
the Mayor along with a recommendation for approval or disapproval of a license
and the reasons, if any, for disapproval. Upon receiving the "Application for
Wrecker Service License", the President on behalf of the Village shall
determine whether or not the applicant has complied with the necessary
standards and criteria. If he finds the applicant qualified, then a license
shall be issued to the applicant and the applicant's name placed at the end of
the towing list.
3-17-5: INSURANCE:
No wrecker license shall be issued until the applicant has deposited with the
Chief of Police the following insurance policies:
   (A)   Garage Keeper's Policy: A garage keeper's legal liability policy
covering fire, theft, windstorm, vandalism and explosion in the amount of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with each vehicle suffering damage being deemed a
separate claim.
   (B)   Garage Liability Policy: A garage liability policy covering the
operation of the owner's business, equipment or other vehicles for any bodily
injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the minimum amount of twenty
five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for any one person injured or killed and a
minimum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for more than one person killed
or injured in any accident and an additional ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
for property damage.
   (C)   Each policy required under this Section must contain an endorsement by
the carrier providing ninety (90) days' notice to both the Village and the
insured in the event of any change in coverage under the policy.
3-17-6: DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF WRECKER OWNERS LICENSED BY THE VILLAGE OF
CREVE COEUR:
The owner shall provide a wrecker vehicle of sufficient size and weight to
remove and tow tractor trailer rigs. All wreckers shall be equipped with
warning lights required under State law and have working two (2) way
communications radio equipment on the same frequency as a base station located
at the point where calls are received. The owner shall provide continuous
twenty four (24) hour per day service each day of the year, and there shall be
an attendant on duty at all times for the purpose of receiving calls and
receiving and releasing stored vehicles. The owner shall assume all liability
and shall indemnify and save the Village harmless from such liability for
damages sustained by vehicles while being towed or stored and for all personal
injuries occurring to any of the firm's employees or other persons and shall
maintain the required insurance policies. The wrecker owner shall not release
any vehicle directly impounded by the Village without authorization by the
Police Department.
3-17-7: COST AND INSPECTIONS:
All costs incident to towing and storage shall be paid by the owner or person
in charge or possession of the towed and stored vehicle to the owner of the
wrecker company and a receipt for payment shall be issued to the said person.
The Village shall assume no liability or responsibility for any vehicle removed
from any place without the authority of the Chief of Police. The wrecker owner
shall maintain approved records and claim check system to assure release of
vehicles to the rightful owner or authorized person. Such records shall be open
to the Police Department for investigation of specific complaints and for
compiling surveys under this Chapter. The owner of any wrecker service shall
permit any person appointed by the Chief of Police to inspect his wreckers,
vault, security room or storage area at such times as the Chief of Police shall
deem appropriate.
3-17-8: WRECKERS CALLED BY THE POLICE:
The Chief of Police shall insure that wreckers are called to the scene of an
accident or to impound vehicles on a rotation basis, distributing the calls on
an equitable basis from the towing list. The Chief of Police shall not call or
cause to be called any wrecker not licensed with the Village unless all such
wreckers are unavailable. It is specifically permitted for the Chief of Police
to call a wrecker out of sequence where proximity to the wreck and estimated
response time make it more practical to do so.
3-17-9: TERMINATION OF LICENSE:
The President may terminate any license when he finds:
   (A)   That the license was secured by fraud or by the concealment of a
material fact by the wrecker owner and such fact, if known, would have caused
the refusal to issue a license.
   (B)   That the wrecker owner has violated any of the requirements or
regulations established by the Chief of Police under this Chapter.
   (C)   That the Village is not satisfied with the general services of the
owner and/or employees or with the cooperation it has received while rendering
service or other justifiable cause.
3-17-10: FEES:
The chief of police after consultation with wrecker service operators shall
recommend to the village board a table of maximum fees that may be charged by
wrecker owners licensed under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 436, 2-2-
1977)
3-17-11: OTHER REGULATIONS:
The chief of police shall establish and cause the enforcement of reasonable
rules and regulations for wreckers as from time to time he deems appropriate
for the safety, well being, and protection of citizens within his jurisdiction
and their property. (Ord. 436, 2-2-1977)
3-17-12: SOLICITATION OF BUSINESS:
No wrecker shall respond to the scene of an accident or emergency for the
purpose of towing vehicles unless specifically called there by the police or
person involved in the accident or emergency. This section is intended to
prohibit wrecker owners from soliciting business at the scenes of accidents and
emergencies and shall not be construed to prohibit any wrecker from contracting
with any person, firm or corporation providing the wrecker owner, his agents
and employees do not solicit towing contracts at the scenes of accidents or
emergencies. (Ord. 436, 2-2-1977)
3-17-13: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, upon conviction,
shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
CHAPTER 18
REGULATION OF ADULT BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-18-1: Definitions
3-18-2: Adult Uses Enumerated
3-18-3: Limitations On Adult Uses
3-18-4: Measurement Of Distances
3-18-5: License Required; Filing Of Application; Filing Fee
3-18-6: Contents Of Application For License
3-18-7: Issuance Of Adult Use License
3-18-8: Suspension, Revocation Of License For Adult Use, And Fines
3-18-9: Automatic Suspension
3-18-10: Exterior Display
3-18-11: Display Of License And Permit
3-18-12: Employment Of Persons Under Eighteen Years Of Age Prohibited
3-18-13: Existing Adult Uses
3-18-14: Adult Use Employee Permit
3-18-15: Revocation Or Suspension Of Adult Use Employee Permit
3-18-16: Employment Of Employees Without Permits
3-18-17: Illegal Activities On Premises
3-18-18: Severability Clause
3-18-19: Violation And Penalty
3-18-20: Repeal Of Conflicting Ordinances
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively prescribed to them by this section:
   ADULT BOOKSTORES: An establishment having as a substantial portion of its
stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or viewing on the premises by
use of motion picture devices or any other coin operated means, and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities", or
"specified anatomical areas" or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET: A public or private establishment which is
licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, which features topless
dancers and/or waitresses, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar
entertainers who display "specified anatomical areas", or engage in, depict, or
display specified sexual activities.
   ADULT MERCHANDISE: Magazines, books, other periodicals, videotapes, films,
motion pictures, photographs, slides, CD-ROMs, DVD-ROMs, virtual reality
devices, or other similar media that are characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; instruments, devices, toys or paraphernalia either
designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or
designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs;
lubricants, oils, gels, creams or lotions designed for or marketed or presented
in a context to suggest their use upon specified anatomical areas or for
specified sexual activities; or lingerie or leather goods marketed or presented
in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices or specified
sexual activities.
   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity for
less than fifty (50) persons used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation
by patrons thereon.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons used for presenting motion pictures having as a dominant
theme material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT STORE: An establishment having adult merchandise as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade.
   BODY SHOP OR MODEL STUDIO: Any public or private establishment which
describes itself as a body shop or model studio, or where for any form of
consideration or gratuity figure models who display "specified anatomical
areas" are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or
gratuity, or where for any form of consideration or gratuity, nude and seminude
dancing, readings, counseling sessions, body painting, and other activities
that present materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" are provided for observation by or communication
to persons paying such consideration or gratuity.
   BUILDING STRUCTURE: Any structure or group of structures housing two (2) or
more businesses which share a common entry, exit, wall, or frontage wall,
including, but not limited to, shopping centers, shopping malls, shopping
plazas, or shopping squares.
   MASSAGE: Any method of pressure on or friction against or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating of the external
soft parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the human body or with
the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without
such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used
in this practice.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association, or corporation engages in, or carries on,
or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities mentioned in
the definition "massage" in this section except for hospitals, nursing homes,
sanitariums, or persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the
healing arts under the laws of the state, or persons working under the
direction of any such persons or in any such establishments, and further
excepting barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular
profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of
registration issued by the state, and further excepting health and recreational
facilities and clubs which contain ten thousand (10,000) square feet of
enclosed and finished space equipped for exercise rooms, gymnasiums, tennis
courts, racquetball courts, swimming pools or similar uses directly related to
and used in exercising the human body and which establishment does not derive
more than five percent (5%) of its yearly income from the massage services.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Are any of the following conditions:
   (A)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
      1.   Human genitals, pubic region, or pubic hair; and
      2.   Buttock; and
      3.   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
   (B)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Are any of the following conditions:
   (A)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   Acts or representations of acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse or sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, or flagellation.
   (C)   Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock,
or female breast.
   (D)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any activities
set forth in subsections (A) through (C) of this definition. (Ord. 478, 8-19-
1981; amd. Ord. 537, 2-22-1989; Ord. 945, 7-30-2021)
3-18-2: ADULT USES ENUMERATED:
The following shall be considered adult uses for the purpose of this chapter:
   (A)   Adult bookstore;
   (B)   Adult motion picture theater;
   (C)   Adult mini-motion picture theater;
   (D)   Adult entertainment cabaret;
   (E)   Massage establishment;
   (F)   Body shop or model studio;
   (G)   Adult Store. (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981; Ord. 945, 7-30-2021)
3-18-3: LIMITATIONS ON ADULT USES:
   (A)   Adult uses are conditionally permitted in any I-2 district northwest
of Wesley Road and U.S. Route 29, provided no adult use shall be located within
one thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundaries of any school, daycare
center, cemetery, public park, forest preserve, public housing, and place of
religious worship. Additionally, no adult use shall be located within two
hundred fifty feet (250') of any property which is zoned or used for
residences.
   (B)   Persons under the age of twenty one (21) years are prohibited from
being on the premises of an establishment operating as an adult use under this
chapter unless said persons are employees or independent contractors of the
establishment. (Ord. 753, 7-24-2013)
3-18-4: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES:
For the purposes of this chapter, measurements shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the property
line of the adult use to the nearest property line of any school, daycare
center, cemetery, public park, forest preserve, public housing and/or place of
religious worship as well as any residences. (Ord. 758, 12-11-2013)
3-18-5: LICENSE REQUIRED; FILING OF APPLICATION; FILING FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, or to
permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises in
the village the operation of an adult use as herein defined, without first
having obtained a separate license for such adult use from the president of the
village.
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct an adult use
shall file an application in duplicate under oath with the president upon a
form provided by the village clerk and pay a nonrefundable filing fee, the
amount of which is established annually by the village board and published in
the office of the village clerk. The filing fee must be paid to the village
clerk, who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application
filed with the president.
The village president shall within five (5) days refer the copies of such
application to the building and electrical inspectors, the fire department, and
police department. These persons and departments shall within thirty (30) days
inspect the premises proposed to be operated as an adult business establishment
or in case of the police department, conduct background investigation of the
applicant and all such persons and departments shall make written
recommendations to the village president concerning the premises and the
applicant's compliance with the matters coming within the jurisdiction of such
persons and departments.
Within ten (10) days after receiving the recommendation of the aforesaid
persons and departments, the president shall notify the applicant that his
application is granted, denied, or held for further investigation. Such
additional investigation shall not exceed an additional thirty (30) days unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon the conclusion of such additional
investigation, the president shall advise the applicant in writing whether the
application is granted or denied.
Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation, the
president shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action.
Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the
investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at
any reasonable time or place for examination under oath regarding said
application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any inspection
or investigation required by this chapter shall constitute an admission by the
applicant that he or she is ineligible for such permit and shall be grounds for
denial thereof by the president.
Once a license is granted, the license fee for the business shall be annually
paid to the village clerk. The amount of the annual license fee is the same as
the initial filing fee and shall be established annually by the village board
and published in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-18-6: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
An applicant for a license including any partner or limited partner of the
partnership applicant and any officer or director of the corporate applicant
and any stockholder holding more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of a
corporate applicant, or any other person who is interested directly in the
ownership or operation of the business shall furnish the following information
under oath:
   (A)   Name and address, including all aliases. (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
   (B)   Written proof that the individual is at least twenty one (21) years of
age. (Ord. 478-B, 11-10-1993)
   (C)   All residential addresses for the past three (3) years.
   (D)   The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
   (E)   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three (3)
years immediately preceding the date of the application.
   (F)   The adult use or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or any other city or state
under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor,
and the business activity or occupation subject to such action of suspension or
revocation.
   (G)   All criminal or city ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of
bond and pleadings of nolos contendere on all charges, except minor traffic
violations.
   (H)   Fingerprints and photograph of the applicant.
   (I)   The exact nature of the adult use to be conducted and the proposed
place of business and facilities thereto.
   (J)   The names and addresses of all persons holding any beneficial interest
in the real estate upon which such adult use is to be operated, including, but
not limited to, contract purchasers or sellers, beneficiaries of land trust or
lessees subletting to applicant.
   (K)   If the premises are leased or being purchased under contract, a copy
of such lease or contract shall accompany the application.
   (L)   A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with the
provisions of this chapter and is in compliance with them. (Ord. 478, 8-19-
1981)
3-18-7: ISSUANCE OF ADULT USE LICENSE:
Upon receipt of the recommendations of the persons and departments referred to
in section
3-18-5 of this chapter, the president shall issue a license to maintain,
operate or conduct an adult use unless he finds: (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
   (A)   That the applicant is under the age of twenty one (21) years of age or
under any legal disability. (Ord. 478-B, 11-10-1993)
   (B)   The applicant is a person who is not of good moral character and
reputation in the community in which he or she resides.
   (C)   The applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses,
unless upon investigation the village president finds that such convictions
occurred at least four (4) years prior to the date of the application, that the
applicant has had no subsequent convictions and has shown evidence of
rehabilitation sufficient to warrant public trust:
      1.   A felony under federal laws or the laws of this or any other state.
      2.   Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a
place of prostitution, patronizing a prostitute, pimping, obscenity, selling
harmful material or having a tie in a sale of obscene publications to
distributors, under the laws of this state or equivalent laws or ordinances of
the United States or any other state or city, or any other crime or misdemeanor
opposed to decency and morality.
   (D)   The applicant has held an interest in a license either under this
chapter or chapter 1 of this title which regulates alcoholic liquor and has
been revoked for cause.
   (E)   The applicant, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued under this chapter would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   (F)   The operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
have complied with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to,
building, health, planning, housing, zoning and fire codes of the village.
Every adult use license issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate at the
expiration of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
3-18-8: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE FOR ADULT USE, AND FINES:
Any license issued for an adult use may be revoked or suspended by the Village
President if the Village President shall find:
   (A)   That the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter
regulating adult uses.
   (B)   The licensee has committed any of the offenses listed in subsection
3-18-7(C) of this chapter.
   (C)   The licensee has knowingly furnished false or misleading information
or withheld relevant information on any application for any license or permit
required by this chapter or knowingly caused or suffered another to furnish or
withhold such information on his or her behalf.
   (D)   The licensee has violated chapter 1 of this title regulating alcoholic
liquor.
   (E)   That a person under the age of twenty one (21) years, who is not an
employee or independent contractor of the establishment, is on the premises of
an establishment operating as an adult use under this chapter, and views any
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as described in
section
3-18-1 of this chapter.
The licensee shall be responsible for the acts of his agents, servants and
employees, provided, however, that in the case of first offense by a licensee
where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed
a suspension of thirty (30) days if the Village President shall find that the
licensee has no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could
not, by the exercise of due diligence, have had such actual or constructive
knowledge.
The Village President before revoking or suspending any license shall give the
licensee at least ten (10) days' written notice of the charges against him or
her and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Village President at
which time the licensee may present evidence bearing upon the question. In such
cases, the charges shall be specific and in writing.
In addition to the suspension or revocation of licensure for adult use for the
violations listed in this chapter, the Village President (or designee) shall
also issue an ordinance violation for each and every offense in an amount not
to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each and every offense.
(Ord. 753A, 10-24-2018)
3-18-9: AUTOMATIC SUSPENSION:
   (A)   In the event a licensee is convicted of violating any of the
provisions of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-20 as now in force or as may
be amended, from time to time, or any of the provisions of section
 6-2-50 of this Code as now in force or as may be amended, from time to time,
then the license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be suspended for a
period of three (3) months.
   (B)   The President, before suspending any license, shall give at least ten
(10) days' written notice of the charge. The licensee may, within five (5) days
of receipt of said notice, request a public hearing before the President, at
which time the licensee may present evidence bearing upon the question. The
notice required hereunder may be delivered personally to the licensee or be
posted on the premises of the establishment being used as an adult use. (Ord.
753A, 10-24-2018)
3-18-10: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No adult use shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of
any material depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" by display, decoration, sign, show
window, or other opening from any public way or from any property not licensed
as an adult use. (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
3-18-11: DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND PERMIT:
Every licensee shall display a valid license in a conspicuous place within the
adult use business so that same may be readily seen by persons entering the
premises. (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
3-18-12: EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any adult use licensee or his manager or employee to
employ any person actually engaged in the provision of goods or services to the
public in connection with the adult use who is not at least eighteen (18) years
of age. (Ord. 753, 7-24-2013)
3-18-13: EXISTING ADULT USES:
All existing adult uses at the time of the passage of this chapter must submit
an application for an adult use license within thirty (30) days of the passage
and approval of this chapter. (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
3-18-14: ADULT USE EMPLOYEE PERMIT:
Any person, including a licensee, who actually engages in the providing of
goods or services to the public in connection with the adult use shall file an
application for an adult use employee permit with the Village Clerk upon a form
provided by the Village Clerk and shall pay the following fees to the Village
Clerk who shall issue a receipt which shall be attached to the application
filed with the Village Clerk. There are fees required to be paid both for the
original application, as well as an annual renewal fee. Those fees are
established annually by the Village Board and are published in the Office of
the Village Clerk. If an annual renewal is not received timely, the Village
will charge an additional fee for failing to return to the Village to renew
timely. That additional charge is also established annually by the Village
Board and is published in the Office of the Village Clerk. In the event that an
adult use employee's last valid license is over one calendar year old, that
person will be considered a new applicant and will be charged an original
application fee as opposed to a failure to return timely fee.
The application for an adult use employee permit shall contain substantially
the same information as the application for adult use license, except for the
names and addresses of the owners of the real estate and any leases or
contracts concerning real estate.
The Village President may issue an adult use employee permit within twenty one
(21) days following the application, unless he finds that the applicant would
not have been eligible for an adult use license under the terms of section
3-18-7 of this chapter.
Every adult use employee permit issued pursuant to this chapter will terminate
at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance, unless sooner
revoked. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-18-15: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF ADULT USE EMPLOYEE PERMIT:
Any adult use employee permit may be revoked or suspended by the Village
President if the Village President shall find:
   (A)   That the permittee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter
regulating adult uses.
   (B)   The permittee has knowingly furnished false or misleading information
or withheld relevant information on any application for any license or permit
required by this chapter or knowingly caused or suffered another to furnish or
withhold such information on his or her behalf.
Any adult use employee permit shall be revoked by the Village President if the
Village President shall find that the permittee has committed any of the
offenses listed in subsection
3-18-7(C) of this chapter.
The Village President in revoking or suspending an adult use employee permit
shall give the permit holder written notice specifying the grounds therefor.
Such person may within ten (10) days of such revocation or suspension file a
written request with the Village President for a public hearing before the
Village President at which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon
the question.
The Village President may in his discretion conduct such hearing concurrently
with a hearing pursuant to section
3-18-8 of this chapter for the adult use license, unless it shall appear that
such a joint hearing would prejudice the rights of the licensee or the
permittee involved.
All persons required under this chapter to obtain an adult use employee permit
pursuant to this chapter must display on request during the hours of operation
of said business an identification card provided by the Village Police
Department containing the legal name, and date of birth of the employee. (Ord.
478, 8-19-1981)
3-18-16: EMPLOYMENT OF EMPLOYEES WITHOUT PERMITS:
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee for the adult use or the
employer of any persons purporting to engage in the providing of goods or
services to the public in connection with the adult use to ensure that each
such person shall first have obtained a valid adult use employee permit
pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
3-18-17: ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES ON PREMISES:
No licensee or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee shall engage in any activity or conduct or permit any
other person to engage in any activity or conduct in or about the licensed
premises which is prohibited by any ordinance of the Village or law of the
State or of the United States. (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
3-18-18: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase
of this chapter, or any part thereof, or application thereof to any person,
firm, corporation, public agency, or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent of the Board of Trustees that this
chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision,
clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or part thereof not then been included.
(Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
3-18-19: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. A person who is convicted shall be punished by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months
or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 575-A, 1-23-2002)
3-18-20: REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
Any other ordinances or resolutions of the Village which may contain provisions
contrary to those in this chapter are hereby expressly revoked and shall be
considered to be superseded by this chapter. (Ord. 478, 8-19-1981)
CHAPTER 19
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-19-1: Authority
3-19-2: Definitions
3-19-3: Raffles Prohibited Without License
3-19-4: Application For Raffle License
3-19-5: Decision On Application
3-19-6: Eligibility For License
3-19-7: Duration Of License
3-19-8: License Fees
3-19-9: Conduct Of Raffles
3-19-10: Raffles Manager
3-19-11: Records
3-19-12: Sentence
3-19-13: Limitation Of Authority
3-19-1: AUTHORITY:
The licensing provisions in this chapter were passed by the president and board
of trustees of the village of Creve Coeur pursuant to the raffles act, 230
Illinois Compiled Statutes 15. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
   BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses
who have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and
civic interests of a community.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and
operated to benefit an indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to
those eligible for benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
   EDUCATIONAL ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and
operated to provide systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by
methods common to schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably
in their scope and intensity with the course of study presented in tax
supported schools.
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION: An organization of persons having a common interest,
the primary interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and
to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the
burdens of government by caring for those who otherwise would be cared for by
the government. A college fraternity shall satisfy this definition if these
missions are set forth in its organizational documents.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION: An organization composed of workers organized with the
objective of the betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit
and the development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective
occupations.
   NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less
reasonable sums expended for prizes, local license fees, and other reasonable
operating expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
   NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION: An organization or institution organized and
conducted on a not for profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone
as a result of the operation.
   RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in section 28-2(b) of the "criminal
code of 1961", conducted by an organization licensed under this chapter, in
which:
   (A)   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance;
   (B)   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
The term "raffle" excludes a game using a card or board containing the word
"free" marked in the center space of the central row of four (4) figures, where
said card or board contains five (5) horizontal rows of spaces, with each row
except the central row containing five (5) figures.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION: Any church, congregation, society, or organization
founded for the purpose of religious worship.
   VETERANS' ORGANIZATION: An organization or association comprised of members
of which substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows
or widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare
of its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as
to confer a public benefit.
   VOLUNTEER: A person performing work for a licensee, who is not compensated
by the licensee. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007; amd. Ord. 651, 11-14-2007)
3-19-3: RAFFLES PROHIBITED WITHOUT LICENSE:
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct raffles or chances in the village
of Creve Coeur without having first obtained a license therefor pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-4: APPLICATION FOR RAFFLE LICENSE:
   (A)   The license and application for license must specify the area or areas
within the village of Creve Coeur in which raffle chances will be sold or
issued, the time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued, the
time of determination of winning chances and the location or locations at which
winning chances will be determined.
   (B)   The license application must contain a sworn statement attesting to
the not for profit character of the prospective licensee organization, signed
by the presiding officer and the secretary of that organization.
   (C)   A license only authorizes the licensee to conduct raffles as defined
in this chapter.
   (D)   Applications must include the following information:
      1.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise reasonably
expected to be awarded by a licensee in a single raffle,
      2.   The retail value of each prize reasonably expected to be awarded by
a licensee in a single raffle,
      3.   The price which is reasonably expected to be charged for each raffle
chance issued or sold,
      4.   The day or days during which chances may be issued or sold, and
      5.   The maximum number of raffles to be conducted during the period of
one year following the issuance of the license.
   (E)   Application forms shall be available to the public at the office of
the clerk of the village of Creve Coeur and completed applications are to be
submitted at the same location. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-5: DECISION ON APPLICATION:
The village clerk shall review all license applications within ten (10) days
from the date of application and shall, within thirty (30) days from the date
of application, approve or deny a raffle license application. If an application
is approved, the village clerk shall forthwith issue a raffle license to the
applicant. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-6: ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   (A)   Licenses shall be issued only to:
      1.   Bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal,
educational or veterans' organizations that operate without profit to their
members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5)
years immediately before making application for a license and which have had
during that entire five (5) year period a bona fide membership engaged in
carrying out their objects; however, the five (5) year period may be reduced to
two (2) years as applied to a local organization which is affiliated with and
chartered by a national organization which meets the five (5) year requirement,
or
      2.   To a nonprofit fundraising organization that the licensing authority
determines is organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance
to an identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
   (B)   As required by the raffles act, the following are ineligible for any
license under this chapter:
      1.   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      4.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection
(B)1, (B)2 or (B)3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit
interest, or in which such a person is active or employed;
      5.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (B)1, (B)2
or (B)3 of this section is an officer, director, or employee, whether
compensated or not;
      6.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection (B)1, (B)2
or (B)3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a
"raffle" as defined herein. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-7: DURATION OF LICENSE:
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a specific number
of raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one year and
may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this chapter or the raffles
act. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-8: LICENSE FEES:
   (A)   Application Fee: At the time of application for a raffle license made
to the village clerk of the village, there shall be paid an application fee in
an amount established annually by the village board and published in the office
of the village clerk. Said application fee is nonrefundable even should the
application be denied by the village clerk. Bingo is considered a raffle, and
an annual license fee for bingo is required under this provision of this code.
   (B)   License Fees For Raffle Machines: Freestanding (not handheld) raffle
machines shall require a separate annual license fee for each such machine,
which shall be paid by the eligible organization licensed to conduct raffles on
the premises where the machine is located. If more than one organization is
licensed to conduct raffles on such premises, the licensed organizations may
each pay a share of such license fee for the machine, provided that no license
shall be issued for such machine unless and until the total license fee is
received by the village of Creve Coeur for such machine. The amount of the fee
is established annually by the village board and is published in the office of
the village clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-19-9: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
   (A)   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization permitted to conduct that game.
      2.   No person except a bona fide member or volunteer of the licensee may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
      3.   No person, including a volunteer or member, may receive any
remuneration or profit from the licensee for participating in the management or
operation of the raffle; however, the practice of "tipping the caller" shall
not be prohibited.
      4.   A licensee may rent premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle.
      5.   Raffle chances may be sold or issued only within the area specified
on the license and winning chances may be determined only at those locations
specified on the license.
      6.   A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may participate in the
conducting of raffles or chances only with the permission of a parent or
guardian. A person under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area
where winning chances are being determined only when accompanied by his parent
or guardian.
   (B)   If a lessor rents premises where a winning chance or chances on a
raffle are determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person
who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a
license issued under the provisions of this chapter. However, if the lessor or
its employee is a member or volunteer of a licensee, in that capacity the
lessor or its employee may be held criminally liable if the person who uses the
premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a license issued
under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-10: RAFFLES MANAGER:
All operation of and the conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a
single raffles manager or an alternate, designated by the organization. The
manager shall give a fidelity bond in an amount determined by the president of
the village of Creve Coeur in favor of the organization conditioned upon his or
her honesty in the performance of his or her duties. Terms of the bond shall
provide that notice shall be given in writing to the licensing authority not
less than thirty (30) days prior to cancellation. The president may waive this
bond requirement by including a waiver provision in the license issued to an
organization under this chapter, provided that a license containing such waiver
provision shall be granted only by unanimous vote of the members of the
licensed organization. The raffles manager may be either a member or volunteer
of the licensee. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-11: RECORDS:
   (A)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All deductions
from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be documented
with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description of the
purchased item or service or other reasons for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and the date of payment.
   (B)   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles programs shall be
separated from other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross
receipts, if bingo games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization
pursuant to license therefor issued by the department of revenue of the state
of Illinois, and placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have
separate records of the raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same
person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership and to the clerk of the
village of Creve Coeur, its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from
raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized as required in this
section.
   (D)   Records required by this section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to the
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-12: SENTENCE:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a petty offense punishable
by a maximum fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
3-19-13: LIMITATION OF AUTHORITY:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting or
operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than
raffles as provided for herein. (Ord. 544-G, 11-14-2007)
CHAPTER 20
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
SECTION:
3-20-1: Definitions
3-20-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
3-20-3: Fee Imposed
3-20-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration
3-20-5: Compliance With Other Laws
3-20-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
3-20-7: Penalties
3-20-8: Enforcement
3-20-9: Severability
3-20-10: Conflict
3-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
   GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: 1) the fee imposed by this chapter; 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act; 3)
amounts collected under section
8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code; 4) the tax imposed by the
telecommunications excise tax act; 5) 911 surcharges; or 6) the tax imposed by
section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
village;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a timesharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the village;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications
devices; or
   (I)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the village.
   PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any municipal street, alley, water or public right of
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this state.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air to ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: a) Any telecommunications retailer; and b) any
person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs, owns, operates
or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or designed to be
used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the village.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
telecommunications act of 1996 (public law 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)(7),
as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio services,
and paging services. (Ord. 562-A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   (A)   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this chapter shall
register with the village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection
3-20-4(C) of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village
pursuant to subsection (A) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection
3-20-4(C) of this chapter, as the case may be, to the village within thirty
(30) days from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information
provided by the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most
recent return on file with the village. (Ord. 562-A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-3: FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 6.0% of all
gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses
within the village for telecommunications originating or received in the
village.
   (B)   The village infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
chapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than ninety (90) days after the village provides written notice by
certified mail to each telecommunications retailer with whom the village has an
existing franchise, license, or similar agreement that the village waives all
compensation under such existing franchise, license, or other similar agreement
during such time as the fee is subject to being lawfully imposed and collected
by the retailer and remitted to the village. The infrastructure maintenance fee
shall apply to gross charges billed on or after the effective date as
established in the preceding sentence.
   (C)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (D)   The village hereby waives all fees, charges, and other compensation
that may accrue, after the effective date of the waiver, to the village by a
telecommunications retailer pursuant to any existing village franchise,
license, or similar agreement with a telecommunications retailer during the
time the village imposes the telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee.
This waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure
maintenance fee provided for in this chapter is subject to being lawfully
imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by the
telecommunications retailer from the customer.
   (E)   The village clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
village has a franchise.
   (F)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in section
3-20-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 562-A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the village the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in
which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%)
of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the village, which shall
contain such information as the village may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under subsection
(A) of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the village may request, and telecommunications
retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such credit. However, no
claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years after the date of
the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to offset a claim of
underpayment made by the village within the applicable statutory period of
limitations; and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax
act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section
8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section
8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the public utilities act.
   (G)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter
to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the village by
the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any
costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit, in an amount not to
exceed five percent (5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in
an audit. Said sum shall be paid to the village within twenty one (21) days
after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The village, or its designee, may promulgate such further or
additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant
to section
3-20-2 of this chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 562-A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as
provided; and
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over, or within the right of way. (Ord. 562-
A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the village entered into before the effective date of this
chapter regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according
to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived. (Ord. 562-A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this code. (Ord.
562-A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 562-A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 562-A, 9-10-2003)
3-20-10: CONFLICT:
This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto
which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 562-A, 9-
10-2003)
CHAPTER 21
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION
SECTION:
3-21-1: Purpose
3-21-2: Definitions
3-21-3: Initial Registration
3-21-4: Annual Registration
3-21-5: Registration Fee
3-21-6: Registration Information
3-21-7: Changes In Registration Information
3-21-8: Building Inspection
3-21-9: Keeping Of Records
3-21-10: Penalty For Failure To Comply
3-21-11: Severability
3-21-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to enable the village to develop a comprehensive
inventory of rental residential dwelling buildings located in the village, in
order for the village of Creve Coeur police and fire departments to have a
better understanding of the number, location and ownership of such buildings.
Additionally, the village wants to ensure that all rental residential dwelling
buildings within the village meet building and fire codes to ensure the safety
of the residents of the village of Creve Coeur. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
3-21-2: DEFINITIONS:
   OWNER: An individual(s), company, corporation, or governmental or private
agency listed on the recorded deed or purchaser under a recorded land contract
as the owner of a property containing residential rental dwelling building(s).
   RENTAL RESIDENTIAL DWELLING BUILDING: A building, house, mobile home, or any
other structure that is used for or as a rental residential dwelling or for
residential purposes. A rental residential dwelling building is considered an
entire building and not an individual unit such as a unit of an apartment
complex or duplex.
   RENTAL RESIDENTIAL UNIT: Each portion of a building that is separately
available for rent. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-21-3: INITIAL REGISTRATION:
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, the owners of
all "rental residential dwelling buildings" within the limits of the village of
Creve Coeur shall register such units with the village clerk, on a form to be
provided by the village. Units must be registered by the owner or the owner's
agent. Each registration is only valid for a maximum period of one year. (Ord.
634A, 12-11-2013)
3-21-4: ANNUAL REGISTRATION:
Following the initial thirty (30) day registration period rental residential
dwelling buildings shall be registered as follows:
   (A)   Every year on or before January 1, each rental residential building
registration shall be renewed for the following year.
   (B)   Newly constructed residential rental dwelling buildings shall be
registered within thirty (30) days of its renting to another for residential
purposes.
   (C)   A residential rental dwelling building sold, transferred or conveyed
shall be reregistered by the new owner within thirty (30) days of the date of
the deed, land contract, or other instrument of conveyance. At that time the
units will be removed from the previous owner's registration.
   (D)   Any nonrental residential dwelling unit converted to a residential
rental dwelling building shall be registered within thirty (30) days of the
date it is occupied for residential rental purposes. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
3-21-5: REGISTRATION FEE:
Each time a rental residential dwelling building is registered pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, the owner of such building shall pay a fee per
rental residential unit to cover the village's cost of administering this
program, or the prorated amount thereof. The amount of that per unit fee is
established annually by the village board and is published in the office of the
village clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-21-6: REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
The following information shall be provided by the owner or owner's agent at
the time of registration:
   (A)   Owner's name, address, phone number, fax number and e-mail address
(optional).
   (B)   Agent's (if applicable) name, address, phone number, fax number and e-
mail address (optional).
   (C)   Address of each building owned (fee simple or land contract) by the
registrant containing residential rental dwelling building(s) (includes multi-
unit building in which the owner lives).
   (D)   The identifying address of each residential rental dwelling buildings.
   (E)   Type of residential rental dwelling building (single-family, duplex,
multi-unit, apartment complexes, rooming houses, etc.).
   (F)   Signature of owner or agent attesting to the truthfulness of the
information provided. If signed by the owner, said owner being a company,
corporation or governmental or private agency, only a duly authorized officer
or administrator may sign the registration form. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
3-21-7: CHANGES IN REGISTRATION INFORMATION:
Changes in the registration information, other than those listed in section
3-21-6 of this chapter (follow up registration) shall be provided in writing to
the village clerk. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
3-21-8: BUILDING INSPECTION:
The village will be inspecting residential rental buildings to ensure code
compliance. The inspections will take place on the building inspector and/or
the building inspector's designee's schedule. It is the intent of the village
that each rental residential dwelling building shall be inspected at least once
every five (5) years. Additional inspections will take place in the event that
a tenant or law enforcement complaint is received. The procedure for rental
residential dwelling inspections are detailed further in section
7-8-1 et seq., of this code. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
3-21-9: KEEPING OF RECORDS:
The village clerk shall be responsible for maintaining all residential rental
dwelling building registration data and provide a quarterly report to the
village board of the number of residential rental dwelling buildings in the
village, type of residential rental dwelling building, and the number and type
of buildings added to or deleted from the previous registration roster. The
same report shall be provided to the village police and fire departments on a
quarterly basis. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
3-21-10: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY:
Failure to register a residential rental dwelling building(s) within the
applicable time period prescribed in this chapter shall subject an owner to a
fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per unregistered residential
rental dwelling building.
The submission of false information on a residential rental dwelling building
registration form shall also subject an owner, or his or her agent, to a fine
of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per unregistered residential rental
dwelling building. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
3-21-11: SEVERABILITY:
Should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter be
rendered or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent
jurisdiction or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining
provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall
remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
CHAPTER 22
HOTEL USE TAX
SECTION:
3-22-1: Definitions
3-22-2: Municipal Hotel Use Tax
3-22-3: License Requirement
3-22-4: Duty To Collect Tax
3-22-5: Monthly Report And Payment
3-22-6: Late Penalty
3-22-7: Enforcement In Court
3-22-8: Exclusion
3-22-9: Additional Rules
3-22-10: Penalties
3-22-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
words are defined:
   HOTEL: Any building or structure in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, or sleeping or housekeeping
accommodations in which ten (10) or more rooms, apartments or suites are
available for such use, and includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts,
lodging houses, rooming houses, and apartment houses.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms in a hotel for not less than thirty (30) consecutive days.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, entity or representative.
   RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits,
and property or services of any kind or nature. (Ord. 714, 6-13-2012)
3-22-2: MUNICIPAL HOTEL USE TAX:
A tax, in addition to any and all other taxes, is imposed upon the use and
privilege of renting, leasing or letting of rooms in a hotel in the village at
a rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental receipts from such rental,
leasing or letting, the ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of
which shall be borne by the user, lessee or tenant of said rooms. (Ord. 714, 6-
13-2012)
3-22-3: LICENSE REQUIREMENT:
No person shall engage in the business of renting, leasing, or letting rooms in
a hotel in the village without a license obtained from the village clerk. The
annual license fee for a hotel license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord.
714, 6-13-2012)
3-22-4: DUTY TO COLLECT TAX:
The owner and operator of each hotel and the person to whom the license to
operate the same is issued shall, jointly and severally, have the duty to
collect and account for said tax from each user, lessee or tenant of rooms in
such hotel at the time that the rent for the same is collected. (Ord. 714, 6-
13-2012)
3-22-5: MONTHLY REPORT AND PAYMENT:
A sworn monthly return shall be filed with the village for each hotel in the
village on forms prescribed by the clerk showing all receipts from each
renting, leasing or letting of rooms which return shall be filed before the
last day of the month next succeeding the month for which the return is made
and shall be accompanied by payment of all taxes due and owing for the month
covered by said return. (Ord. 714, 6-13-2012)
3-22-6: LATE PENALTY:
If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate of two
percent (2%) per thirty (30) day period, or portion thereof, from the day of
delinquency shall be added thereto and paid. (Ord. 714, 6-13-2012)
3-22-7: ENFORCEMENT IN COURT:
Payment and collection of said tax may be enforced by action in any court of
competent jurisdiction and failure to collect, account for and pay over said
tax shall be cause for revocation of any village license for such hotel or
applicable to the premises thereof in addition to any other penalty provided in
this chapter. (Ord. 714, 6-13-2012)
3-22-8: EXCLUSION:
The tax imposed by the provisions shall not apply to the renting, leasing or
letting of rooms by permanent residents. (Ord. 714, 6-13-2012)
3-22-9: ADDITIONAL RULES:
The village clerk is hereby authorized to promulgate and publish rules and
regulations and to establish procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter which the clerk may deem necessary or desirable to administer and
enforce this chapter. (Ord. 714, 6-13-2012)
3-22-10: PENALTIES:
Any person operating a hotel in the village without a license, or failing or
omitting to pay said tax when due, or failing or omitting to collect, account
for and pay over said tax shall, in addition to any other penalty provided
herein, upon conviction be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than seven hundred dollars ($700.00). Each and every failure to pay tax is a
separate incident. (Ord. 714, 6-13-2012)
CHAPTER 23
BUSINESS REGISTRATION
SECTION:
3-23-1: Registration Required
3-23-2: Definition Of Business
3-23-3: Exemptions
3-23-4: Forms Used
3-23-5: Registration Deadlines
3-23-6: Changes To Registration
3-23-7: Fees
3-23-8: Penalties
3-23-1: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every "business" as defined in this chapter, whether or not subject to any
licensing requirements of the village or of any other governmental agency shall
annually register with the village in the manner and at the times prescribed in
this chapter. (Ord. 743, 4-10-2013)
3-23-2: DEFINITION OF BUSINESS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "business" shall include any and all
persons selling or providing any type of service or product. It shall also mean
any for profit or not for profit entity, including, without limitation, any
sole proprietorship, corporation, joint venture, association, franchisee or
cooperative that leases or owns a building or space within a building in the
village of Creve Coeur for occupational purposes. Businesses that operate from
distinct spaces or buildings with separate addresses shall be deemed to be
separate businesses regardless if such businesses are owned or operated by the
same sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association,
franchisee, or cooperative. (Ord. 743, 4-10-2013)
3-23-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The registration requirements of this chapter shall not apply to educational,
governmental, religious, or political organizations, or home based businesses.
Those entities not required to register may do so at their discretion for the
safety benefits registration provides. (Ord. 743, 4-10-2013)
3-23-4: FORMS USED:
Annual business registration forms will be prepared and supplied by the village
of Creve Coeur and will be maintained by the village clerk. (Ord. 743, 4-10-
2013)
3-23-5: REGISTRATION DEADLINES:
Every business subject to the regulations in this chapter shall renew their
registration on or before June 30 of each year. Each new business must register
prior to commencing operations. (Ord. 743, 4-10-2013)
3-23-6: CHANGES TO REGISTRATION:
Every business shall submit written notice of any change to a previously
submitted annual business registration application to the village within thirty
(30) days of the occurrence of such change. (Ord. 743, 4-10-2013)
3-23-7: FEES:
Business registration fees are the same amount for new businesses and for
renewals as long as the renewal is received prior to June 15 of every year. The
fee is waived for charitable and other not for profit organizations. The amount
of the fee is established annually by the village board and is published in the
office of the village clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
3-23-8: PENALTIES:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
violator to penalties of no less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no more
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first offense. Second or
subsequent failures to register or renew business registration shall subject
the violator to penalties of no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
and no more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00). Each day after the thirty
(30) day time limit a business fails to properly register constitutes a new and
separate offense. (Ord. 743, 4-10-2013)
CHAPTER 24
VIDEO GAMING
SECTION:
3-24-1: Definitions
3-24-2: Village License Required
3-24-3: Regulations
3-24-4: Penalty For Failure To Obtain Or Annually Renew A Village License
3-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
 
LICENSED       Any establishment that is both licensed to sell liquor at retail
GAMING         in the village and is licensed by the Illinois gaming board to
ESTABLISHMENT: operate a video gaming terminal on its premises, hereinafter LGE.
               An LGE whose primary or major focus or source of revenue is the
               operation of video gaming terminals (as defined under the
               Illinois Video Gaming Act) and that only offers alcoholic
               beverages, food, or other merchandise as incidental or a
               secondary amenity to the operation of video gaming; provided that
               the following factors may be considered when determining whether
               an establishment is a video gaming café: (1) the overall size,
VIDEO GAMING   layout, and design of the premises; (2) the number of video
CAFÉ:         gaming terminals relative to the entire customer seating capacity
               of the establishment; (3) the size of the video gaming terminal
               area in comparison to the remaining portion of the establishment;
               (4) the operation of a commercial kitchen on the premises; (5)
               the preparation and variety of food and beverages offered by the
               establishment; (6) the percentage of proposed or actual revenue
               derived from video gaming as compared to food and beverage sales
               and other retail sales at the establishment; and (7) the number
               of employees at the establishment and their proposed function.
VIDEO GAMING   Has the same meaning as under the Illinois video gaming act as
TERMINAL:      codified at 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40 et seq. (Ord. 808,
               3-23-2016; Ord. 930, 4-14-2021)
 
3-24-2: VILLAGE LICENSE REQUIRED:
The village of Creve Coeur requires that any LGE operating a video gaming
terminal in the village must obtain an annual village video gaming
establishment license to operate in the village of Creve Coeur. To obtain such
a license:
   (A)   Each LGE must annually submit a written application to the village
clerk which details the number of video gaming machines the LGE operates, or
will operate, where those machines will be located on the premises, and a copy
of the state gaming license obtained by the LGE through the state of Illinois.
   (B)   Each LGE must pay an annual fee, per machine, in the amount of the
maximum fee per machine allowed in the Illinois video gaming act as amended
from time to time.
   (C)   The fee amount will be published on the fee list in the office of the
village clerk.
   (D)   Upon payment of the fee per video gaming terminal, the village clerk
will issue an annual village license that shall state the number of terminals
allowed at the LGE and the date the village license expires, provided however,
that a maximum of three (3) village licenses shall be granted for video gaming
cafes. (Ord. 808, 3-23-2016; Ord. 930, 4-14-2021)
3-24-3: REGULATIONS:
All LGEs must fully comply with this code as well as all state and federal
laws. All LGEs must display their state and village licenses during all
business hours and are subject to inspection by the village at any time. All
LGEs that have their liquor license revoked or suspended or their Illinois
video gaming license revoked or suspended shall automatically, without a
hearing, also have its village license revoked or suspended for the same time
frame. (Ord. 808, 3-23-2016)
3-24-4: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO OBTAIN OR ANNUALLY RENEW A VILLAGE LICENSE:
Any LGE offering video gaming without a valid village license shall be punished
by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), per machine,
for a first offense and a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) per machine for a second and subsequent offense. This penalty may be
enforced by issuance of a "notice of violation" by the Creve Coeur police
department. Each and every day any violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 808, 3-23-2016)
CHAPTER 25
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-25-1: Definitions:
3-25-2: Tax Imposed; Rate:
3-25-3: Collection Of Tax By Recreational Cannabis Retailers:
3-25-1: DEFINITIONS:
The words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-
1 et seq.), as may be amended from time to time, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. (Ord. 890, 9-11-2019)
3-25-2: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
   A.   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling adult-use, recreational cannabis at retail in the Village at the rate
of 3.0% of the gross receipts from these sales made in the course of that
business. Such tax shall not apply to sales of cannabis that are made pursuant
to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et
seq.) as may be amended from time to time.
   B.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Illinois Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax Law, as set forth in
Section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22), as amended
from time to time. (Ord. 890, 9-11-2019)
3-25-3: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RECREATIONAL CANNABIS RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue. Any tax required to be collected pursuant
to or as authorized by this Chapter and any such tax collected by such retailer
and required to be remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State of Illinois. Retailers may
reimburse themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately
stating that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in
combination, in a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required
to collect.
   B.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois
Department of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power
to administer and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 890, 9-11-2019)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUILDING CODE 1
SECTION:
4-1-1: Title; Purpose; Adoption Of Codes
4-1-1-1: Insertions, Additions, And Changes To The IBC, IRC, IMC, IPMC, And IMC
4-1-2: New Buildings And Additions
4-1-2-1: Sheds, Carports, Garages, And Other Detached Structures
4-1-3: Existing Buildings
4-1-4: Alterations
4-1-5: Moving And Demolition Of Buildings
4-1-6: Public Buildings
4-1-7: Foundation And Footing
4-1-8: Construction
4-1-9: Chimneys
4-1-10: Electrical Construction
4-1-11: Plumbing (Rep. by Ord. 545, 10-26-1994)
4-1-12: Office Of Building Inspector
4-1-13: Office Of Electrical Inspector
4-1-14: Inspection Before Lathing
4-1-15: Store Buildings And Business Houses
4-1-16: Garage Houses
4-1-17: Street Line
4-1-18: Side Yards
4-1-19: Building Lines
4-1-20: Front Building Line
4-1-21: Lots Opening Onto A Street
4-1-22: Building Permit Fees
4-1-22-1: Engineering And Consulting Fees
4-1-23: Electrical Permit Fees
4-1-23-1: Plumbing Permit Fees
4-1-24: Stop Orders
4-1-25: Workmanship
4-1-26: Duty To Procure Permit
4-1-27: Termination Of Permits
4-1-28: Construction Without Permit
4-1-29: Carports And Breezeways
4-1-30: Stands
4-1-31: Septic Tank And Seepage Bed Systems
4-1-32: Sewer Location
4-1-33: Sewer Construction
4-1-34: Sewer Joints
4-1-35: Septic Tanks
4-1-36: Distribution Box
4-1-37: Layout Of Seepage Fields
4-1-38: Office Of Building Inspector (Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-1-39: BOCA National Building Code Adopted (Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-1-40: Penalties
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-30-1 et seq.
4-1-1: TITLE; PURPOSE; ADOPTION OF CODES:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CREVE COEUR BUILDING CODE, and
presumptively shall provide for all matters affecting or relating to the
construction, equipment, alteration, repairing, moving or demolition of
buildings or structures wherever erected or to be erected or removed in the
village.
The International Building Code, 2018 Edition (“IBC”) as prepared by the
International Code Council; the International Residential Code, 2018 Edition
(“IRC”), as prepared by the International Code Council; the International
Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition (“IPMC”), as prepared by the
International Code Council, and the International Mechanical Code, 2018 Edition
(“IMC”), as prepared by the International Code Council are hereby adopted and
made a part of this chapter by reference thereto (“the codes”). All village
inspectors are trained to make sure that buildings are constructed in
accordance with the above accepted and legal standards. The codes used by the
village inspectors in performing their official duties are published and
available for inspection in the office of the village clerk upon request. All
codes used by the village’s inspectors are incorporated as fully as if set out
at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling. In the event
of any conflict between the provisions as otherwise contained in this chapter
and those contained in the codes on file at the office of the village clerk,
the provisions as contained in the codes shall apply. (Ord. 701B, 4-23-2014;
amd. Ord. 955, 2-23-2022)
4-1-1-1: INSERTIONS, ADDITIONS, AND CHANGES TO THE IBC, IRC, IMC, IPMC, AND
IMC:
   (A)   The following sections of the IBC are hereby revised, completed, or
deleted as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert at “Name of Jurisdiction” the following: “the Village of
Creve Coeur”.
Section 1612.3. Insert in place of bracketed material “Tazewell County.”
Section 1612.3. Insert in place of bracketed material the following date:
February 17, 2017.
Chapter 27 pertaining to Electrical Wiring, Equipment and Systems is hereby
deleted in its entirety.
Chapter 29 pertaining to Plumbing Systems is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Section 903.2.8 shall not apply to the extent that it requires the installation
of automatic sprinklers in one and two family dwellings.
Appendices B, C, G, I and K of the IBC are hereby adopted.
Appendices A, D, E, F, H, J, L and M of the IBC are hereby deleted in their
entirety.
   (B)   The following sections of the IRC are hereby revised, completed, or
deleted as follows:
Section R101.1. Insert in place of the bracketed material “the Village of Creve
   Coeur”.
Table R301.2. Design Criteria
Snow Load    20
Speed        90 mph
Topo         No
Seismic      A
Weathering   Severe
Frost        36"
Termite      Moderate to Severe
Winter       -4°
Ice Barrier  Yes
Flood Hazard FIRM February 17, 2017
Air Freezing 2000
Mean Temp    50°
 
Chapters 25-32 pertaining to plumbing systems and Chapters 33-42 pertaining to
electrical systems are hereby deleted in their entirety.
Section R313.2 shall not apply to the extent that it requires the installation
of automatic sprinklers in one and two family dwellings.
Appendices A, B, C, F, G, J and M of the IRC are hereby adopted.
Appendices D, E, H, I, K, L, N, O, P and Q of the IRC are hereby deleted in
their entirety. With respect to the deletion of Appendix E pertaining to
manufactured housing, except to the extent otherwise required by superseding
state or federal law, manufactured homes shall not be placed in the Village.
   (C)   The following sections of the IMC are hereby revised, completed, or
deleted as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert at “Name of Jurisdiction” the following: “The Village of
Creve Coeur.”
Section 106.5.2. Insert in place of the bracketed material “the fee schedule
set forth in Section 4-1-22 of the Village Code.”
Section 106.5.3. Insert in place of the first bracketed item the following:
“50%” and insert in place of the second bracketed item the following: “25%”.
Section 108.4 is deleted in its entirety and the following is substituted in
lieu thereof: “The general penalty provisions set forth in Section 4-1-40 of
the Creve Coeur Village Code shall apply to violations of this Code.”
Section 108.5. Insert in place of the first bracketed item the following:
“$25.00", and insert in place of the second bracketed item the following:
$750.00".
   (D)   The following sections of the IPMC are hereby revised, completed or
deleted as follows:
Section 101.1. Insert at “Name of Jurisdiction” the following: “The Village of
Creve Coeur.”
Section 103.5. Insert in place of the bracketed material “the fee schedule set
forth in Section 4-1-22 of the Village Code.”
Section 112.4. Insert in place of the first bracketed item the following:
“25.00", and in place of the second bracketed item the following: “$750.00".
Section 302.4. Insert in place of the bracketed material the following: “ten
inches.”
Section 304.14. Insert in place of the first bracketed item the following:
“March 1" and insert in place of the second bracketed item the following:
“December 1.”
Section 602.3. Insert in place of the first bracketed item the following:
“October 15" and insert in place of the second bracketed item the following:
“April 15".
Section 602.4. Insert in place of the first bracketed item the following:
“October 15" and insert in place of the second bracketed item the following:
“April 15". (Ord. 955, 2-23-2022)
4-1-2: NEW BUILDINGS AND ADDITIONS:
This chapter shall apply to all new buildings and additions to buildings,
except:
   (A)   Temporary one-story buildings for use of builders.
   (B)   Wooden fences not over four feet six inches (4'6") high. (Ord. 267, 9-
27-1961)
   (C)   For "modular dwellings" as defined by section
10-1-2 of this code, the regulatory standards for the construction of modular
dwellings adopted by the Illinois department of public health shall apply
unless a specific standard in this code shall exist, in which case the
requirements of the building code shall control. (Ord. 550-A, 5-10-1995)
4-1-2-1: SHEDS, CARPORTS, GARAGES, AND OTHER DETACHED STRUCTURES:
   (A)   Definitions:
   CARPORT: A structure open on at least two (2) sides used generally for
covering vehicles. A carport is typically considered a "detached structure"
regardless of size and its proximity to the home or garage unless it is part of
a proper permitted and planned home addition. If the carport is not open on at
least two (2) sides, it shall be considered a garage and will have to comply
with all code requirements for a garage.
   DETACHED STRUCTURE: Any item erected or built on a property in the village
of Creve Coeur that is present on the property for longer than two (2) weeks. A
detached structure could be anything from an outbuilding or a tree house to a
tent. A detached structure is not a "portable storage container" which is
defined and regulated in section
10-14-14 of this code.
   GARAGE: An enclosed structure on three (3) or more sides that is used,
commonly for the parking of vehicles. Any detached structure over four hundred
(400) square feet (example, bigger than 20 by 20 feet or 16 by 25 feet) will be
considered a garage. All garages must be supported on continuous footings and
must meet all other requirements for garages as indicated elsewhere in this
code.
   SHED: A detached one- or multi-story structure, used for tool or equipment
storage, a playhouse or similar use, it does not exceed ten feet (10') tall at
the eave heights, the maximum distance that it can be off the ground is
eighteen inches (18"). Any structure that does not comply with these criteria
will be treated as any other detached structure. A shed is not a tent. A tent
cannot be used as a shed.
   (B)   Requirements For All Detached Structures:
      1.   Any detached structure of any type and any size must follow all
building code and zoning code requirements including setback requirements.
      2.   The construction or addition of any detached structure to a village
property requires a building permit. (Permit fees are listed on a schedule in
the office of the village clerk.)
      3.   Detached structures over two hundred (200) square feet must be
anchored to the ground, and must pass a final inspection.
      4.   Any detached structure over two hundred fifty six (256) square feet
must have a permanent foundation system (at least 12 inches below final grade,
typically including concrete piers).
      5.   No detached structure may be placed closer than five feet (5') from
any property line nor may it be placed closer than twelve inches (12") from any
other detached structure, garage or dwelling.
      6.   Detached structures may only be placed in side or rear yards.
      7.   Regardless of size, if the structure will have electricity, it must
have an electrical permit and pass a final electrical inspection.
      8.   Regardless of size, if the structure will have access to gas
service, it must have a building permit and pass a final building inspection.
      9.   Regardless of size, if the structure will have water service, it
will require a building permit and pass a final plumbing inspection.
      10.   Any addition to a detached structure will be required to meet the
requirements of the structure it becomes. (In other words, a carport
subsequently enclosed requires a building permit that meets with the
requirements of a garage. A garage subsequently equipped with electricity will
require an electrical permit and final inspection.)
   (C)   Requirements Particular To Carports:
      1.   Unattached metal, plastic, and canvas carports may not be outside of
the setback requirements for the main dwelling structure on the property as
required by zoning regulations. Additionally, such carports may only be placed
in a side or rear yard.
      2.   Attached wood frame carports are considered an addition onto the
dwelling or garage and require permits and inspections to ensure building code
compliance as do home additions.
   (D)   Penalties For Failure To Abide By The Permit Requirements Herein:
      1.   Failing to obtain a building permit prior to building or adding to
any structure that requires a permit will result in the permit fees being
double the scheduled fee.
      2.   Refusal to apply for and pay a permit fee after notice that one is
owed will result in daily fines from twenty five dollars ($25.00) to seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   Putting up a structure that does not meet with all building code and
zoning code requirements, including setback requirements will cause the
offender to obtain daily fines in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day until the offending
structure is removed in its entirety. (Ord. 783, 5-27-2015)
4-1-3: EXISTING BUILDINGS:
Every new installation and every repair exceeding a total cost of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) including labor, said labor to be computed as not less than
the full cost of materials used, shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
A permit shall be required for all work on the exterior of any building. (The
cost of said permit is dependent upon the scope of work to be completed.)
No permit is required for the cosmetic remodeling of an interior of a
residential unit (repainting, putting in new fixtures, or new carpet or
flooring). Major remodeling, however (the moving of walls, removal of walls,
replumbing, adding plumbing or changes to electrical work), requires a permit.
Once again, the cost of the permit is dependent upon the scope of work. (Ord.
267E, 1-13-2016)
4-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
This chapter shall also apply to all alterations which affect the structural
strength or sanitary conditions of any building, but shall not include ordinary
repairs necessary for the maintenance of any building. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-5: MOVING AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS:
   No structure shall be moved or demolished until a permit has been obtained
from the building inspector, and adequate provision made for the demolition of
such building. The permit fee for the moving or demolishing of a structure
under this section shall be in accordance with the fees on file with the
building inspector. Property shall be left free and clear of all debris and all
excavations and shall be filled with the proper material approved by the
building inspector for the required project.
(Ord. 267A, 12-19-1979; amd. Ord. 994, 1-24-2024)
4-1-6: PUBLIC BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Plans, Approval: No building, or any part thereof, which may be used
as a meeting place for the public, shall be built until duplicate plans,
showing the details of the proposed work, accompanied by duplicate
specifications covering the material or materials to be used, have been
submitted to, and approved by the building inspector and a permit has been
issued for the proposed construction or alteration. One set of the approved
plans and specifications shall be retained by the building inspector and one
set shall be kept at the building during construction. No changes shall be made
unless revised plans and specifications have been submitted to and approved in
writing by the building inspector. All public buildings shall meet all
specifications of the state fire marshal. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
   (B)   Business And Public Buildings: All business and public buildings to be
built and all additions thereto, within the village, excepting one- and two-
family dwellings and public schools, shall comply with Illinois law and state
fire marshal regulations, including at least the minimum fire safety standards
for all occupancies of the applicable life safety code of the National Fire
Protection Association. (Ord. 701, 1-28-2009)
4-1-7: FOUNDATION AND FOOTING:
   (A)   Bearing Capacity: Excavations for foundations shall extend to a level
which will provide adequate bearing. In case of doubt regarding bearing
capacity, tests may be required for this determination.
   (B)   Frost Line: Excavations shall extend below prevailing frost line and
not less than thirty inches (30") below finished grade. Excavations shall not
be less than twelve inches (12") below natural grade.
   (C)   Footing Trenches: The bottom of footing trenches shall be level and on
undisturbed soil.
   (D)   Footing Projection: All footings shall be a minimum of eight inches
(8") and four inches (4") projection on each side of foundation for width.
   (E)   Continuous Pour Concrete: All footings shall be of continuous pour
concrete. When continuous pour is not possible, there shall be set midway in
the break at the bulkhead, at least three (3) five-eighths inch by sixteen inch
(5/8" x 16") steel rods.
   (F)   Basementless Houses:
      1.   In buildings using wood floors, where no basement is used, a crawl
space of at least twenty four inches (24") shall be provided between the ground
and the bottom of floor joists or support beams, whichever is lowest, and such
ground shall be substantially level.
      2.   In buildings built on a slab, the slab shall be at least six inches
(6") and with thickened edges. Such edges shall extend at least eight inches
(8") above finished grade and at least thirty six inches (36") below finished
grade, with a width of footing at least ten inches (10"). The slab shall rest
on a porous fill of select materials, compacted, not less than six inches (6")
in depth. All slabs shall be reinforced with at least a six inch by six inch
(6" x 6") mesh of no. 10 steel wire, and footings shall contain at least three
(3) five-eighths inch (5/8") steel rods. Between the slab and porous material
shall be a vapor sheet of sufficient quality to withstand absorption of
moisture.
   (G)   Ventilators: In all buildings using crawl space, ventilating openings
shall be provided and covered with a metal mesh of under one-half inch (1/2")
screen openings. All ventilators shall be at least six inches by twelve inches
(6" x 12"), and at least two (2) shall be provided in each crawl space.
   (H)   Buildings On Slab: In small buildings on a slab, such separate
building, other than a dwelling, not exceeding one story, constructed of either
wood frame or concrete block construction and having less than five hundred
(500) square feet of area, may be supported on concrete slab with thickened
edges. Such edges shall extend at least eight inches (8") above finished grade
and twelve inches (12") below finish grade. The slab shall be at least four
inches (4") thick and shall rest on a porous fill of select materials not less
than six inches (6") in depth. All slabs shall be reinforced with at least six
inches by six inches (6" x 6") mesh of no. 10 steel wire.
   (I)   Detached Private Garages: Detached private garages may be supported on
concrete slabs laid on the earth, when not attached to another building. Such
slab shall be not less than four inches (4") thick, and placed on at least a
base of porous material six inches (6") deep, and the slab shall extend at
least two inches (2") above finished grade. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
   (J)   Modular Dwelling: All tongues, wheels, axles and frames must be
removed and may not be any part of the structure. (Ord. 550-B, 5-10-1995)
4-1-8: CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   All structures built under this chapter shall have a termite shield,
properly installed therein, which shall be copper, aluminum or heavy roofing.
   (B)   Use following minimum table for floor joists:
 
Size     Spacing Maximum Span
2" x 8"  16"     12'2"
2" x 10" 16"     14'
2" x 2"  16"     18'
 
   (C)   Use following minimum table for ceiling joists:
 
Size     Spacing Maximum Span
2" x 4"  16"     10'
2" x 6"  16"     14'
2" x 8"  16"     16'
2" x 10" 16"     20'
 
   (D)   Truss construction must be of a standard approved design, or as
approved by an Illinois licensed structural engineer and certified by such
engineer.
   (E)   Bridging must be used on all joist spans over eight feet (8') and must
not be more than eight feet (8') on center.
   (F)   Headers over windows and door openings must comply with the following
table:
 
Size                Maximum Span
Two 2 x 4s on edge  3'6"
Two 2 x 6s on edge  6'
Two 2 x 8s on edge  8'
Two 2 x 10s on edge 12'
 
For longer spans, laminated plywood, concrete lintels or steel beams are
permissible upon certification of an Illinois licensed architectural or
structural engineer.
   (G)   All dwelling houses shall be constructed with outside siding over
storm sheeting; provided, however, that private garages may have single wall
construction.
   (H)   Use the following minimum table on rafter centers:
 
Size    Center Length
2" x 4" 16"    10'
2" x 6" 16"    20'
2" x 6" 24"    16'
2" x 8" 16"    22'
2" x 8" 24"    18'
 
   (I)   All masonry walls shall be interlocked at the corners. In all masonry
walls of more than twenty five feet (25') in length, pilasters shall be placed
midway, and not more than twenty feet (20') apart.
   (J)   1. The outside walls of all masonry buildings shall be at least eight
inches (8") thick. In the case of a second story supported by such wall, the
first floor wall shall be at least twelve inches (12") thick.
      2.   In any building having an excess of two (2) stories, or the
equivalent in height, structural walls and supports shall be in conformity with
a certificate of an Illinois licensed structural engineer.
   (K)   Where wood construction comes in contact with concrete or masonry
construction, a termite shield of three (3) ounces copper or aluminum or heavy
duty roll roofing with at least a one-half inch (1/2") overlap shall be
provided.
   (L)   All freestanding carports shall be supported by at least a four inch
by four inch (4" x 4") pillar, placed at least every eight feet (8'), and
secured with gusset plates. Three inch (3") pipe may be used, if placed every
eight feet (8') and anchored in thirty inches (30") of concrete, or busing one
inch by one-half inch (1" x 1/2") strap anchors imbedded in concrete. Roof
rafters of such freestanding carports shall comply with the rafter regulations
herein provided for other roofs, or in the event that fiberglass is used, such
sheets shall be at least one-eighth inch (1/8") thickness and shall be placed
on rafters of approved strength, as determined by the building inspector. (Ord.
267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-9: CHIMNEYS:
All chimneys shall be built from the ground up and for use in dwellings or
public buildings must have an inside measurement of at least eight inches by
twelve inches (8" x 12"); provided, however, that where the total floor space
of the building shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet, the inside
measurements of said chimney may be eight inches by eight inches (8" x 8"). No
chimney shall have less than a four inch (4") wall in thickness. All chimneys
for coal, oil or wood type heat shall be of brick, and shall be tile lined flue
construction, built from adequate footing below the frost line, up above the
roof of the building. Transite or similar approved type vents may be used with
gas heat.
All gas water heaters or space heaters shall be vented in accordance with the
above, and all such vents shall extend at least ten inches (10") above the
eaves. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-10: ELECTRICAL CONSTRUCTION:
All electrical work shall conform strictly to the provisions of the electrical
code on file in the office of the village clerk. No wiring shall be changed or
altered, nor added to, without a permit. All electrical work shall be performed
in good workmanlike manner. (Ord. 701B, 4-23-2014)
4-1-11: PLUMBING:
(Rep. by Ord. 545, 10-26-1994)
4-1-12: OFFICE OF BUILDING INSPECTOR:
There is hereby created the office of building inspector, who shall be
appointed by the mayor, with the consent of the board of trustees. The building
inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and to supervise the construction, equipment, alteration, repairing,
moving or demolition of all buildings or other structures. The building
inspector shall have the right to enter any premises or any building or other
structure in the performance of his duties, and any person who denies or
obstructs the performance of such duty shall be deemed to be in violation of
this chapter and punished accordingly. The building inspector shall:
   (A)   Issue permits and require all building projects to be completed in
compliance with the standards established in the codes adopted by the village.
   (B)   Inspect premises for habitability (or direct a trained code
enforcement officer employed by the village to so inspect) to ensure the
continued safety of the residents of the village of Creve Coeur and direct the
police to issue tickets if buildings are not in compliance with the codes.
   (C)   Keep records in the village hall so that the records are accessible to
village officials and the public, if requested.
      1.   Records to be kept are permits, certificates of occupancy and
inspection reports, including pictures.
   (D)   Produce quarterly reports which must:
      1.   List all permits issued, inspections and reasons why a particular
property was inspected.
      2.   List hours worked, and requests for reimbursement.
      3.   Be given to the chairman of the buildings and grounds committee and
the village clerk who will maintain a copy of the quarterly reports for the
village trustees.
   (E)   Issue notices and citations for violations of the requirements of this
title, title 10 and title 7, chapter 8 of this code as a designee of the Creve
Coeur police department. (Ord. 787, 8-12-2015)
4-1-13: OFFICE OF ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
There is hereby created the office of the electrical inspector, who shall be
appointed by the mayor with the consent of the board of trustees. The
electrical inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the
provisions of this chapter with reference to all electrical work within the
village. No electrical work shall be performed within the village until a
permit has been secured therefor from the electrical inspector. After said
electrical work has been completed, no current or power shall be connected or
transmitted to such electrical work until after the same has been inspected and
approved by the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall have the
right to enter any premises or any building or other structure in the necessary
performance of such duty and any person who denies or obstructs the performance
of such duty shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and punished
accordingly. The electrical inspector shall:
   (A)   Issue permits and require all building projects to be completed in
compliance with the standards established in the codes adopted by the village.
   (B)   Inspect premises for electrical code violations (or direct an
electrician otherwise employed by the village to so inspect) to ensure the
continued safety of the residents of the village of Creve Coeur and direct the
police to issue tickets if electrical work is not in compliance with the codes.
   (C)   Keep records in the village hall so that the records are accessible to
village officials and the public, if requested.
      1.   Records to be kept are permits, contractor registration and
inspection reports, including pictures if applicable.
   (D)   Produce quarterly reports which must:
      1.   List all permits issued, inspections, contractor registrations and
reasons why a particular property was inspected.
      2.   List hours worked, and requests for reimbursement.
      3.   Be given to the chairman of the buildings and grounds committee and
the village clerk who will maintain a copy of the quarterly reports for the
village trustees. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-1-14: INSPECTION BEFORE LATHING:
All builders or owners of buildings or structures being constructed under this
chapter shall notify the building inspector and the electrical inspector twenty
four (24) hours prior to lathing said building or structure and both the
building inspector and electrical inspector shall make an inspection of said
building or structure at least twenty four (24) hours after said notice and
prior to the lathing of said building or structure. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-15: STORE BUILDINGS AND BUSINESS HOUSES:
No person shall hereafter locate, build, construct, or alter any filling
station or public garage within two hundred feet (200') of any public theater,
school, or church building. No person shall hereafter locate, build, construct,
or alter any store building or business house, including filling stations and
public garages, on any lot in the village where two-thirds (2/3) of the
unimproved property measured by frontage is used exclusively for residential
purposes within a distance of two hundred feet (200') on both sides of the
street adjacent to the lot on which it is proposed to erect or alter such
building, without first obtaining the written consent of the majority of the
property owners, measured by frontage, and including both improved and
unimproved property within said distance of two hundred feet (200') on both
sides of the street adjacent to said lot on which said building is to be
erected, located or altered. Any such application shall be referred to the
zoning board for examination by them, and no such consent shall be deemed to
change, vary or alter any of the provisions of the zoning provisions of this
village, unless properly pursuant under the provisions of said zoning title for
such variance, should a variance be in order. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-16: GARAGE HOUSES:
Any garage that is to be used for living quarters shall be built with garage
doors and cement or concrete floors. Such garage shall be located not less than
fifty feet (50') from the street line, and when such lot is a corner lot, such
garage shall be not less than twenty five feet (25') from the side street line.
No such building shall be used for living quarters for more than one year from
the date of completion of such garage house, as evidenced by the records of the
building inspector. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-17: STREET LINE:
A "street line" is hereby defined as a division line between a lot, tract or
parcel of land and a contiguous public street, including in such street all
property dedicated for street purposes, or subject to public easement. (Ord.
267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-18: SIDE YARDS:
A "side yard" is defined to be an unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building, between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from
the front to the rear of the lot line. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-19: BUILDING LINES:
There shall be a side yard on each side of every residence or dwelling, which
said yard on each side shall have a width of not less than ten percent (10%) of
the total width of the lot, up to and including lots forty feet (40') wide.
Where a residence or dwelling is to be constructed on a lot over forty feet
(40') wide, or on two (2) or more lots totaling over forty feet (40') frontage,
the said yard shall be not less than four feet (4') on each side, excepting
corner lots, where the street side shall in all cases be at least ten feet
(10'). (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
Garages and outbuildings in residence districts must not be placed closer than
five feet (5') to any side or rear lot line. All accessory buildings, shall not
be closer than ten feet (10') to the dwelling. In construction where garages
are attached to the building, a firewall with masonite or five-eighths inch (5/
8") drywall shall be used with suitable fire stops. (Ord. 482-N, 12-13-1995)
4-1-20: FRONT BUILDING LINE:
No structure or building of any kind shall be erected or altered in the
residential portion or district of the village, so that the front of said
building or structure, including porches, whether open or closed, is nearer
than twenty feet (20') of the street lot line, or the line as established by
the majority of the dwellings in the block. Where a district has been zoned for
business purposes, no structure or building nor any appurtenance thereof, shall
be erected or altered so that the front or side of said building or structure
is nearer than three feet (3') to the street lot line where the street is less
than fifty feet (50') in width. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-21: LOTS OPENING ONTO A STREET:
All buildings shall be built upon a lot having an opening onto a public street.
(Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-22: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
Before any building work is started in or on any building or project, a permit
must be secured. The fee for such permit and subsequent inspection shall be in
accordance with the fee schedule on file with the village clerk.
Fees for work started prior to the issuance of a permit shall be doubled.
Until a permit is paid for, the village shall issue a "stop order".
If any person or company is working in the village without a permit and they
have previously been charged a double fine for working in the village without a
permit, that person or company shall pay double the fee for the issuance of the
permit and shall be ticketed pursuant to section
4-1-40 of this chapter. The penalty that shall be assessed shall be in the
amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each occurrence.
No fee shall be charged for a building permit issued to any church, municipal
corporation or taxing district.
For off site inspection of modular construction, the village shall be
reimbursed for any additional expenses incurred, and the building inspector may
request a deposit for anticipated costs prior to issuing a building permit.
(Ord. 787, 8-12-2015)
4-1-22-1: ENGINEERING AND CONSULTING FEES:
   Should the Building Inspector deem it necessary to obtain the services of a
professional engineer in order to: (i) review and evaluate an application for a
building permit, (ii) to conduct inspections prior to or while an applicant
engages in construction activities, (iii) to test, (iv) to prepare structural
or other types of engineering reports, or (v) to undertake any other reasonably
necessary investigations or activities, the applicant for such permit shall pay
the Village an hourly engineering fee to be set from time to time by the Board
of Trustees in order to defray the costs incurred by the Village for said
professional engineer.
   All additional consultant fees required by the Building Inspector shall be
charged to the owner and/or general contractor.
(Ord. 987, 12-13-2023)
4-1-23: ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES:
Before any electrical work is started in or on any building or project, a
permit must be secured. The fee for such permit and subsequent inspection shall
be in accordance with the fee schedule on file with the village clerk.
The builder must secure an electrical permit from the electrical inspector at
the same time that he applies for and receives his building permit from the
building inspector. The electrical inspector shall make two (2) inspections of
the premises for which the permit has issued. In case more than two (2)
inspections of the premises are required, due to failure to wire in accordance
with the codes on file in the office of the village clerk, additional fees for
each additional inspection as listed on the fee schedule, shall be charged.
No fee shall be charged for an electrical permit issued to any church,
municipal corporation or taxing district. (Ord. 701B, 4-23-2014)
4-1-23-1: PLUMBING PERMIT FEES:
Before any plumbing work is started in or on any building or project, a permit
must be secured. The fee for such permit and subsequent inspection shall be in
accordance with the fee schedule on file with the village clerk.
The builder must secure a plumbing permit from the plumbing inspector at the
same time that he applies for and receives his building permit from the
building inspector. The plumbing inspector shall make two (2) inspections of
the premises for which the permit has issued. In case more than two (2)
inspections of the premises are required, due to failure to plumb in accordance
with the plumbing code, additional fees for each additional inspection as
listed on the fee schedule, shall be charged.
No fee shall be charged for a plumbing permit issued to any church, municipal
corporation or taxing district. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-1-24: STOP ORDERS:
All structures subject to the provisions of this chapter, hereafter erected,
altered or repaired, without a permit fee first being obtained, or not in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, shall be stopped by the
building inspector, who shall post conspicuously on the premises, a "stop
order", and any person or owner who proceeds or permits the proceedings with
any work or the furtherance of the work in violation of such order, shall be
deemed guilty of the violation of this chapter and shall be subjected to the
penalties set forth in section
4-1-40 of this chapter. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-25: WORKMANSHIP:
All work shall be done in good workmanlike manner and shall be subject to a
final approval of the building inspector.
All exteriors of buildings hereafter built, shall be of new materials, and no
building shall be built, altered or repaired where the exterior walls are to be
covered with an asphalt type siding or sheeting. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-26: DUTY TO PROCURE PERMIT:
In all cases where a general contractor is in charge of the work or project, or
has been engaged to perform any work, removal, construction, erection,
demolition, improvement or the like, it shall be the duty of the general
contractor to procure and pay for all permits, and he shall otherwise be fully
responsible for the strict compliance with this chapter. In all other cases, it
shall be the duty of the owner to procure and pay for such permits and to
otherwise comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-27: TERMINATION OF PERMITS:
All permits for work to be performed, are issued with the express stipulation
that work shall commence within six (6) months, shall be completed within
twelve (12) months, and shall actively be prosecuted unto completion, except
for strikes, destruction or acts of God, and any unusual or unnecessary delay
in excess of six (6) months shall cause such permit to expire and be void, and
the building inspector shall post a "stop order", and no new permit shall issue
until the full permit fee for such total cost of construction shall have been
fully paid. The provisions of this section shall apply to permits heretofore
issued as well as those that may hereafter be issued. (Ord. 267A, 12-19-1979)
4-1-28: CONSTRUCTION WITHOUT PERMIT:
No person shall commence any work or construction for which a permit is
required by this chapter until after such permit has been obtained and posted.
(Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-29: CARPORTS AND BREEZEWAYS:
All carports and breezeways shall be considered a part of the dwelling house or
building for the purpose of ascertaining the building lines, setback lines and
the like. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-30: STANDS:
All vendors stands, even though temporary, shall comply with the provisions of
this chapter.
For the purpose of determining "temporary", as used herein, the term shall mean
any building under thirty six (36) square feet in area, but not to include
contractor's on the job buildings for use during construction of a building or
other project in actual construction, when used for office or temporary storage
of materials and equipment for such construction purposes. As to such
"temporary" building or stand, herein included and covered, a building permit
shall be required. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-31: SEPTIC TANK AND SEEPAGE BED SYSTEMS:
In all new construction of buildings or dwellings, there shall be installed and
provision made for the installation of sanitary wastes through a septic tank
and seepage systems, and no overflow shall open into any ditch, drain, road,
ravine, coal mine or gulley, nor upon the open ground.
Each owner of a building or dwelling shall provide the building inspector with
specifications for the location and type of sanitary sewage treatment system
and disposal, showing the size of septic tank, extent and location of all tile
fields and other structures, both above and below the surface, as may be
pertinent to the public health and safety. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-32: SEWER LOCATION:
No sewer or drain, including field tile, shall be located within fifty feet
(50') of any well, unless constructed of cast iron pipe, having watertight,
leaded joints, and no such line shall be built, laid or constructed closer than
twenty five feet (25') of any such well. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-33: SEWER CONSTRUCTION:
All sink drains, laundry drains, toilet and basement drains shall be connected
to the sewer line, discharging to the septic tank. Grease traps, if used, shall
likewise be discharged into the septic tank.
All sewer pipes from the house to the septic tank, from the septic tank to the
distribution box and from the distribution box to the individual tile lines in
the seepage beds or field, shall be of cast iron, vitrified clay or concrete
pipe with bell and spigot (slip seal or Amvit type) joints, and no such line
shall be built, laid or constructed closer than twenty five feet (25') of a
well, and shall be laid on a slope of not less than one- eighth inch (1/8") per
foot. All pipes inside the house or under any flooring, shall be of cast iron
with leaded joints. No downspout nor surface drainage shall be permitted to be
connected into this system. Copper piping may be used inside the house, where
such piping is exposed. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-34: SEWER JOINTS:
On all outside the house installations, cement may be used for making joints,
if the joint is caulked with oakum or jute, and the joint completely filled and
covered with mortar all around. The mortar shall be composed of two (2) parts
of clean sand and one part of portland cement, or joints may be made by using
asphaltic or bituminous compounds, provided the joint is first caulked with dry
oakum or jute, tight enough to prevent such jointing material from leaking into
the pipe. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-35: SEPTIC TANKS:
Septic tanks shall not be located within fifty feet (50') of a well, cistern or
pump suction line, nor within twenty five feet (25') of any lake, stream, or
open ditch, nor within less than a foot above the high water line of any river,
stream or lake.
All septic tanks shall be of at least five hundred (500) gallon capacity, and
if serving any more than a four (4) bedroom unit, the minimum size shall be at
least seven hundred fifty (750) gallons.
Metal tanks may be used if properly protected both inside and outside with a
suitable protective coating. Such tanks shall be at least of 14-gauge metal, if
a metal tank is used.
No septic tank shall be placed within less than ten feet (10') of any house
dwelling or public building. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-36: DISTRIBUTION BOX:
A distribution box shall be connected to the septic tank on a short tight sewer
line, located on the upper end of the subsurface disposal field. The inlet pipe
shall enter the end of the box approximately six inches (6") above the bottom,
and sides of the box shall extend at least six inches (6") above the inlet
pipe. A removable cover shall be provided for each box. The bottom of the
drainage lines, shall be placed four inches (4") above the bottom of the box,
and all lines shall be of the same elevation. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-37: LAYOUT OF SEEPAGE FIELDS:
The lines of the tile field shall be constructed so as to fall more than one
inch (1") in fifty feet (50') of tile, and no single line shall exceed one
hundred feet (100') in length. A minimum spacing of six feet (6') between
seepage lines should be provided. Trenches shall be not less than two feet (2')
nor more than three feet (3') wide, and of sufficient depth to accommodate the
purpose for which they are designed. Tile shall be laid on at least a six inch
(6") bed of gravel or crushed rock, from which material smaller than one-half
inch (1/2") has been screened out. From type tile, at least four inches (4"),
laid with the ends between one-eighth inch (1/8") to one-fourth inch (1/4")
apart, shall be used. Tarred paper or roofing cut in strips shall be placed
over the top half of the tile, and gravel of the same consistency previously
described, shall be filled until at least two inches (2") level above the top
of the tile is maintained. (Ord. 267, 9-27-1961)
4-1-38: OFFICE OF BUILDING INSPECTOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-1-39: BOCA NATIONAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-1-40: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter or fail to comply
therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any lawful order or
regulation made thereunder, or who shall proceed to build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, shall, upon conviction therefor, be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and
costs, and each day such violation continues shall be a separate offense and
fined accordingly.
The imposition of a fine for any violation of this chapter shall not excuse the
violation, nor shall it permit it to continue. Any such person so violating
this chapter shall be required to correct or remedy such violation within a
reasonable time, and where not otherwise specified in this chapter, each five
(5) days or major infraction thereof that prohibited conditions are maintained,
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
CHAPTER 2
ELECTRICAL CODE
SECTION:
4-2-1: Title; National Electrical Code Adopted
4-2-2: Electrical Inspector
4-2-3: Other Work By Electrical Inspector
4-2-4: Permit Required
4-2-5: Inspection Of Work
4-2-6: Compliance With The Electrical Codes On File With The Village Clerk
4-2-7: Right To Inspect; Disconnect
4-2-8: Registration Required; Certificate
4-2-9: Registration Fee
4-2-10: Definitions
4-2-11: Plans To Be Submitted
4-2-12: Final Inspection; Certificate Of Approval
4-2-13: National Electrical Code Adopted (Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-14: Violation
4-2-15: Exceptions
4-2-1: TITLE; NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
   (A)   This chapter shall be known and cited as the CREVE COEUR ELECTRICAL
CODE.
   (B)   The NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, 2020 Edition, (“electrical
code”) as prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby
adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference thereto. The electrical
code is available for inspection in the office of the village clerk upon
request. The electrical code is incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling. In the event of any
conflict between the provisions as otherwise contained in this chapter and
those contained in the electrical code on file at the office of the village
clerk, the provisions contained in the electrical code shall apply.
   (C)   The following sections of the electrical code are hereby revised,
completed, or deleted as follows:
Whenever the word “municipality” is used in the electrical code, it shall be
held to refer to the Village of Creve Coeur.
Whenever the words “electrical official” or “administrative authority” are used
in the electrical code, they shall be held to refer to the Electrical Inspector
or his or her authorized representative. (Ord. 955, 2-23-2022)
4-2-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
The person chosen to fill this office of electrical inspector shall be a
competent electrician of good moral character; shall be a resident of the
village and a citizen of the United States. The inspector shall be a licensed
electrician by the state of Illinois. The electrical inspector shall be well
versed in approved methods of electrical construction for safety to life and
property, the statutes of the state relating to electrical work and the rules
and regulations issued by the fire marshal of the state under authority of the
safety rules and standards approved by the American engineering standards
committee. The electrical inspector shall deliver all fees collected to the
treasurer and the treasurer shall pay the electrical inspector the agreed upon
rate for services.
The electrical inspector shall be paid compensation as set by the village
board. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011; Ord. 941, 6-23-2021)
4-2-3: OTHER WORK BY ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR:
It shall be lawful for the electrical inspector to engage in business of
electrical contracting while holding the position of electrical inspector.
However, with respect to any electrical contracting performed by the electrical
inspector constituting contracting with respect to which it is the duty of the
electrical inspector to inspect or to perform other duties in his official
capacity, the electrical inspector shall immediately notify the president of
the board of trustees of said work being performed by the electrical inspector.
Upon such notification, it shall be the duty of the president, by and with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees, to appoint a temporary,
independent electrical inspector with respect to said contracting work. The
temporary, independent electrical inspector shall have all qualifications as
required of the electrical inspector and shall have all duties and
responsibilities with respect to said contracting work performed by the
electrical inspector.
Any violations of the provisions of this code by the electrical inspector or
temporary, independent electrical inspector shall be deemed sufficient cause
for his removal from office, but he may be removed for other just cause. (Ord.
707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Upon the adoption under this chapter of such standards and specifications for
the installation, alteration and use of electrical equipment, rules,
regulations and fees, the same shall at once become operative, and thereafter
no electrical equipment shall be installed or altered except upon a permit
issued by the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall inspect and
shall require that all methods and materials conform to the standards and
specifications applicable thereto which have been recommended and adopted as
herein provided.
Permits required under this electrical code shall be issued pursuant to section
4-2-8 of this chapter except as hereinafter provided. Any permit required by
this code may be issued to a person not so registered to do any work regulated
by this code provided that the applicant is the bona fide owner of the dwelling
structure or accessory building in which the work is to be performed, that he
shall personally be responsible for all work performed in connection therewith,
and that all material, workmanship and methods of installation or repair shall
meet the requirements of this electrical code; and provided further that the
owner shall not take out permits for dwelling structures containing more than
four (4) dwelling units, regardless of whether such dwelling units are occupied
or unoccupied.
All permits issued for any property shall be copied and filed at village hall.
The permit should state the date when a follow up inspection will occur if a
follow up inspection is necessary. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-5: INSPECTION OF WORK:
Upon the completion of the installation or alteration of electrical equipment,
it shall be the duty of the person installing or altering the same to notify
the electrical inspector, who shall inspect the work within twenty four (24)
hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, after such notice is given,
and if such electrical equipment is found to be in full accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and does not constitute a hazard to life and
property, he shall make a record of such inspection and issue a certificate of
approval if and as required elsewhere herein. All wiring not exposed to view or
that is to become hidden, shall be inspected within twenty four (24) hours
after notice is received, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, before
such wiring is concealed. (Ord. 310, 2-1-1967; amd. Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-6: COMPLIANCE WITH THE ELECTRICAL CODES ON FILE WITH THE VILLAGE CLERK:
No certificate of approval shall be issued unless the electrical equipment is
in strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the statutes of
the state of Illinois; provided, however, that compliance with the regulations
as laid down from time to time by the electrical code (on file in the office of
the village clerk) shall be prima facie evidence of proper installation or
alteration. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and the above
referenced code, the code shall govern. The electrical inspection department
shall keep complete records of all permits issued and inspections made and
other official work performed under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 701B,
4-23-2014)
4-2-7: RIGHT TO INSPECT; DISCONNECT:
The provisions for inspection of work authorized by the permits issued in
accordance herewith shall not be construed as prohibiting the inspection of any
electrical equipment now or hereafter installed whenever the electrical
inspector shall determine that public safety requires it. The electrical
inspector shall have the right during reasonable times or hours to enter any
building in the discharge of his official duties, for the purpose of making any
inspections or tests of the installation or alteration of electrical equipment
contained therein, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all
electrical currents and to cut or disconnect any wire where such electrical
currents are dangerous to life or property, or may interfere with the work of
the fire department. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-8: REGISTRATION REQUIRED; CERTIFICATE:
Any person desiring to engage in the business of electrical contracting shall
apply for registration to the electrical inspector. Upon the filing of such
application in proper form, satisfactory completion of the test required and
the payment of the registration fee fixed herein, the electrical inspector
shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration which shall
authorize the applicant to engage in such business for the year for which it is
issued. The electrical inspector shall keep a suitable record of such
registrations. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-9: REGISTRATION FEE:
The fee for registration as an electrical contractor shall be established
annually by the village board and published in the office of the village clerk.
The fee shall be paid by the applicant to the treasurer in advance upon filing
the application. The certificate of registration issued hereunder shall expire
on December 31 of the year for which it is issued 1 . (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-33-1.
4-2-10: DEFINITIONS:
The term “electrical contractor” as used in this chapter means any person in
the business of installing or altering by contract, electrical equipment for
the utilization of electricity for light, heat or power, not including radio
apparatus or equipment for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and not
including apparatus, conductors and other equipment installed for or by public
utilities, including common carriers, which are under the jurisdiction of the
Illinois commerce commission for use in their operation as public utilities.
The term “electrical contractor” does not include employees employed by such
contractors to do or supervise such work. (Ord. 310, 2-1-1967; amd. Ord. 514,
12-10-1986; Ord. 701B, 4-23-2014; Ord. 955, 2-23-2022)
4-2-11: PLANS TO BE SUBMITTED:
Plans shall be submitted by architects, engineers or the owner and approval
obtained from the electrical inspection department before any work is started
pertaining to the electrical installation in or on any new building or project
covered by these rules. Residences, or remodeling work within or on existing
buildings or projects would not be covered by this section except where the
work is of such extent as to require plans to be drafted. Approval under this
section will not constitute a permit, which must be obtained by the contractor
making the installation. (Ord. 310, 2-1-1967)
4-2-12: FINAL INSPECTION; CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
Final inspection and certificate of approval by the electrical inspector shall
be required on wiring in or on all buildings or projects before the same are to
be connected to the supply lines of the public utility, excepting approval may
be given on a completed service and certain stipulated branch circuits where
required for heat and for construction purposes. Such temporary connections are
subject to cutoff without notice for any violation of this chapter. The meter
department of the public utility shall be notified in writing of the
certificate of approval, and a copy shall be furnished to the contractor or
owner, upon request. (Ord. 310, 2-1-1967)
In the absence of the electrical inspector, an approval may issue when signed
by the president and a member of the electrical commission, and shall be as
valid as when otherwise issued. (Ord. 310, 2-1-1967; amd. Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-13: NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-14: VIOLATION:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
shall engage in the electric contracting business, whether limited or
generally, without first having obtained a certificate of registration from
this village or some other municipality in the state, having a registration and
licensing ordinance with tests, shall be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for each offense, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00), and each day that the offense continues or remains uncorrected,
shall be deemed a separate offense and upon conviction, shall be fined
accordingly. However, the conviction and fining of any violator shall not be
deemed a permit to continue the violation or condition or practice complained
of as being contrary to this chapter. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-2-15: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing herein shall prevent an application for injunctive relief, nor shall
the selection of one method in any way preclude the use of the other remedy.
(Ord. 310, 2-1-1967; amd. Ord. 310C, 1-28-1998)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Office Of Plumbing Inspector
4-3-2: Permit Required
4-3-3: Inspection Of Work
4-3-4: Compliance With Illinois Plumbing Code
4-3-5: Records And Reports To Village (Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-3-6: Right Of Inspector To Inspect; Disconnect
4-3-7: Plans To Be Submitted
4-3-8: Final Inspection; Certificate Of Approval
4-3-9: Permit; Fees
4-3-10: Illinois Plumbing Code Adopted
4-3-11: Violation
4-3-12: Exceptions
4-3-1: OFFICE OF PLUMBING INSPECTOR:
   (A)   Office Created: There is hereby created the office of plumbing
inspector. The person chosen to fill this office shall be a competent licensed
plumber of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. He shall
have at least five (5) years' experience as a plumber and should be well versed
in approved methods of construction for safety to life and property and the
statutes and regulations of the federal government and the state of Illinois.
The plumbing inspector shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and
consent of the village trustees as allowed under the Illinois municipal code,
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3.1-30-5. The board of trustees may, as needed,
prescribe the duties, and define the powers of the plumbing inspector.
   (B)   Term Of Office: The plumbing inspector shall be appointed for a term
of one year. The initial term shall be from the officer's date of appointment
until April 30, 1995; thereafter, the plumbing inspector's term shall expire on
April 30 of each calendar year.
   (C)   Compensation: The plumbing inspector shall be paid compensation as set
by the village board.
   (D)   Alternative: In the alternative, the mayor, with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees, may contract with an independent plumbing
inspection service that will conduct inspections as required by this chapter.
   (E)   Duties:
      1.   The plumbing inspector is charged with ensuring the safety of the
public through the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, to use
standards outlined in the plumbing code, and to recommend to the board
reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the issuance of permits.
      2.   The plumbing inspector shall inspect premises for code violations
(or direct a plumber otherwise employed by the village to so inspect) to ensure
the continued safety of the residents of the village of Creve Coeur and direct
the police to issue tickets if plumbing fails to comply with the codes.
      3.   The plumbing inspector shall keep records in the village hall so
that the records are accessible to village officials and the public, if
requested.
         (a)   Records to be kept are permits issued, and inspection reports,
including pictures if applicable.
      4.   The plumbing inspector shall produce quarterly reports which must:
         (a)   List all permits issued, inspections and reasons why a
particular property was inspected.
         (b)   List hours worked, and requests for reimbursement.
         (c)   Be given to the chairman of the buildings and grounds committee
and the village clerk who will maintain a copy of the quarterly reports for the
village trustees. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011; Ord. 941, 6-23-2021; Ord. 955, 2-23-
2022)
4-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
Upon the adoption under this chapter of such standards and specifications for
the installation, alteration and use of plumbing equipment, rules, regulations
and fees, the same shall at once become operative, and thereafter no plumbing
shall be installed or altered except upon a permit issued by the plumbing
inspector. The plumbing inspector shall inspect and shall require that all
methods and materials conform to the standards and specifications applicable
thereto which have been recommended and adopted as herein provided. All fees
given to the plumbing inspector shall be promptly transferred to the treasurer.
The village treasurer will pay the plumbing inspector the agreed upon rate for
services. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-3-3: INSPECTION OF WORK:
Upon the completion of the installation or alteration of plumbing equipment, it
shall be the duty of the person installing or altering the same to notify the
plumbing inspector, who shall inspect the work within forty eight (48) hours,
exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, after such notice is given, and if
such plumbing equipment is found to be in full accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and does not constitute a hazard to life and property, he shall
make a record of such inspection and issue a certificate of approval if and as
required elsewhere herein. All plumbing not exposed to view or that is to
become hidden, shall be inspected within forty eight (48) hours after notice is
received, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, before such plumbing is
concealed. (Ord. 545, 10-26-1994)
4-3-4: COMPLIANCE WITH ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE:
No certificate of approval shall be issued unless the plumbing equipment is in
strict compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the statutes of the
state, specifically the Illinois plumbing code. (Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-3-5: RECORDS AND REPORTS TO VILLAGE:
(Rep. by Ord. 707, 12-14-2011)
4-3-6: RIGHT OF INSPECTOR TO INSPECT; DISCONNECT:
The provisions for inspection of work authorized by the permits issued in
accordance herewith shall not be construed as prohibiting the inspection of any
plumbing equipment now or hereafter installed whenever the plumbing inspector
shall determine that public safety requires it. The plumbing inspector shall
have the right during reasonable times or hours to enter any building in the
discharge of his official duties, for the purpose of making any inspections or
tests of the installation or alteration of plumbing equipment contained
therein, and shall have the authority to cause the turning off of all water and
to cut or disconnect any plumbing or sanitary sewer connections where such are
dangerous to life or property, or may interfere with the work of the fire
department. (Ord. 545, 10-26-1994)
4-3-7: PLANS TO BE SUBMITTED:
Plans shall be submitted by architects, engineers or the owner and approval
obtained from the plumbing inspector before any work is started pertaining to
the plumbing installation in or on any new building or project covered by these
rules. Residences, or remodeling work within or on existing buildings or
projects is not covered by this section except where the work is of such extent
as to require plans to be drafted. Approval under this section will not
constitute a permit, which must be obtained by the contractor making the
installation. (Ord. 545, 10-26-1994)
4-3-8: FINAL INSPECTION; CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
Final inspection and certificate of approval by the plumbing inspector shall be
required on plumbing in or on all buildings or projects before the same are to
be connected to the supply lines of the public utility, excepting approval may
be given on a completed service and certain stipulated temporary or part time
services where required for heat and for construction purposes. Such temporary
connections are subject to cutoff without notice for any violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 545, 10-26-1994)
4-3-9: PERMIT; FEES:
Before any plumbing work is started in or on any building or project, a permit
must be secured from the plumbing inspector. The fee for such permit and
subsequent inspection shall be in accordance with the fee schedule on file with
the village clerk. (Ord. 701B, 4-23-2014)
4-3-10: ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted for the village, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property due to health
hazards that certain code known as the Illinois plumbing code promulgated by
the Illinois department of public health. (Ord. 545, 10-26-1994)
4-3-11: VIOLATION:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each offense nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), and each day that the offense
continues or remains uncorrected, shall be deemed a separate offense and upon
conviction, shall be fined accordingly. However, the conviction and fining of
any violator shall not be deemed a permit to continue the violation or
condition or practice complained of as being contrary to this chapter. (Ord.
575-A, 1-23-2002)
4-3-12: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing herein shall prevent an application for injunctive relief, nor shall
the selection of one method in any way preclude the use of the other remedy.
(Ord. 545, 10-26-1994)
CHAPTER 4
FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Prohibited Acts
4-4-3: Fair Housing Board
4-4-4: Duties of the Fair Housing Board
4-4-5: Procedures
4-4-6: Penalty
4-4-7: Remedies
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed:
   DISCRIMINATE: The term "discriminate" includes difference in treatment in
the sale, lease, rental, or financing of housing accommodations because of the
race, color, creed, religion, religious beliefs or national origin.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: The term "housing accommodation" shall mean and
include any building, structure, or portion thereof which is used or occupied,
or is maintained, arranged, or designated or designed to be used or occupied as
a home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings.
   DWELLING: The word "dwelling" shall mean any building or structure, or
portion thereof, within this Village, which is arranged, designed or used as a
home, residence or living quarters, or sleeping place of one or more human
beings.
   HOUSING: The word "housing" shall mean any building or structure, or portion
thereof designed, intended, arranged or designed to be used as or occupied as a
home, residence, living quarters or sleeping place of one or more human beings.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER: The term "real estate broker" shall mean any real estate
broker or agent thereof or who exercises any function of a real estate broker
within the Village.
   LENDING INSTITUTION: The term "lending institution" shall mean any bank,
insurance company, savings and loan association or person in the business of
lending money or guaranteeing loans, or any person in the business of
obtaining, arranging or negotiating loans or guarantees as an agent or broker,
or any person in the business of buying or selling of loans or instruments for
the payment of money which is secured by title to or a security interest in
real estate.
   OWNER: The word "owner" shall mean any person who holds legal or equitable
title to, or an beneficial interest in, any dwelling or housing, or to any
legal or equitable title to shares of, or any beneficial interest in, any real
estate cooperative which owns any dwelling or housing. (Ord. 328, 7-17-68)
4-4-2: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall be an unfair housing practice and unlawful for any real estate broker,
lending institution, owner, or person as herein defined to commit any of the
following act or acts prohibited because of or due to race, color, creed,
religion, religious beliefs or national origin:
   (A)   Refuse to show, sell, lease or rent any dwelling or housing solely
because of race, color, creed, religion, religious beliefs or national origin.
   (B)   Make any discriminations distinction or restriction against any
purchaser lessee in the showing, price, terms, conditions or privileges
relating to the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling or housing, or
in the furnishing of any facilities or services in connection therewith.
   (C)   Cause any written or oral inquiry or record to be made concerning such
prohibited acts, or a person seeking to purchase, rent or lease any dwelling or
housing.
   (D)   Publish, circulate, issue or display, or cause to be published,
circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement,
sign, or other writing of any kind relating to the sale, rental or leasing of
any housing accommodation within the Village, which will indicate or express
any limitation or discrimination in the sale, rental or leasing of such housing
accommodation, of any prospective buyer, leasee or renter of such property.
   (E)   To solicit for sale, lease, or listing for sale or lease, of any
housing accommodations within this Village on the loss of value due to the
present or prospective entry into the neighborhood of any person or persons of
any particular race, color, creed, religion, religious beliefs or national
origin.
   (F)   Distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements
designed to induce any owner of any housing accommodation to sell or lease his
property.
   (G)   Discriminate or to participate in discrimination in connection with
borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodation in the Village.
   (H)   To exploit or overcharge any person for housing accommodations within
this Village.
   (I)   To deliberately refuse examination of copies of listing of a
residential property or real estate within this Village, or to accept and enter
into any limitation in such listing for causes above mentioned. (Ord. 328, 7-
17-68)
4-4-3: FAIR HOUSING BOARD:
There is hereby created a Fair Housing Board which shall be appointed by the
President, and shall consist of five (5) members to be approved by the Board of
Trustees. The President shall designate one of its members to be Chairman. Any
three (3) members of said Board shall constitute a quorum. The term of office
of each member shall be for three (3) years, or until his successor is
appointed and qualified. The President shall designate which of the two (2)
first appointed shall serve for two (2) year terms, and the remaining members,
including the Chairman, shall be appointed for three (3) year terms.
Thereafter, appointments shall be for the full three (3) year terms or for
unexpired terms in event of vacancy. (Ord. 328, 7-17-68)
4-4-4: DUTIES OF THE FAIR HOUSING BOARD:
It shall be the duty of the Fair Housing Board to:
   (A)   Act to eliminate discriminatory practices as specified in Section
4-4-2 of this Chapter, and to initiate or receive and investigate complaints
charging unlawful housing practices;
   (B)   Seek conciliation of such complaints, hold public hearings, make
findings of fact, issue orders and publish its findings of fact and orders in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter;
   (C)   Render, from time to time, but not less than every three (3) months, a
written report of its activities and recommendations with respect to fair
housing practices, to the President and Village Board, and
   (D)   Adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carryout the
purposes of this Chapter and the orderly handling of its business and duties.
(Ord. 328, 7-17-68)
4-4-5: PROCEDURES:
Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of the provisions of this
Chapter shall file a written complaint setting forth his grievance. Complaints
may be filed with the Fair Housing Board by leaving the same with the Clerk.
Each complaint shall set forth the name and address of the complainant,
together with his telephone number; the name and address of the person against
whom the complaint is brought and it shall state in detail the alleged facts
surrounding the alleged violation of this Chapter. The Fair Housing Board shall
provide a printed form of complaint for use by any aggrieved citizen, and such
forms shall be made conveniently available at the office of the Clerk. Any
complaint shall be filed, as aforesaid, within ninety (90) days after the
alleged unfair housing practice occurred, or it shall be barred.
After the filing of any complaint, the Chairman of the Fair Housing Board shall
designate two (2) members of said Board to make a prompt investigation in
connection therewith; and if such members shall determine after such
investigation, that probable cause exists for crediting the allegations of the
complaint, they shall immediately endeavor to eliminate the unlawful
discriminatory practice complained of by conference, conciliation and
persuasion. In case of a determination that probable cause does not exist, the
fair housing board shall make written findings of fact and shall send copies
thereof to the complainant and the accused within twenty (20) days from the
date of such finding. If attempts at conciliation are not successful within
thirty (30) days after filing of the complaint, the board shall then proceed
promptly to a full hearing of the complaint.
In case of the failure to so eliminate such unfair practice, or in advance
thereof, if in the judgment of the fair housing board the circumstances so
warrant, they may cause to be issued and served in the name of the fair housing
board, a written notice together with a copy of such complaint, to all parties,
of a full hearing on the complaint at a time and place to be specified in such
notice. The notice shall be served on all parties not less than seven (7) days
before the time set for public hearing. The public hearing shall be held not
later than forty five (45) days from the date of the filing of the complaint. A
copy of the notice of public hearing shall be furnished the local press.
The accused shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint, to appear
at the hearing in person and/or to be represented by counsel, and to examine
witnesses and submit testimony. The complainant shall present testimony in
person and such evidence as he deems or is pertinent. He too, may be
represented by counsel.
The fair housing board shall conduct all hearings, but shall not be bound by
the strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity. The fair
housing board shall have full power to subpoena witnesses and pertinent
documents, which power may be enforced by said board by proper petition to the
circuit court of the tenth judicial circuit at Tazewell County, Illinois. The
board, aforesaid, shall have power to administer oaths and to take sworn
testimony. At the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall render a written
report and recommendations, within ten (10) days, which shall be served by mail
upon the parties. Hearings may be continued from time to time, but shall be
heard and concluded within sixty (60) days from the date of the first hearing.
(Ord. 328, 7-17-1968)
4-4-6: PENALTY:
If upon the due consideration of all evidence produced at the hearing, the fair
housing board finds that the person against whom the complaint has been filed,
has engaged in or is engaging in an unfair housing practice, as defined in this
chapter, the board shall state its finding of fact and shall issue and cause to
be served upon such person an order requiring such person or the accused to
cease and desist from such unfair housing practice and it shall take such
affirmative or other action as in the judgment of said fair housing board, will
effectuate the purposes of this chapter, including the requirement of a report
of the manner of compliance. Said board shall retain jurisdiction of the case
until it is satisfied that the accused has complied with the order. In the
event that said board determines that the accused has not complied with its
orders, it shall be empowered to recommend to the village board for authority
to have the village attorney do any one of the following:
   (A)   Institute and prosecute proceedings to enforce against the accused
found guilty of the violation of this chapter a fine as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction:
      1.   For an order restraining such person from violating any provision of
this chapter.
      2.   For such other or further relief as may seem to the court
appropriate for the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of
violation hereof.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may, upon
conviction thereof be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) plus costs and each day the
violation continues shall be a separate offense and subject to fine for each
said violation, separately. However, such fine shall not be a limitation upon
nor a consent or prevention to also use one or more of the other remedies
available hereunder. (Ord. 575-A, 1-23-2002)
4-4-7: REMEDIES:
Any person aggrieved by the violation of any provision of this chapter who has
exhausted the remedies provided for in this chapter may apply to any court of
competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violation, including:
   (A)   An order compelling compliance with this chapter;
   (B)   An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have violated
any provision of this chapter for the sale, lease, exchange, transfer,
conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing which is subject to such
violation;
   (C)   An order requiring specific performance of any contract for the sale,
lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance or assignment of any dwelling or housing
by any person who is violating this chapter or has violated this chapter or
refuses to perform for one of the reasons herein prohibited as an unfair
practice;
   (D)   Compensatory damages; and
   (E)   Such other and further relief as may seem to the court appropriate for
the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of the violation hereof.
(Ord. 328, 7-17-1968)
CHAPTER 5
UNSAFE OR DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-5-1: Dangerous Buildings Generally
4-5-2: Definition Of Dangerous Buildings
4-5-3: Enforcement Power
4-5-4: Notice Of Unsafe Condition Of Buildings; Means Of Service
4-5-5: Lis Pendens
4-5-6: Placarding Of Building Or Structure
4-5-7: Demolition Lien; Personal Judgment
4-5-8: Nuisance Structures
4-5-9: Pests And Unsanitary Conditions
4-5-1: DANGEROUS BUILDINGS GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any
building or structure or part thereof in any unsafe or dangerous condition. The
word "building", as used in this section, shall describe any walled or roofed
structure including mobile homes, commercial establishments, dwellings and any
accessory structures. (Ord. 554, 10-9-1996)
4-5-2: DEFINITION OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS:
For the purpose of this chapter, any building or structure which has any of the
following defects or is in any of the conditions hereinafter described shall be
deemed a "dangerous building" and any conditions hereinafter described shall be
deemed unsafe:
   (A)   Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe
and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic for all persons housed or
assembled therein who would be required to or might use such door, aisle,
passageway, stairway or other means of exit.
   (B)   Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by wind, flood, fire or
by any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability
thereof is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and is less than
the minimum requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to
fail or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure
persons or damage property.
   (D)   Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that walls
or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is
required in the case of new construction.
   (E)   Whenever any building or structure or any part thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the
removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of
supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to
partially or completely collapse; or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning is likely to fall or give away.
   (F)   Whenever for any reason whatsoever, the building or structure or any
portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.
   (G)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind
or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an
attractive nuisance to children who might play in or about the building
structure to their danger.
   (H)   Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind
or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to afford a harbor
for trespassers, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of
committing a nuisance or unlawful acts.
   (I)   Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty
construction or arrangement is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation and is
likely to cause injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living
within.
   (J)   Whenever a building or structure is infested with rodents, insects,
pests or other vermin; or is likely to cause sickness or disease when so
determined by the building inspector or code enforcement officer of the
village.
   (K)   Whenever any building shall become vacant, dilapidated or open at door
or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or
accessible to entrance by trespassers.
   (L)   Whenever a building or structure is deemed a nuisance by Section
4-5-8 of this Chapter and the structure or building has been secured by the
owner or his agents by covering up the windows and exits with lumber or
materials other than glazing materials for a period of thirty (30) days or
more, thereby causing a blighting influence on a neighborhood. (Ord. 554, 10-9-
1996)
4-5-3: ENFORCEMENT POWER:
   (A)   The Building Inspector or code official or his designate shall have
full power to pass any question arising under the provisions of this Section,
subject to the conditions, modifications and limitations contained in this
Chapter.
   (B)   The Building Inspector or code official or his designate is hereby
authorized to demolish or repair or cause the demolition or repair of dangerous
buildings or uncompleted buildings or abandoned buildings within the
territorial limits of the Village.
   (C)   The Building Inspector or code official is further authorized, when
removing or causing the demolition of a dangerous building, uncompleted
building or abandoned building from a lot, to remove all private sidewalks,
fences, concrete foundations and driveways located on the lot with such
building. (Ord. 554, 10-9-1996)
4-5-4: NOTICE OF UNSAFE CONDITION OF BUILDINGS; MEANS OF SERVICE:
   (A)   When a building or structure within the Village is found to be a
"dangerous building" or contains an unsafe condition, the Building Inspector
shall issue and serve a notice thereof upon all owners of record or persons
having an interest therein as shown by documents recorded in the office of the
County Recorder of Deeds and upon persons in apparent possession of the
premises.
   (B)   The notice shall briefly and concisely specify the conditions and
factors of the building or structure which render it dangerous or unsafe. The
notice shall further specify that the owners make the building safe (by
complete elimination of any unsafe conditions) or commence demolition at
owner's costs within fifteen (15) days of such notice. The notice shall further
specify that:
      1.   Demolition shall commence no later than fifteen (15) days of such
notice, and
      2.   A date of completion of demolition.
The date for completion shall be reasonably set in light of the nature of the
building, weather conditions, and other related factors. The fifteen (15) day
time period shall commence upon receipt of the notice.
   (C)   The notice authorized by this Section shall be served by either
personal service or by certified mail with return receipt. Personal service may
be made by either the Building Inspector or a police officer of the Village.
   (D)   Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner
or owners of any such building, including the lienholders of record, is not
ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name such real
estate was last assessed for general real estate taxes is sufficient notice
under this Section.
   (E)   In the event the owner fails to comply with any time period set forth
in the notice, the Corporation Counsel is authorized to commence a civil action
in the Circuit Court of the County seeking a court order authorizing demolition
or repair of the building or structure subject to the notice provided by this
Section and to create the lien described in Section
4-5-7 of this Chapter. It shall not be a defense to this cause of action that
the building is boarded up or otherwise enclosed. It further shall not be a
defense that the building is put in a safe condition during the pendency of the
civil action.
   (F)   Joined as defendants in such cause shall be the owner of record and
other parties having an interest in the property as shown by documents recorded
in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds on the date of the filing of the
complaint for demolition. (Ord. 554, 10-9-1996)
4-5-5: LIS PENDENS:
Upon the commencement of the civil action set forth in Section
4-5-4 of this Chapter, a lis pendens designating the property upon which the
subject building is located shall be filed with the Recorder of Deeds. Failure
to file or the improper filing of the lis pendens does not, however, affect the
civil action for demolition. Any person obtaining or recording in such office
an interest in the property after such filing may become party to the civil
action only if he intervenes by order of the court. (Ord. 554, 10-9-1996)
4-5-6: PLACARDING OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
   (A)   Whenever any dwelling or building has been designated a dangerous
building or contains unsafe conditions, the building inspector shall placard
the building indicating that the condition is dangerous and unsafe. It shall be
unlawful for any person to rent, cause to rent, to occupy or allow another to
occupy premises, knowing that such premises has been designated a dangerous
building.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, cause to remove or
cover up in any way any placard designating a building or structure a
"dangerous building". A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00), and each day such violation continues shall be a
separate offense. (Ord. 575-A, 1-23-2002)
4-5-7: DEMOLITION LIEN; PERSONAL JUDGMENT:
   (A)   The cost of demolition or repair incurred by the village, including
court costs, attorney fees and other costs related to the enforcement of this
chapter is recoverable from the owner or owners of the real estate and is a
lien thereon, which lien shall be superior to all prior existing liens and
encumbrances, except taxes; provided, however, that within sixty (60) days
after completion of the demolition or repair, the corporation counsel shall
file a notice of lien for the cost and expense incurred by the village, in the
office of the recorder of deeds of the county. Upon payment of such cost of
demolition by the owner or any person who has an interest in the property, the
lien shall be released by the corporation counsel.
   (B)   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in cases of
mortgages or mechanic's liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced
by the corporation counsel within three (3) years after the date of filing of
notice of lien.
   (C)   If payment of the village's cost of demolition is not paid to the
village within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the notice of lien, the
village attorney may commence proceedings in the circuit court seeking a
personal judgment from the owner of the subject property at the time the
complaint for demolition was filed with the circuit clerk in the amount of such
costs. The action authorized by this subsection shall be in addition to, and
without waive of, any other remedies. (Ord. 554, 10-9-1996)
4-5-8: NUISANCE STRUCTURES:
   (A)   Any unsafe, dilapidated or abandoned building, house, barn or other
structure situated within the limits of the village is, and the same is hereby
declared to be, a nuisance.
   (B)   If any such building or other structure is being constructed, altered,
enlarged or repaired and the building permit issued for such building or
structure expires or is revoked by the building inspector then that building or
structure shall remain a declared nuisance. (Ord. 554, 10-9-1996)
4-5-9: PESTS AND UNSANITARY CONDITIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent to keep or maintain any
building or structure, including, without limitation, every rooming house,
sleeping room facility, dormitory, hotel, motel, single-family resident,
commercial property or otherwise, in a condition exhibiting an unsanitary
nature, and it shall be the responsibility of each such owner or operator to
dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in proper
secure facilities for disposal which are safe and sanitary.
   (B)   Every occupant of a single-family dwelling or other structure within
the village shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents,
or other pests within the structure or in the yard. In a two-family dwelling or
multi-family dwelling, the occupant shall be responsible for such extermination
whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. When, however, infestation
is caused by failure of the owner or operator to maintain a dwelling in a
rodentproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner
or operator.
   (C)   Every owner or operator shall be responsible for extermination of any
insects, rodents or other pests whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more
of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public areas of any
two-family dwelling or any multi-family dwelling.
   (D)   Every owner or operator of a rooming house, sleeping room facility,
dormitory, or motel shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects,
rodents or other pests in it or in the yard.
   (E)   Any owner of any dog, cat or other domesticated animal shall maintain
any outside kennels and/or feeding areas in a neat and sanitary manner. No
person shall maintain their property in such a condition so as to draw rats,
rodents, insects or other pests to the location of any such dog kennel or
feeding area, and all such food supplies for such animals shall be maintained
in such a manner as to be protected from access of such rodents and other
pests. (Ord. 624, 10-13-2004)
CHAPTER 6
VACANT AND NEGLECTED STRUCTURES AND PROPERTIES
SECTION:
4-6-1: Scope
4-6-2: Intent
4-6-3: Other Laws, Codes, Ordinances, And Regulations
4-6-4: Definitions
4-6-5: Obligation To Submit A Plan To Avoid Demolition Action
4-6-6: Fifteen Day Notice
4-6-7: Vacant Building Plan
4-6-8: Violations And Penalties
4-6-1: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to all vacant buildings and properties in the village
of Creve Coeur now existing or hereafter becoming vacant. (Ord. 759A, 12-9-
2015)
4-6-2: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare by requiring responsible parties to implement a maintenance plan for
such vacant structures and properties to remedy any public nuisance, prevent
deterioration, unsightly blight and consequent adverse impact on the value of
nearby property. This chapter shall be construed liberally and justly to affect
its purposes. (Ord. 759A, 12-9-2015)
4-6-3: OTHER LAWS, CODES, ORDINANCES, AND REGULATIONS:
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws,
codes, ordinances, and regulations which prescribe standards other than are
provided herein, and in the event of conflict, the most restrictive shall
apply. (Ord. 759A, 12-9-2015)
4-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS: The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, and the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, tree
branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, and
dust and other similar materials.
   MAINTENANCE: Acts of repair and other acts to prevent a decline in the
condition of grounds, structures, and equipment; such that the condition does
not fall below the standards established by this code and other applicable
statutes, codes and ordinances.
   OCCUPANT: Any persons living and/or sleeping in a structure or having
possession of a space within a building.
   OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care, or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm, or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON: Includes a corporation or copartnership as well as an individual.
   PREMISES: A lot, plot, or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon.
   PUBLIC NUISANCES: Include the following:
   (A)   The physical condition, or uses of any premises, regarded as a public
nuisance at common law;
   (B)   Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including, but not
limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, and unsafe fences
or structures;
   (C)   Any premises which has unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities;
   (D)   Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use;
   (E)   Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or
manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb, or property;
   (F)   Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish or
garbage or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
   (G)   Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; open or vacant and the doors,
windows, or other openings are boarded up or secured, by any means other than
conventional methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new
construction of similar type; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide
shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near
the premises.
   RENOVATION: A building and its facilities made to conform to present day
minimum standards of sanitation, fire and life safety.
   STRUCTURE: Any building built for the support, shelter or enclosure of a
person's animals, chattels, or movable property of any kind and which is
permanently affixed to the ground.
   VACANT AND NEGLECTED: Empty or not occupied on a regular basis by an
occupant or not used by a person on a regular basis for the usual and customary
purposes for which a building is designated and lawfully permitted, or not
maintained in a safe and livable condition. (Ord. 759A, 12-9-2015)
4-6-5: OBLIGATION TO SUBMIT A PLAN TO AVOID DEMOLITION ACTION:
Whenever any structure or property in the village is vacant and such structure
or property contains one or more of the public nuisances described in this
chapter, then the owner of such building shall, within fifteen (15) days of
notification, contact the village's building inspector to develop a vacant
structure/property plan.
If the property owner does not contact the village's building inspector, the
village will proceed with a demolition action pursuant to the Illinois
municipal code, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5-11-31-1. (Ord. 759A, 12-9-2015)
4-6-6: FIFTEEN DAY NOTICE:
The building inspector or other officer of the village shall direct the
village's legal counsel to prepare a fifteen (15) day notice to the owners of
the property of record and all lienholders of the offender property. The
fifteen (15) day notice shall be sent via certified mail, return receipt
requested and shall detail the nuisances complained of, violations of the
building codes that are apparent as well as that the owners of the property may
avoid substantial fees and court costs if they meet with the village's building
inspector and shall, together, develop a vacant structure/property plan. If a
plan cannot be agreed upon, the village will continue with a demolition action.
The development of a vacant building plan with the building inspector will stay
the prosecution of the demolition action as long as the vacant building plan is
adhered to by the parties. (Ord. 759A, 12-9-2015)
4-6-7: VACANT BUILDING PLAN:
A vacant building plan, when submitted shall contain the following:
   (A)   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which
are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction of
similar type. The proposed repair shall result in openings secured by
conventional methods used in the design of the building or by methods permitted
for new construction of similar type.
   (B)   For buildings and premises thereof which are identified as being or
containing public nuisances, the vacant building plan shall contain a plan of
action to remedy such public nuisance(s).
   (C)   For each required plan, a time schedule shall be submitted identifying
a date of commencement of repair and date of completion of repair for each
improperly secured opening and identified nuisance.
   (D)   When the owner proposes to demolish the vacant building, then the
owner shall submit a plan and time schedule for such demolition.
   (E)   A plan of action to maintain the building and premises thereof in
conformance with this chapter.
   (F)   All plans will comply with the following maintenance requirements in
addition to all other village code provisions:
      1.   Motor Vehicles: An owner of a vacant building and premises thereof
shall not permit an inoperable, partially dismantled, wrecked, junked,
discarded, abandoned or unlicensed motor vehicle to remain on the premises,
unless such vehicle is in an enclosed building or unless permitted as part of
an approved vacant building plan.
      2.   Boarding Up: No window, door, or other opening shall be boarded up
or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional methods used in the
design of the building or otherwise permitted for new construction of similar
type for a period in excess of thirty (30) days unless authorized pursuant to
an approved vacant building plan.
      3.   Weather Coating: Any exterior surface which has previously been
treated with a weather coating material such as paint or stain shall be
maintained in good condition free from faded or peeling paint or other coating
material.
      4.   Lighting: All exterior lighting fixtures shall be maintained in good
repair, and illumination shall be provided to the building and all walkways in
the same manner as provided at the time the building was last occupied or as
otherwise provided in the approved vacant building plan. (Ord. 759A, 12-9-2015)
4-6-8: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates their own vacant building plan, who refuses to or
neglects to submit a vacant building plan, or who refuses to agree to a
schedule that will bring a building fully code compliant in a timely manner
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and fines will increase
daily until the seven hundred fifty dollar ($750.00) per day maximum is
reached. The village's building inspector is specifically permitted (in
addition to the Creve Coeur police department or code enforcement officer) to
issue ordinance violations of this chapter. (Ord. 759A, 12-9-2015)
CHAPTER 7
SWIMMING POOLS AND SPAS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Permits And Inspections Required For Swimming Pools Or Spas
4-7-2: Requirements Of Construction Of Pools/Spas
4-7-1: PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS REQUIRED FOR SWIMMING POOLS OR SPAS:
   (A)   Inspections Of Pools/Spas With Over Twenty Four Inches Performed At
Least Once Every Five Years: Inspections of existing swimming pools (above
ground or in-ground) or spas that contain more than twenty four inches (24")
(2') of water are required in the Village of Creve Coeur to make sure that all
safety requirements, cover and fencing requirements (as found at subsection
10-4-6(F) of this Code), electrical and plumbing requirements and Building Code
requirements are met.
      1.   Cost of inspection is twenty dollars ($20.00).
      2.   Village will notify property owner via first class mail of an annual
inspection date at least two (2) weeks prior to the inspection.
      3.   For a pool/spa to meet inspection requirements it must:
         (a)   Contain water suitable for swimming/bathing that is not
stagnant.
         (b)   Contain proper fencing or enclosures and required at subsection
10-4-6(F) of this Code.
         (c)   All electrical work must meet Code requirements.
         (d)   The pool/spa must hold water and not leak as to create a run off
hazard.
      4.   Property owners who do not allow or avoid inspection are assumed to
have failed and will be cited pursuant to subsection (A)5 of this section.
      5.   Swimming pools or spas that do not pass inspection are determined to
be a nuisance per se, and will be cited as such as detailed in section
7-3-1 et seq., of this Code.
   (B)   Pool/Spa Building Permits Required Prior To Construction Of Pools/Spas
With Over Thirty Six Inches (3 Feet) Of Water: A building permit is required
prior to the construction of a swimming pool (above ground or in ground) or spa
that contains water over thirty six inches (36") (3') deep.
      1.   An application for a permit shall be filed with the building
inspector which shall contain:
         (a)   The contractor's name, address, and phone number and license
number if a contractor is being used.
         (b)   One set of drawing showing the construction details of the
swimming pool/spa that details:
            (1)   Filter and heating equipment.
            (2)   Diving boards and slides.
            (3)   Any other applicable equipment.
            (4)   Electric plan.
            (5)   Location, height and type of fence or enclosure to be used to
comply with the fencing requirements of subsection
10-4-6(F) of this Code.
         (c)   One up to date copy of the plat of survey showing everything
currently on the property and the location of the swimming pool/spa drawn to
scale and indicate the location of:
            (1)   The pool or spa.
            (2)   Path of electric service to the house.
            (3)   No pool or spa shall be placed closer than five feet (5')
from the lot line or be located in an easement.
      2.   The building inspector will review and approve or deny the permit
within ten (10) working days and will call you when the permit is ready to be
picked up.
   (C)   Permit Fees:
      1.   Twenty dollars ($20.00) paid when the permit is picked up.
      2.   Twenty dollars ($20.00) to be paid prior to re-inspection if any
portion of the pool/spa fails the first inspection.
      3.   Cost of the permit is double ($40.00) in the event that construction
started before a permit was obtained.
   (D)   Permit Duration: A building permit to build a pool/spa is good for
sixty (60) days. (Ord. 836A, 7-26-2017)
4-7-2: REQUIREMENTS OF CONSTRUCTION OF POOLS/SPAS:
   (A)   Plans And Permit On Site: Village approved plans and permit must be on
the job site at all times.
   (B)   Construction Requirements:
      1.   A construction barrier is necessary to protect the area during
construction.
      2.   If a pool heater is installed, the gas company will be required to
confirm that the existing gas meter and service is sufficient for the added
demand.
      3.   Pool heaters shall be equipped with a readily accessible on- off
switch to allow shutting off the heater without adjusting the thermostat
setting.
      4.   Pool heaters fired by natural gas shall not have a continuously
burning pilot light.
      5.   Time switches that can automatically turn off and on heaters and
pumps according to a preset schedule shall be installed on swimming pool
heaters and pumps.
      6.   All electrical work must be hard wired and to code. The electrical
requirements are based on the Electrical Codes adopted by the Village's
electrical inspector (a copy of the codes adopted is on file with the Village
Clerk).
      7.   All excavated soil must be hauled offsite.
   (C)   Inspection: Inspections will be required as the project progresses.
Each inspection must be scheduled with the building inspector or electrical
inspector who must be given at least twenty four (24) hours' notice when
scheduling:
      1.   Fence.
      2.   Underground electric.
      3.   Concrete wall/slab.
      4.   Final inspection. (Ord. 836A, 7-26-2017)
CHAPTER 8
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
4-8-1: Scope of Chapter
4-8-2: Definitions
4-8-3: Compliance Required
4-8-4: Minimum Occupancy Requirements
4-8-5: Water Line Connections
4-8-6: Electrical
4-8-7: Utilities
4-8-8: Right of City Inspectors to Enter Buildings
4-8-9: Right of Owner to Enter Buildings to Make Repairs
4-8-10: Effect of Chapter on Other Regulations
4-8-1: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter is applicable to occupancy for residential purposes of any
building or structure, altered or converted so as to be occupied for
residential purposes. The requirements imposed by this chapter shall be in
addition to the other applicable requirements for existing buildings imposed by
this code. (Ord. 931, 4-28-2021)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
 
                   Any building or structure which is wholly or partly used or
DWELLING:          intended to be used for living or sleeping by human
                   occupants; provided, that temporary housing as hereinafter
                   defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
                   Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
DWELLING UNIT:     forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
                   used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking
                   and eating.
                   Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter
                   which is designed to be transportable and which is not
TEMPORARY HOUSING: attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any
                   utilities system on the same premises for more than fifteen
                   (15) consecutive days. (Ord. 931, 4-28-2021)
 
4-8-3: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for occupancy
a dwelling unit, which does not comply with the minimum standards for basic
facilities set forth in this chapter, and such is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. (Ord. 931, 4-28-2021)
4-8-4: MINIMUM OCCUPANCY REQUIREMENTS:
Every dwelling unit shall contain at a minimum:
   (A)   Lavatory Facilities: A room, separate from the habitable rooms, which
affords privacy and which is equipped with a flush water closet in good working
condition.
   (B)   Bathtub Or Shower: A room, separate from the habitable rooms, which
affords privacy to a person in the room and which is equipped with a bathtub or
shower.
   (C)   Sink: A sink in good working condition and properly connected to an
approved water supply system which provides at all times heated and unheated
running water under pressure and which is connected to an approved plumbing and
sewerage system.
   (D)   Electricity: At least two (2) separate floor or wall-type electric
outlets per room capable of receiving and receiving electrical service.
   (E)   Heating: Heating facilities, which are capable of safely and
adequately heating all habitable rooms. Portable heating equipment employing a
flame and heating equipment using gasoline or kerosene do not meet the
standards of this chapter and are prohibited. (Ord. 931, 4-28-2021)
4-8-5: WATER LINE CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   Every sink, lavatory, and bathtub or shower required shall be properly
connected with water lines, which shall be in good working condition and
receiving water service.
   (B)   All plumbing fixtures required by this section shall be properly
connected to an approved water system and to an approved sewerage system.
   (C)   All plumbing shall be so designed and installed as to prevent
contamination of the water supply through backflow or any other method
contamination. (Ord. 931, 4-28-2021)
4-8-6: ELECTRICAL:
Every outlet, fixture, and electrical wiring shall be properly installed and
maintained in good and safe working condition. (Ord. 931, 4-28-2021)
4-8-7: UTILITIES:
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service equipment or utility
which is required by this chapter to be removed, shut off or discontinued for
any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except for such temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
process, or during temporary emergencies. (Ord. 931, 4-28-2021)
4-8-8: RIGHT OF CITY INSPECTORS TO ENTER BUILDINGS:
The Building Inspector or code official or his or her designee, in performing
their duties under this chapter, shall have the power during reasonable hours,
and upon showing of proper identification, to make or cause to be made an entry
into any private building or premises within the Village for the purpose of
making an inspection or test in the discharge of his official duties; provided,
however, that no inspection of an occupied dwelling shall occur without the
consent of a resident, tenant, or lawful occupant residing therein unless an
administrative search warrant is first obtained. (Ord. 931, 4-28-2021)
4-8-9: RIGHT OF OWNER TO ENTER BUILDINGS TO MAKE REPAIRS:
Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or
his agent or employee, access to any part of the premises occupied by him, at
all reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as
are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
931, 4-28-2021)
4-8-10: EFFECT OF CHAPTER ON OTHER REGULATIONS:
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
any provisions of any zoning, building, fire prevention, safety or health
regulation of this code, the provisions which establish the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of health and safety shall prevail. (Ord. 931, 4-
28-2021)
TITLE 5
FIRE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
5-1-1: Department Created
5-1-2: Members; Oath
5-1-3: Appointments
5-1-4: Meetings; Officers; Bond
5-1-5: Treasurer's Duties
5-1-6: Rules And Regulations
5-1-7: Firemen's Powers; Duties
5-1-8: Prohibitions During Fire
5-1-9: Compensation
5-1-10: Fees For Services
5-1-1: DEPARTMENT CREATED:
There is hereby established and organized the fire department of the village
for the prevention and extinguishment of fires. (Ord. 94, 7-20-1938)
5-1-2: MEMBERS; OATH:
The fire department shall consist of a fire department administrative
secretary, a fire chief, assistant fire chief, and not less than twelve (12)
other members. Said fire department administrative secretary, fire chief,
assistant fire chief, and members of the fire department are hereby declared to
be village officers, and shall, before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation:
I do solemnly (swear or affirm, as the case may be) that I will support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of the office of
(Fire Department Administrative Secretary, Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chief, or
Village Fireman, as the case may be) according to the best of my ability.
(Ord. 94-A, 10-11-1989)
The oath or affirmation so subscribed shall be filed with the clerk. The fire
department administrative secretary, fire chief, assistant fire chief and the
firemen shall each be provided with the proper badge of office, and shall have
police powers as hereinafter set forth.
The fire chief shall serve as the liaison to the mayor and village board
regarding fire department matters and in the absence of the fire chief, the
assistant fire chief shall serve as the liaison. The liaison will ensure the
mayor and village board are updated on issues that apply to compliance with all
federal, state and local laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations and safety
measures. (Ord. 704, 4-13-2011)
5-1-3: APPOINTMENTS:
The fire chief, assistant chief, rescue chief, administrative secretary and
other officers/firemen shall be recommended by the members of the fire
department and the mayor and village trustees will act upon such
recommendation. (Ord. 374B, 6-11-1997)
   (A)   Firefighter Training:
      1.   The village of Creve Coeur hereby elects to participate in the
program provided for in the Illinois fire protection training act.
      2.   Before an individual may commence service as a firefighter, he/she
must have been certified by the Illinois state fire marshal as a firefighter
II, as having successfully completed an approved training course as provided in
said act.
      3.   The firefighter II certification must be completed by the trainee
within his/her probationary period of twenty four (24) months. Failure of any
trainee to complete such basic training and certification within the required
period will render that individual and local governmental agency ineligible for
reimbursement funding for basic training for that individual in the fiscal year
in which his/her probationary period ends. The individual may later become
certified without reimbursement. (Ord. 647, 10-24-2007)
5-1-4: MEETINGS; OFFICERS; BOND:
The fire chief and firemen of the fire department shall hold a meeting for the
election of a treasurer and such other officers as may be necessary for the
proper organization of said department. Such election shall be held on the
fourth Monday in May of each year and said treasurer and other elective
officers shall hold office for a term of one year and until their successors
are elected and qualified. The treasurer of such fire department shall give a
bond in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), payable to the village and
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties as such treasurer, which
said bond shall be approved by the president and the board of trustees. (Ord.
94, 7-20-1938)
5-1-5: TREASURER'S DUTIES:
The treasurer of the village shall pay and deliver to the treasurer of the fire
department and take his receipts therefor, all monies received by him from the
two percent (2%) tax on the gross receipts of foreign fire insurance companies.
The treasurer of the fire department shall receive said money and shall pay out
the same only upon the order of said fire department when ordered by a majority
vote at any regular or special meeting thereof and only for the purpose of the
maintenance, use and benefit of such department. (Ord. 94, 7-20-1938)
5-1-6: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The said fire department is hereby empowered to make all necessary rules and
regulations, in respect to the proper maintenance and functioning of said
department and the management of the funds in the hands of its treasurer. (Ord.
94, 7-20-1938)
5-1-7: FIREMEN'S POWERS; DUTIES:
When responding to a bona fide emergency in a personal vehicle, firemen shall
use only a blue oscillating light mounted on the dashboard of their vehicle.
While on duty at fires, firemen shall protect persons and property from injury,
and shall have authority to direct or order spectators to move away from the
scene of immediate danger when necessary to prevent injury to persons or
property or to allow firemen sufficient room for the proper performance of
their duty. Firemen, while attending any fire in the village, shall be vested
with police powers and shall have authority to arrest at or near the scene of
any fire, or while responding to any alarm, any person wilfully refusing to
obey any lawful order of the department or any member thereof, or for violating
any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 94A, 6-24-1998)
5-1-8: PROHIBITIONS DURING FIRE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over any fire
hose laying in any street or alley, or to touch any fire apparatus without
authority from a fireman on duty or from a member of the village board. (Ord.
94, 7-20-1938)
   (B)   Upon the sounding of the siren, bell or other warning device used upon
fire apparatus or other vehicles of the fire department, all operators and
drivers of vehicles shall drive their vehicles as near to the right curb or
right side of the street as is reasonably possible and shall remain standing or
parked at such right side until such fire apparatus has passed. It shall be
unlawful for the driver or operator of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow any fire apparatus responding to a fire alarm, closer than
four hundred feet (400'), or to park any vehicle within three hundred feet
(300') of the place where the fire apparatus has stopped in response to a fire
alarm. (Ord. 152, 4-17-1946)
5-1-9: COMPENSATION:
   Members of the village of Creve Coeur volunteer fire department shall be
compensated in amounts determined by the Mayor and Village Trustees, as amended
from time to time.
   The fire chief shall receive such sums as the Mayor and Village Trustees
shall determine, except when absent from the community, in which event, the
fire chief’s compensation shall be paid to the officer designated to perform
the fire chief’s work during his absence.
   Between the first day and the tenth day of each month, the fire chief shall
prepare and certify over his signature a list of all fires or fire calls which
have occurred during that previous month, together with a list of all members
of the fire department, showing the fires or fire calls to which said members
responded; and also a final computation as to the amount due to each member
during the previous month.
   Said fire chief shall deliver said list so certified by him to the president
between the first and the tenth day of each month, who shall present said
certified list to the board of trustees for the audit and approval of the same
at the first meeting of said president and board of trustees following the
receipt of said list.
   In the event of the absence or disability of the Fire Chief, the Assistant
Fire Chief shall prepare and deliver said certified list to the Village
President, and in the event of the absence or disability of the President, said
certified list may be deposited with the Clerk for presentation to the Board of
Trustees.
(Ord. 745, 4-24-2013; amd. Ord. 960, 8-10-2022)
5-1-10: FEES FOR SERVICES:
   (A)   Vehicle Fires: When emergency response services are rendered by the
Village of Creve Coeur Fire Department for a fire in a vehicle owned by any
person, business or entity who is not a resident of the Village of Creve Coeur,
Illinois, there shall be a charge for fire protection services to the owner of
the vehicle of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00).
   (B)   Extrication From Vehicles: When emergency response services are
rendered by the Village of Creve Coeur Fire Department for extrication of any
person who is not a resident of the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois, from any
vehicle and the owner of the vehicle is a person, business or other entity who
is not a resident of the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois, there shall be a
charge for extrication services of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per
person extricated. The person extricated and the owner of the vehicle shall be
jointly liable for the amount due.
   (C)   Unnecessary Non-Emergency Public Assist: Should any individual request
emergency medical services via an ambulance or paramedic service through
dialing 911, and receive no medical service and also, subsequently, refuse
medical transport, then said individual will be billed at a rate of seventy
five dollars ($75.00) per occurrence. (Ord. 851, 4-11-2018)
CHAPTER 2
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Definitions
5-2-2: Permits
5-2-3: Searches And Seizures; Forfeiture; Destruction
5-2-4: Violations
5-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the term "fireworks" shall be defined as follows:
The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a viable or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include toy
cannons, in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets,
roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks
containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing
any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual
effects; provided, however, that the term "fireworks" shall not include snake
or glowworm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers",
"booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads" and "auto burglar
alarms"; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which
paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of
explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that the hand
cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy
pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20)
grain of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all
times. (Ord. 553, 8-14-1996)
5-2-2: PERMITS:
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly possess, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or
explode any fireworks. Every such display shall be handled by a competent
individual and shall be of such a character and so located, discharged or fired
as not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
Application for permits shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of the date of the sale, use or display and action shall be taken on
such application within forty eight (48) hours after such application is made.
After such privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession, use and
distribution of fireworks shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit
granted hereunder shall be transferable. No permit shall be required, under the
provisions of this act, for supervised public displays by state or county,
village or fair associations.
   (B)   A bond is required from the licensee in a sum not less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned on compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and the regulations of the state fire marshal.
   (C)   A permit shall be issued only after payment of the permit fee and
inspection of the sale or display site by the village police chief, or his
designee, to determine that such site shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person or persons. Forms for such application, bond and permit may
be obtained from the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 553, 8-14-1996)
   (D)   The fee for a permit issued pursuant to this chapter is established
annually by the village board and is published in the office of the village
clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
   (E)   The application for permit shall contain the following information:
      1.   Exact location of proposed sale or display.
      2.   Exact location of where the fireworks are to be stored prior to sale
or display.
      3.   The name and address of dealer from whom fireworks shall be
purchased.
      4.   The quantity and type of fireworks to be sold or displayed (gross
weight or by type and number).
      5.   The method by which the fireworks will be transported to the sale or
to the display site.
      6.   The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) responsible
for the sale or display.
      7.   The name, address and telephone number of the official monitor of
the display.
      8.   Whether the person in actual charge of the display is able bodied,
over twenty one (21) years of age, and capable of reading, writing and
understanding the English language.
      9.   A statement that the applicant has received all necessary federal
permits.
      10.   The names, addresses, telephone numbers and ages of the display
installation and ignition personnel.
      11.   A statement whether police and fire personnel and equipment, and a
first aid station, will be on hand at each display in the event of an accident.
(Ord. 553, 8-14-1996)
5-2-3: SEARCHES AND SEIZURES; FORFEITURE; DESTRUCTION:
Whenever any village officer or a member of the board of trustees has reason to
believe that any violation of this chapter has occurred within the jurisdiction
within which such official is authorized to act and that the person so
violating this chapter has in his possession fireworks or combustibles, such
official may file a complaint in writing, verified by affidavit, with any
circuit court within whose jurisdiction the premises to be searched are
situated, stating the facts upon which such belief is founded, the premises to
be searched, and the property to be seized, and procure a search warrant and
execute the same. Upon the execution of such search warrant, the person
executing the same shall make due return thereof to the court issuing the same,
together with an inventory of the property taken thereunder. The court shall
thereupon issue process against the owner of such property if he be known,
otherwise against the party in whose possession the property so taken was
found, if known. In case of inability to serve such process upon the owner or
the person in possession of the property at the time of its seizure, as
hereinbefore provided, notice of the proceedings before the court shall be
given as required by the statutes of the state governing cases of attachment.
Upon the return of the process duly served or upon the posting or publishing of
notice made, as hereinabove provided, the court shall proceed to determine
whether or not such property so seized was held or possessed in violation of
this chapter. In case of a finding that the fireworks or combustibles seized
were possessed in violation of this chapter, judgment shall be entered
confiscating and forfeiting the property and ordering its destruction. (Ord.
553, 8-14-1996)
5-2-4: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
CHAPTER 3
FIRE HAZARDS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Application
5-3-2: Fire Extinguishers Required
5-3-3: Fire Hazards Prohibited
5-3-4: Life Safety Inspections
5-3-5: Outdoor Fires And Open Burning
5-3-6: Patio Wood Burning Units
5-3-7: Fire Suppression Training
5-3-8: Prescribed Burning
5-3-9: Recreational Or Ceremonial Purposes
5-3-10: Burning Permits
5-3-11: Right Of Entry And Inspection
5-3-12: Liability
5-3-13: Enforcement
5-3-1: APPLICATION:
This chapter and the regulations herein provided shall apply to all property
within the boundaries of the village. (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-2: FIRE EXTINGUISHERS REQUIRED:
The occupant of every building or structure covered by this chapter shall
procure and maintain in good working order on said premises a fire extinguisher
of such capacity and design as has been approved by the department of public
safety of the state or the office of the state fire marshal. (Ord. 643, 6-13-
2007)
5-3-3: FIRE HAZARDS PROHIBITED:
The occupant of every building or structure covered by this chapter shall keep
its chimneys, stoves, furnaces, boilers or heating apparatus used in or about
said building, in a safe and proper condition; such occupant of said building
shall also see that all electrical wiring and apparatus is kept and maintained
in a proper and safe condition, and shall also see that there is no dangerous
fire condition or other fire hazards, such as accumulated paper, ashes or
trash, or overloaded electrical circuits permitted on said premises or in said
building. (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-4: LIFE SAFETY INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department or his appointed
agent, to carefully inspect all business and commercial buildings, all
stations, all public garages, all hotels or public lodging places, including
motels, and all places of public amusement within the village, but not
including any private residence or dwelling house or any private garage at
least once in each year.
If said fire chief or his agent finds that the occupant of any building or
property is permitting or maintaining a dangerous fire condition or fire
hazard, or its occupant is violating any of the provisions of this chapter, he
shall notify such occupant in writing to correct such condition or conditions
without delay, and he shall also make report of the same to the village board.
Any occupant so notified by the chief of the fire department or his agent as to
the existence of any hazardous fire condition or other unsafe condition on said
premises, shall proceed at once to remedy and correct the same without
unnecessary delay. (Ord. 727, 10-24-2012)
5-3-5: OUTDOOR FIRES AND OPEN BURNING:
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall set fire
to or cause or permit to be burned in any yard, lot, street or alley, any
rubbish, garbage, paper or other combustible material unless such material is
confined during combustion to an approved incinerator. For purposes of this
subsection an "approved incinerator" is one which prevents the escape of soot,
cinders, fumes, gases and smoke. Incinerators shall not be permitted on
residential parcels.
   (B)   Any other provision of this section to the contrary notwithstanding,
it shall be lawful for any person as a means of cooking food to burn
combustible material ordinarily used for the purpose of cooking food outdoors
in any permanent or temporary outdoor fireplace, grill or barbecue pit.
Provided, however, that any such fire must be kept under competent and
continuous supervision and must be kept a sufficient distance from any
building, structure or other material so as not to constitute a fire hazard.
   (C)   The open burning of the following is specifically prohibited: treated
or painted wood including, but not limited to, plywood, composite wood products
or other wood products that are painted, varnished or treated with
preservatives, corrugated cardboard, container board, office paper, newspaper,
any plastic materials including, but not limited to, nylon, PVC, ABS,
polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic
containers, tires, furniture and appliances, hazardous substances including,
but not limited to, batteries, household chemicals, pesticides, used oil,
gasoline, paints, varnishes, and solvents and construction and demolition
waste. "Construction and demolition waste" means building waste materials,
including, but not limited to, waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated
wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from
construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house,
commercial or industrial building, or other structure.
   (D)   The burning of leaves is allowed during the period beginning on
October 15 and ending on November 30 of each year and during the period
beginning April 1 and ending on April 30 of each year. However, the above
indicated time spans may be expanded, shortened or completely abolished on a
seasonal basis in the following manner:
      1.   If the fire chief in his discretion determines that conditions will
not permit the safe and proper burning of leaves, he may, by written notice
posted in the village hall and distributed through such media as the fire chief
in his discretion deems appropriate, entirely prohibit the burning of leaves
during all or a portion of the period when such burning would otherwise be
authorized by this subsection (D). In any event no person shall burn leaves if
the burning of such material creates a health hazard or endangers any adjoining
building, structure or other property by the communication of smoke or fire.
      2.   If the fire chief in his discretion determines that due to unusual
seasonal conditions that it would be appropriate to allow the burning of leaves
at times other than those specified in this subsection (D), he may, by written
notice posted in the village hall and distributed through such media as the
fire chief in his discretion deems appropriate, extend the above specified time
periods for the burning of leaves for a period of time not to exceed thirty
(30) days prior to or subsequent to the times specified in this subsection (D).
      3.   No leaves may be burned upon any street, curb, gutter, alley, public
property or sidewalk or on the ice of a lake, pond, stream or water body.
      4.   Open burning of leaves shall be conducted only on the property on
which the materials were generated.
      5.   Burning of leaves shall be constantly attended by a competent person
until the fire is completely extinguished. (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-6: PATIO WOOD BURNING UNITS:
   (A)   "Patio wood burning unit" means a chimenea, patio warmer, or other
portable wood burning device used for outdoor recreation and/or heating.
   (B)   A patio wood burning unit may be installed and used in the village of
Creve Coeur without an open burning permit only in accordance with all of the
following provisions:
      1.   The patio wood burning unit shall not be used to burn refuse.
      2.   The patio wood burning unit shall burn only clean wood.
      3.   The patio wood burning unit shall be located at least twenty feet
(20') from the nearest structure which is not on the same property as the patio
wood burning unit.
      4.   The patio wood burning unit shall not cause a nuisance to neighbors.
(Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-7: FIRE SUPPRESSION TRAINING:
   (A)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, structures and other
materials may be burned for fire prevention training if an appropriate permit
has been obtained from the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (B)   All fire suppression training should conform to the guidelines
established by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standard on live
fire training evolutions (NFPA 1403). (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-8: PRESCRIBED BURNING:
"Prescribed burn" means the burning, in compliance with a prescription and to
meet planned fire or land management objectives, of a continuous cover of
fuels. Fires set for forest, prairie, and wildlife habitat management are
allowed only if conducted in accordance with and pursuant to a permit issued by
the Illinois environmental protection agency. A burning permit must also be
obtained from the village pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-9: RECREATIONAL OR CEREMONIAL PURPOSES:
Fires for recreational or ceremonial purposes such as school pep rally
bonfires, scout or civic activities and campfires using clean wood may be
allowed upon issuance of a burning permit.
   (A)   "Campfire" means a small outdoor fire intended for recreation or
cooking but not including a fire intended for disposal of waste wood or refuse.
   (B)   "Clean wood" means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished
or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with
preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other
composite wood products. (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-10: BURNING PERMITS:
   (A)   No person shall start or maintain any outdoor burning or open burning,
other than leaf burning as otherwise permitted by this chapter, without a
burning permit issued by the fire chief.
   (B)   Any person that obtains a burning permit from the state environmental
protection agency shall also obtain a village burning permit before starting
the fire. Proof of the state permit must be presented with the application for
the village permit.
   (C)   Permits are not required for the burning of leaves otherwise permitted
under this chapter.
   (D)   When weather conditions warrant, the fire chief may temporarily
suspend issuing burning permits and may temporarily suspend previously issued
burning permits for open burning.
   (E)   A burning permit issued under this section shall require compliance
with all applicable provisions of this chapter and any additional special
restrictions deemed necessary to protect public health and safety as well as
state laws and regulations.
   (F)   Any violation of the conditions of a burning permit shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter. Any violation of this chapter or the burning permit
shall void the permit. (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-11: RIGHT OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION:
The fire chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of
the village of Creve Coeur who presents credentials may inspect any property
for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-12: LIABILITY:
A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all
fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by
the fire. (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
5-3-13: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   The fire and police chiefs and their designated agent(s) are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
governmental entity who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or fails
to comply with a duly authorized order issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
deemed to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by
Illinois statute which shall be punishable by civil fine determined in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
                                            Minimum Fine Maximum Fine
First offense within 3 year period          $ 75.00      $500.00
Second offense within 3 year period         150.00       500.00
Third offense within 3 year period          325.00       500.00
Fourth or more offense within 3 year period 500.00       500.00
 
The actual fine amount for the first, second or third offense can be the
minimum, maximum, or any amount in between. (Ord. 643, 6-13-2007)
CHAPTER 4
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
5-4-1: Adopt Rules And Regulations
5-4-2: Penalty
5-4-1: ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS:
   (A)   The International Fire Code, 2018 Edition (“IFC” or “fire prevention
code”) as prepared by the International Code Council, and the NFPA 101 Life
Safety Code, 2018 Edition (“LSC” or “life safety code”), as prepared by the
National Fire Protection Association, are hereby adopted and made a part this
chapter by reference thereto, for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for fire prevention and safety in the village of Creve Coeur. The
fire prevention code and life safety code are available for inspection in the
office of the village clerk upon request. The fire prevention code and life
safety code are incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the
provisions thereof shall be controlling. In the event of any inconsistency
between the provisions of the IFC, the Life Safety Code or any other provisions
of the Village Code, including other codes adopted or incorporated by reference
by the Village Code, the terms of the more stringent code as determined by the
Fire Chief in consultation with the Building Inspector of the Village shall
apply.
   (B)   The following sections of the IFC are hereby revised, completed, or
deleted as follows:
      1.    Section 101.1. Insert in place of the bracketed material “Village
of Creve Coeur”.
      2.   At Section 110.4 insert: Persons who violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any requirements thereof or who shall erect,
install, alter or repair or do work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be punished by a fine as
provided in section 4-1-40 of the village code for each offense, together with
applicable costs. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute
a separate offense.
      3.   Section 112.4 is hereby deleted in its entirety and the following is
substituted in lieu thereof: “Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition shall be subject
to penalties as provided in section 4-1-40 of the village code.”
      4.   Section 903 pertaining to automatic sprinkler systems is deleted,
but only to the extent its provisions were made applicable to new one and two
family dwellings.
      5.   Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is hereby completed to read as follows: “in all
territory within the corporate limits of the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois
other than those areas of the Village assigned to the ‘I-1 or I-2 Industrial
Zoning District’ classification.”
      6.   Section 5706.2.4.4 is hereby completed to read as follows: “in all
territory within the corporate limits of the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois
other than those areas of the Village assigned to the ‘I-1 or I-2 Industrial
Zoning District’ classification.”
      7.   Section 5806.2 is hereby completed to read as follows: “in all
territory within the corporate limits of the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois
other than those areas of the Village assigned to the ‘I-1 or I-2 Industrial
Zoning District’ classification.”
      8.   Section 6104.2 is hereby completed to read as follows: “in all
territory within the corporate limits of the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois
other than those areas of the Village assigned to the ‘I-1 or I-2 Industrial
Zoning District’ classification.”
      9.   Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H and I of the Fire Prevention Code
are hereby adopted. Appendix J is not adopted.
   (C)   The “NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2018 Edition” as published by the
National Fire Protection Association is hereby adopted and made applicable
within the Village of Creve Coeur in the State of Illinois.
      1.   Section 24.3.5.1 pertaining to automatic sprinkler systems in new
one and two family dwellings is hereby deleted.
      2.   Sprinkler Requirements. For all structures other than one and two
family dwellings and buildings where the only use is storage of non-combustible
materials (with no commercial operations or residential occupancy), the
automatic sprinkler requirements of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2018 Edition
shall apply to the same extent as with new construction in the following
circumstances: (1) where there is a change in ownership of such structure
(other than transfers from an individual(s) to a partnership, business entity
or trust owned and controlled by such individual(s)), (2) where there is a
change of ownership of any commercial operation located in such structure, (3)
where there is a change in use or occupancy classification of such structure,
or (4) where the owner makes any Renovation, Modification, Reconstruction or
Addition to such structure (as such terms are defined in the NFPA 101 Life
Safety Code, 2018 Edition). For purposes hereof, a “change of use” shall be
deemed to occur upon the occupancy of any structure that has been vacant for
more than six (6) months. The owner of any existing structure for which
installation of automatic sprinklers is required hereunder shall complete such
installation within a period of twelve (12) months from the effective date of
the change in ownership (of the property or business occupying the property),
change in use or occupancy classification, or issuance of a building permit for
any Renovation, Modification, Reconstruction or Addition. The Village Building
Inspector, with the approval of the Village President, may grant extensions of
the foregoing time for compliance based upon special circumstances demonstrated
by the owner. The Building Inspector may approve variations from the
requirements of the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code, 2018 Edition where the design or
layout of the structure make strict compliance impossible or impractical,
provided that in no event shall the automatic sprinkler requirement be waived
or eliminated for any residential dwelling unit.
   (D)   All fire department connections on either sprinklers or standpipes
shall meet both of the following specifications:
      1.   A 5" locking Storz connection.
      2.   All connections shall be equipped with listed plugs or caps.
In the event of a conflict between this subsection (D) and any provision of any
other ordinance or code applicable in the Village including, without
limitation, the IFC or the Building Code, then the provisions of this
subsection (D) shall govern. (Ord. 701A, 3-12-2014; amd. Ord. 955, 2-23-2022)
5-4-2: PENALTY:
The penalty for violation of the fire prevention code or life safety code
shall, upon conviction, subject the offender to a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001; amd. Ord. 955, 2-23-2022)
CHAPTER 5
RAPID ENTRY KEY LOCKBOX SYSTEM
SECTION:
5-5-1: Key Lockbox Required; Exceptions
5-5-2: Installation
5-5-3: Hazardous Materials
5-5-4: Administration
5-5-1: KEY LOCKBOX REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   The following structures shall be equipped with a rapid entry key
lockbox approved by the fire chief:
      1.   All buildings within the village having an automatic alarm system or
equipped with an automatic fire suppression system, except one- and two-family
owner-occupied dwellings.
      2.   Multi-family residential structures, including senior citizen
apartments/condo complexes, that have restricted accesses through locked doors
and have a common corridor for access to living quarters.
      3.   All high-rise buildings, i.e., structures having floors at or above
fifty feet (50') above ground level.
      4.   All commercial or industrial buildings.
      5.   Businesses sharing a common wall.
      6.   All new construction, subject to this section, shall have the rapid
entry key lockbox installed and operational prior to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
   (B)   The following structures are exempt from the rapid key entry
requirement:
      1.   Any building or structure having on site twenty-four (24) hour
security personnel, or businesses open for business twenty-four (24) hours may
be exempt from the requirements of this section at the discretion of the fire
chief.
      2.   Any Federally owned building. (Ord. 891, 10-9-2019; amd. Ord. 891A,
3-9-2022)
5-5-2: INSTALLATION:
   (A)   The building or business owner shall have sole responsibility for
installation of the rapid entry key lockbox.
   (B)   The rapid entry key lockbox shall be installed on the front of the
building, near the main entry door to the right side at a height not to exceed
seven feet (7') aboveground, unless approved by the fire chief. Each box comes
with a red sticker that will be applied to the front door.
   (C)   The rapid entry key lockbox shall contain keys for the exterior doors
clearly marked and any interior doors where alarm panels, electrical panels,
sprinkler controls or hazardous materials are stored.
   (D)   The rapid entry key lockbox shall contain elevator keys, if
applicable.
   (E)   No steps, displays, signs, other fixtures or structure protrusions
shall be located under the box which would allow intruders to access the box
without assistance. (Ord. 891, 10-9-2019)
5-5-3: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
Commercial structures storing, using or manufacturing large quantities of
materials considered hazardous must have a rapid entry key lockbox which will
contain the following:
   (A)   Keys to entry doors.
   (B)   Keys to hazardous materials storage areas and documentation on what
materials are stored and approximate quantities stored or used on site.
   (C)   Keys will be labeled for easy identification in the field. (Ord. 891,
10-9-2019)
5-5-4: ADMINISTRATION:
   (A)   New Structures:
      1.   The building inspector shall notify the fire chief or designee with
contact information of new businesses that would fall under this section.
      2.   Contractors or building owners may obtain applications for rapid
entry key lockbox from the village fire chief or the chief's designee.
   (B)   Existing Structures:
      1.   The village fire department shall be responsible for tracking
businesses with and without rapid entry key lockboxes and notifying Building
Inspector, Village Clerk and Code Enforcement when necessary.
      2.   The Village, with the assistance of code enforcement, shall be
responsible for enforcement of this ordinance.
      3.   Owners/managers must obtain applications for rapid entry key
lockboxes from the village fire chief or the chief's designee.
   (C)   Time For Compliance:
      1.   All existing buildings shall comply with the provisions of this
section within thirty (30) days from the first notice of non-compliance.
      2.   All newly constructed buildings not yet occupied or buildings
currently under construction shall comply with the terms hereof prior to
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
   (D)   Penalty: All structures listed in section
5-5-1(A) that are not in compliance with this section or any person who shall
violate any provision of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to a
penalty for such violation until compliance has been met. (Ord. 891, 10-9-2019;
amd. Ord. 891A, 3-9-2022)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
6-1-1: Department Established
6-1-2: Officers
6-1-3: Duties
6-1-4: Chief Of Police
6-1-5: Members Of Department
6-1-6: Bond (Rep. by Ord. 399-A, 11-9-1994)
6-1-7: May Call For Assistance
6-1-8: Subject To Board Of Police And Fire Commission
6-1-9: Auxiliary Police
6-1-10: Residency
6-1-11: Part Time Police Officers
6-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established an executive department of the village to be known
as the police department. Said police department shall embrace the officers and
positions hereinafter enumerated and such officers as may be provided by the
president and board of trustees. (Ord. 243, 3-6-1957)
6-1-2: OFFICERS:
There are hereby created the offices of chief of police, lieutenant, sergeant
and patrolman. These offices shall be known and designated as "policemen" and
the word "policemen" shall mean any member of the regularly constituted police
department, sworn and commissioned to perform police duties, and said policemen
shall constitute the police force of this village and the members of the police
department shall be and are officers of the village, a municipal corporation,
and all duly commissioned policemen of the rank of chief and sergeant, now in
the employment of the village as such, as of the adoption of the police and
fire commission act, are deemed qualified and capable officers, without
examination, and those among them who have served as such officer for less than
a year, shall be eligible to receive their certificate of accreditation upon
meeting other lawful requirements of the police and fire commission. (Ord. 399-
A, 11-9-1994; amd. Ord. 399-C, 5-10-2000)
6-1-3: DUTIES:
The police department, under the chief of police, and under his supervision,
shall:
   (A)   Preserve the peace and order of the village;
   (B)   Protect persons and property from harm, loss or damage;
   (C)   Prevent crime and detect and apprehend persons suspected of crimes and
misdemeanors;
   (D)   Regulate traffic upon public thoroughfares;
   (E)   Enforce all criminal laws of this state and all ordinances;
   (F)   Secure all necessary warrants and other documents for the enforcement
of these duties, and aid in the prosecution of all such crimes and
misdemeanors;
   (G)   Cause to be served and executed any criminal process issued by any
court of competent jurisdiction within the village;
   (H)   Have custody of lost, stolen and abandoned property;
   (I)   Maintain proper and adequate records of crimes and criminals and
matters relating thereto;
   (J)   To arrest for the violation of any crime and misdemeanor;
   (K)   To have custody of and detention of prisoners and to do and perform
all other acts necessary and incidental in the performance of police work and
as given by law to any police officer or constable. (Ord. 243, 3-6-1957)
6-1-4: CHIEF OF POLICE:
The chief of police shall be the commanding officer of the police force and
shall have control of the assignment of all members of the force and the
direction and supervision of police work in the village, including any
auxiliary police officers under his command. He shall be responsible for the
control and regulation of all equipment assigned to or under the control of the
police department. (Ord. 243, 3-6-1957; amd. Ord. 652, 2-28-2007; Ord. 652B, 6-
10-2015)
6-1-5: MEMBERS OF DEPARTMENT:
The police force of the village shall be comprised of a chief, lieutenant and
such number of sergeants and patrolmen as the village board may by resolution
establish, and any replacements, reemployment, or employment of regular members
above, shall be under the jurisdiction, rules, regulation and control of the
board of fire and police commissioners. No office shall be filled unless
determined and ordered to be filled by the village board. (Ord. 652, 2-28-2007)
6-1-6: BOND:
(Rep. by Ord. 399-A, 11-9-1994)
6-1-7: MAY CALL FOR ASSISTANCE:
Any police officer of this village may, at any time, call upon any able bodied
male person above the age of twenty one (21) years to aid him in arresting or
taking into custody any person guilty of having committed any unlawful act, or
charged therewith, or to aid such officer in preventing the commission of any
unlawful act. No one shall refuse or neglect to give such aid or assistance
when so directed. (Ord. 243, 3-6-1957)
6-1-8: SUBJECT TO BOARD OF POLICE AND FIRE COMMISSION:
The police force of this village shall be subject to all the rules and
regulations of the board of police and fire commission, governing employment,
disciplining and discharge of policemen. (Ord. 243, 3-6-1957)
6-1-9: AUXILIARY POLICE:
   (A)   Appointment: The village board may appoint auxiliary police officers
in such number as they from time to time deem necessary.
   (B)   Status: Auxiliary police officers shall not be "conservators of the
peace" and shall only carry firearms while on duty, with the permission of the
chief of police, and only after completing the state certified forty (40) hour
mandatory firearms training course as provided under 50 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 710/2. Auxiliary police officers shall not be considered to be members
of the regular police department, and shall not supplement members of the
regular police department of the village in the performance of their assigned
and normal duties except as otherwise provided herein.
   (C)   Identification Symbol: Identification symbols worn by auxiliary police
shall be different and distinct from those used by members of the regular
police department.
   (D)   Supervision: Auxiliary police shall, at all times during the
performance of their duties, be subject to the direction and control of the
chief of police of the village.
   (E)   Powers And Duties: Auxiliary police officers shall only be assigned to
perform the following duties in the village: 1) to aid or direct traffic within
the village, 2) to aid in control of natural or manmade disasters, and 3) to
aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the chief of police.
When it is impractical for members of the regular police department to perform
those normal and regular police duties, however, the chief of police of the
regular police department may assign auxiliary police officers to perform those
normal and regular police duties.
   (F)   Hiring Standards: No person shall be hired as an auxiliary police
officer who has not been fingerprinted, subject to the background check, and
found to have never been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral
turpitude. No person may be hired as an auxiliary officer if he or she resides
outside the corporate limits of the village. Auxiliary police shall serve
without compensation. The village will be responsible for the cost of
appropriate uniforms and identification badges. (Ord. 652B, 6-10-2015)
6-1-10: RESIDENCY:
Any applicant or employee for a position on the police force of this village,
shall be eligible provided said person resides within the village of Creve
Coeur, Tazewell County, Illinois, or within ten (10) miles of the village
limits. (Ord. 402-A, 1-11-1995)
6-1-11: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
   (A)   Employment: The village of Creve Coeur may employ part time police
officers from time to time as the village board deems necessary. The process to
hire part time police officers is as follows:
      1.   The chief of police will bring the qualifications of all candidates
for the position to the police and fire committee of the village board; the
chief will make recommendation to the committee of the candidate the chief
feels is most qualified for the position.
      2.   The police and fire committee will review the candidates and the
chief's preferences and will make a decision on a candidate.
      3.   The committee chairman will bring the committee's recommendation for
hire to the board for approval.
   (B)   Duties: A part time police officer shall have all the responsibilities
of a full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the
general orders of the Creve Coeur police department, but the number of hours a
part time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time
police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police
officers.
   (C)   Hiring Standards: All police officers, other than those officers who
shall be employed on a full time basis, shall have completed training and the
reporting requirements mandated by the Illinois law enforcement training
standards board (ILETSB) as required by the Illinois police training act 1  and
meet the standards of this section (unless otherwise authorized by the village
board due to exigent circumstances).
In addition to already having completed the ILETSB training, part time officers
must:
      1.   Be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      2.   Possess a valid state of Illinois driver's license.
      3.   Pass a background investigation.
      4.   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health and
physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      5.   Be a high school graduate or GED equivalent.
      6.   Pass a medical examination.
      7.   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      8.   Have been honorably discharged from the U.S. military if the officer
previously served in the U.S. military.
      9.   Successfully complete state mandated certification classes within
eighteen (18) months of appointment date (if not currently certified).
      10.   Begin certification classes within six (6) months of the date of
employment (if not currently certified).
      11.   Successfully pass a forty (40) hour mandatory firearms class (if
not currently certified).
   (D)   Policy Regarding Primary Employment: It is recognized that part time
officers will more than likely be engaged in a regular full time trade,
profession or occupation, commonly referred to as their primary employment. It
is the intent of the village not to hire or retain any part time officer whose
primary employment or occupation would conflict or be inconsistent with his/her
position on the Creve Coeur police department. The following are rules and
procedures regarding primary employment:
      1.   Any person applying for an appointment as a part time officer shall
disclose his/her primary employment and such information pertaining thereto as
may be required by the village.
      2.   No part time officer shall engage in any primary employment that is
in conflict with any existing rules and regulations of the Creve Coeur police
department.
      3.   All part time officers shall promptly report to the chief of police
any changes to his/her primary employment status.
      4.   When the chief of police determines that the primary employment of a
part time officer is in conflict with any of the rules or policies within the
Creve Coeur police department, he shall note the same in the officer's
personnel file and direct the officer, in writing, to either make changes in
his primary employment, so as to eliminate the conflict, or to resign his part
time position.
      5.   Upon failure of the part time officer to make the necessary changes,
as stated above, the police committee of the village board, upon request from
the chief of police, will review the recommendation that the part time officer
be discharged. The chairman of the police committee shall then report the same
to the entire board and upon a simple majority vote of the village board, said
officer shall be discharged as a part time officer.
      6.   Part time officers shall not engage in any primary employment that
shall involve the sale, dispensing, or service of any manner of any alcoholic
liquor or beverages.
      7.   Part time officers shall not engage in any bail bond agencies,
private detective agencies, or any similar business that investigates the
private affairs of a citizen.
   (E)   Discipline: Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the chief of police. Part time officers serve at the discretion
of the village of Creve Coeur authorities, shall not have any property rights
in said employment, and may be removed by the village of Creve Coeur
authorities at any time. Part time police officers shall comply with all
applicable rules and general orders issued by the police department.
   (F)   Other Policies With Respect To Part Time Officers:
      1.   Part time officers shall receive quarterly evaluations from their
supervisors and semiannual reviews by the chief of police to determine if any
abuses of departmental policy or official assignment have occurred.
      2.   Part time officers shall be limited to no more than thirty (30)
hours per week in the village of Creve Coeur. Additionally, part time officers
may not work more than one thousand five hundred sixty (1,560) working hours
per calendar year. If an officer works part time for another department the
total number of hours for both departments count toward the one thousand five
hundred sixty (1,560) hour limit and must be reported to the state training
board.
      3.   Certified part time officers shall serve a three (3) month
probationary period, noncertified officers, if they are hired due to exigent
circumstances specifically approved by the village board, shall serve a six (6)
month probationary period.
      4.   Part time officers, whether certified or not, cannot be used in
place of or to supplant full time positions. It is further understood that
overtime shall be offered to full time officers first and if no one accepts the
overtime it can then be filled with part time officers. (Ord. 719, 8-22-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 1
SECTION:
6-2-1: Definitions
6-2-2: Civil Remedies Preserved
6-2-3: Penalties
6-2-4: Civil Emergency Provisions
6-2-5: Disorderly Conduct; Breach Of The Peace
6-2-6: Public Intoxication; Breach Of Peace; Incapacitated
6-2-7: Vagrancy (Rep. by Ord. 428, 12-17-1975)
6-2-8: Disturbing Lawful Assemblies
6-2-9: Disturbing Elections; Process
6-2-10: Assault, Battery And Affray
6-2-11: Reckless Conduct
6-2-12: Unlawful Assemblies
6-2-13: Mob Action
6-2-14: Obstructing Stairways Or Exits
6-2-15: Resisting Arrest
6-2-16: Disobedience To Police And Fire Officer
6-2-17: Unlawful Use Of Weapons
6-2-18: Firing Or Discharging Weapons
6-2-19: Carrying Loaded Weapons
6-2-20: Unlawful Display Of Weapon
6-2-21: Confiscation And Disposition Of Weapons
6-2-22: Dangerous Fires (Rep. by Ord. 363-C, 11-10-1999)
6-2-23: Bonfires (Rep. by Ord. 363-C, 11-10-1999)
6-2-24: Creating, Maintaining Nuisances
6-2-25: Failure To Abate Nuisance After Notice (Rep. by Ord. 463, 8-1-1979)
6-2-26: Abandoned Refrigerators; Iceboxes
6-2-27: Noises; Loud, Disturbing, Unnecessary
6-2-28: Stench Bombs; Nauseous Gases And Substances
6-2-29: Fireworks (Rep. by Ord. 553, 8-14-1996)
6-2-30: Throwing Missiles; Bottles
6-2-31: Curfew Limitations For Minors
6-2-32: Sale Of Intoxicating Liquors To Minors Prohibited
6-2-33: Possession Of Alcoholic Liquor By Minor
6-2-34: Consumption Of Alcoholic Liquor By Minors
6-2-35: Exceptions; Minors Consuming Liquors
6-2-36: Use Of Forged Identification Card To Obtain Liquor
6-2-37: Sale Of Firearms; Weapons To Minors
6-2-38: Criminal Housing Management
6-2-39: Trespass; Land And Buildings
6-2-40: Malicious Mischief; Destruction
6-2-41: Coin Operated Devices; Slugs, Tampering
6-2-42: Trespass To Vehicles
6-2-43: Prostitution Defined
6-2-44: Keeping A Place Of Prostitution
6-2-45: Patronizing A Prostitute
6-2-46: Soliciting For A Prostitute
6-2-47: Pandering
6-2-48: Pimping
6-2-49: Public Indecency; Acts Or Language
6-2-50: Obscenity; Defined And Prohibited
6-2-51: Obscene Marking In Public View
6-2-52: Obscenity; Affirmative Defense
6-2-53: Window Peeping
6-2-54: Gambling
6-2-55: Keeping A Gambling Place Prohibited
6-2-56: Violation Of Civil Rights; Elements
6-2-57: Violation Of Civil Rights; Sanctions
6-2-58: Bribery; Offering Or Accepting
6-2-59: Solicitation To Commit Offense
6-2-60: Conspiracy To Commit Offense
6-2-61: Solicitation And Conspiracy; Affirmative Defense
6-2-62: Public Solicitation Of Funds; Registration
6-2-63: Solicitation Or Promotion By Telephone
6-2-64: Telephones; Obscene, Anonymous, Misrepresented Calls
6-2-65: False Alarms
6-2-66: Intimidation; Threats Communicated
6-2-67: Theft
6-2-68: Persons Entitled To Alcoholic Beverages
6-2-69: Possession Of Cannabis Prohibited
6-2-70: Drug Paraphernalia
6-2-71: Possession/Use Of Synthetic Alternative Drugs Prohibited
6-2-72: Social Host Responsibility
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-1-1.
6-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
   ACT: A failure or omission to take action.
   AIR RIFLE: Includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB
gun, or pellet gun which impels a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel,
lead, stone, or other hard materials with force that reasonably is expected to
cause bodily harm or property damage.
   ANOTHER: A person or persons as defined in this code other than the
offender.
   ASSAULT: When, without lawful authority, a person engages in conduct which
places another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery.
   BATTERY: If a person intentionally or knowingly, without legal justification
and by any means: a) causes bodily harm to an individual, or b) makes physical
contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an individual.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY: Is hereby defined to be:
   (A)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force
or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute by three (3) or more persons acting together without authority of law;
or
   (B)   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, or explosion within the corporate
limits of the village resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
   CURFEW: A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing, or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property, or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the village,
excepting officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated
to duty with reference to said civil emergency.
   POLICE OFFICER: Any person who by virtue of his office or public employment
is vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for
offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific
offenses.
   PUBLIC EMPLOYEE: Any person, other than a public officer, who is authorized
to perform any official function on behalf of, and is paid by, the village or
any of its subdivisions or agencies.
   PUBLIC OFFICER: A person who is elected to office pursuant to a statute or
ordinance, or who is appointed to an office which is established, and the
qualifications and duties of which are prescribed, by statute or ordinance, to
discharge a public duty for the village, or any of its subdivisions or
agencies.
   REASONABLE BELIEF OR REASONABLY BELIEVES: The person concerned, acting as a
reasonable man, believes that the described facts exist. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-2: CIVIL REMEDIES PRESERVED:
This chapter does not bar, suspend, or otherwise affect any right or liability
to damages, penalty, forfeiture, or other remedy authorized by law to be
recovered or enforced in a civil action, for any conduct which this chapter
makes punishment; and the civil injury is not merged in the offense. (Ord. 363,
6-17-1970)
6-2-3: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, violations of any
provision thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
an offense continues shall be a separate violation and punishable accordingly.
(Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-4: CIVIL EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 1 :
   (A)   Declaration Of Emergency: Whenever an emergency as defined in section
6-2-1 of this chapter exists, the president shall declare the existence by
means of a written declaration setting forth the facts which constitute the
emergency.
   (B)   General Curfew: After proclamation of a civil emergency by the
President, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical areas
of the Village or the Village as a whole, as he deems advisable and applicable,
during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the interest of
the public safety and welfare.
   (C)   General Orders: After the proclamation of a civil emergency, the
President may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, make any or
all of the following orders:
      1.   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns and
private clubs or portions thereof within which the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted.
      2.   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer.
      3.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
      4.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing, or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
      5.   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the
protection of life and property.
   (D)   Duration Of Proclamation: The proclamation herein authorized shall be
effective for a period of forty eight (48) hours unless sooner terminated by a
proclamation of the President indicating that the civil emergency no longer
exists. The President shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a
civil emergency at the end of each forty eight (48) hour period during the time
the said civil emergency exists.
   (E)   Notice Of Proclamation: Upon issuing the proclamation herein
authorized, the Chief of Police shall notify the news media situated within the
Village, and shall cause three (3) copies of the proclamation declaring the
existence of the emergency to be posted at the following places within the
Village: the City Hall, the Police Station, and the Post Office.
   (F)   Construction: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to
impair the powers contained in the provisions of this Code giving powers to the
Police and Fire Departments, but shall be construed together with existing
ordinances that are now, or shall be, in effect for the safety and welfare of
the citizens of the Village. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
 
Notes
1 1. For further provisions, see title 2, chapter 3 of this code.
6-2-5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT; BREACH OF THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any violent, tumultuous,
offensive or disorderly conduct; by threatening, traducing, quarreling,
challenging to fight or fighting; or by using obscene, offensive, profane or
unseemly language to the annoyance, disturbance or vexation of another; or to
be guilty of any conduct calculated to breach the peace.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to knowingly transmit or cause to be
transmitted in any manner to the Police Department or Fire Department or any
privately-owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance, or emergency medical
technician-paramedic, knowing at the time there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such assistance is required; or, calls the number "911" for the
purpose of making or transmitting a false alarm or complaint and reporting
information when, at the time the call or transmission is made, the person
knows there is no reasonable ground for making the call or transmission and
further knows that the call or transmission could result in the emergency
response of any public safety agency. (Ord. 852, 4-11-2018)
6-2-6: PUBLIC INTOXICATION; BREACH OF PEACE; INCAPACITATED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, in any public place, to be in such a state
of intoxication that:
   (A)   He is unreasonably loud, obscene, or disorderly so as to breach the
peace, or
   (B)   He is incoherent, incapacitated, or asleep so as not to be able to
control, direct or protect himself. It shall be the duty of the police officers
to arrest any such person when they reasonably believe such condition exists.
(Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-7: VAGRANCY:
(Rep. by Ord. 428, 12-17-1975)
6-2-8: DISTURBING LAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully interrupt or disturb any
funeral assembly, funeral procession, school, any assembly met for a lawful
purpose by any offensive behavior, or by any disorderly conduct. (Ord. 332, 11-
17-1968)
6-2-9: DISTURBING ELECTIONS; PROCESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance at an election
poll or to interfere with the election process. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-10: ASSAULT, BATTERY AND AFFRAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly start a fight, or to fight or
to commit any assault, or assault and battery anywhere within the Village.
6-2-11: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
No person shall cause bodily harm to, or endanger the bodily safety of, an
individual by any means, commit reckless conduct by performing recklessly the
acts which cause the harm or endanger the safety of an individual, whether they
are lawful or are unlawful.
6-2-12: UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES:
It shall be unlawful for any two (2) or more persons to assemble together for
any unlawful purpose, or who, being assembled, to act in concert to do an
unlawful act, against the property of the Village, or the person or property of
another, or against the public peace or to make any movement or preparation
therefor.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly suffer or permit any
assemblage for the purpose of committing any unlawful act or breach of the
peace, or any riotous, offensive or disorderly conduct in or upon premises
owned or occupied by him, or under his control within the Village.
6-2-13: MOB ACTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in mob action, as defined as
follows:
   (A)   The use of force, violence, or other disruptive conduct by two (2) or
more persons acting together, without lawful authority, so as to constitute a
breach of the peace; or
   (B)   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
   (C)   The assembly of two (2) or more persons without authority of law to do
violence to the person or property of another.
6-2-14: OBSTRUCTING STAIRWAYS OR EXITS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any stairway,
aisles, corridor, or exit in any office building, factory, hotel, school,
church, theater, assembly hall, lodge or other public hall, or any building
used by two (2) or more tenants or families in such a manner that it interferes
with the free use of such stairway, aisle, corridor or exit.
6-2-15: RESISTING ARREST:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or wilfully resist an arrest
which he knows is being made by a police officer, or by a private person
summoned and directed by a police officer to make an arrest, even if he
believes that the arrest is unlawful, and the arrest is in fact unlawful. (Ord.
363, 6-17-70)
6-2-16: DISOBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE OFFICER:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To knowingly prevent, obstruct, harass or endanger, by any means, any
police officer, fire officer, or other official or employee, or any military
personnel on emergency duty within the Village, in the lawful performance of
his duties.
   (B)   To knowingly or wilfully refuse or neglect to obey, without reasonable
justification therefor, any lawful order or direction of any police officer,
fire officer, or other official or employee, or any military personnel on
emergency duty within the Village. (Ord. 363, 6-17-70; amd. Ord. 428, 12-17-75)
6-2-17: UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      1.   Possess or carry any bludgeon, black-jack, sling-shot, sand-club,
sand-bag, metal knuckles or any buck-knife or chain-belt, or any knife,
commonly referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens
automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in
the handle of the knife; or
      2.   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken
bottle, or other piece of glass, or any other dangerous or deadly weapon or
instrument of like character; or
      3.   Carry on or about his person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun
projector or bomb, or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance; or
      4.   Carry concealed in any vehicle or concealed on or about his person
except when on his land or in his own abode or fixed place of business, any
pistol, revolver or other firearm; or
      5.   Set a spring gun; or
      6.   Possess any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or
intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm; or
      7.   Possess or carry any weapon from which more than eight (8) shots or
bullets may be discharged by a single function of the firing device, any
shotgun with a barrel less than eighteen inches (18") in length, or any bomb,
bombshell, grenade, bottle or other container containing an explosive
substance, such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov
cocktails; or
      8.   Carry or possess any firearm or other deadly weapon in any place
which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or at any public gathering
held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental body or any public
gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a place where a showing,
demonstration or lecture involving the exhibition of unloaded firearms is
conducted, within the limits of the Village.
   (B)   The presence in an automobile other than a public omnibus of any
weapon, instrument or substance referred to in subsection (A)7 above is prima
facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is being carried by, all
persons occupying such automobile at the time such weapon, instrument or
substance is found, except under the following circumstances:
      1.   If such weapon, instrument or instrumentality is found upon the
person of one of the occupants therein; or
      2.   If such weapon, instrument, or substance is found in an automobile
operated for hire by a duly licensed driver in the due, lawful and proper
pursuit of his trade, then such presumption shall not apply to the driver.
   (C)   Subsections (A)3 and (A)4 of this Section shall not be construed to
apply to any duly authorized and appointed police officer or agent of this
Village; or of the State of Illinois; or of the United States; or to any member
of the Armed Forces or Reserve Forces of the United States or the Illinois
National Guard, while in the performance of their duties. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970;
amd. Ord. 428, 12-17-1975)
6-2-18: FIRING OR DISCHARGING WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire or discharge any firearm, air gun,
slingshot, bow, crossbow or other device designed to fire, project or throw any
stone, bullet or other hard substance within the Village; provided, however,
that this Section shall not apply to any police officer discharging a firearm
in the performance of his duty, nor any citizen from discharging any firearm
when lawfully defending his person or property. This Section shall not apply to
the discharge of firearms in conjunction with civic or charitable organization
or club events provided that prior permission is obtained from the Village
Board. Application shall be made to the Chief of Police at least thirty (30)
days in advance of the event. Applicants shall provide proof of insurance, the
location and time of the event, a description of event activities, and such
other information as may be reasonably required by the Chief of Police. (Ord.
322-B, 7-21-1982; amd. Ord. 332-C, 4-26-1995; Ord. 894, 10-23-2019)
6-2-19: CARRYING LOADED WEAPONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, except persons permitted by law, to have
or carry any shotgun or rifle or air gun in or on any vehicle, unless such
shotgun or rifle or air gun is dismantled to render it incapable of being fired
or is unloaded when enclosed in a case; the mere removal of the bolt from a
bolt-action rifle shall not be construed as dismantled so as to render it
incapable of firing. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-20: UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF WEAPON:
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession of any weapon or device set
forth in this Code to display or flourish any such weapon in a threatening or
boisterous manner such as might alarm a reasonable man. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-21: CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS:
   (A)   Upon conviction of a violation of Sections
6-2-17 through
 6-2-20 of this Code, any weapons seized shall be confiscated by the trial
court.
   (B)   Any stolen weapon so confiscated, when no longer needed for
evidentiary purposes, shall be returned to the person entitled to possession if
known. All other confiscated weapons, when no longer needed for evidentiary
purposes, shall, in the discretion of the trial court, be destroyed, or
preserved as the property of the Village. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-22: DANGEROUS FIRES:
(Rep. by Ord. 363-C, 11-10-1999)
6-2-23: BONFIRES:
(Rep. by Ord. 363-C, 11-10-1999)
6-2-24: CREATING, MAINTAINING NUISANCES 1 :
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create or maintain anywhere
within the Village, any nuisance as declared or defined in any provision of
this Code, or to permit or direct another to do the same.
   (B)   Notice of such nuisance and violation shall be given to the person
responsible, or his agent, and to the Chief of Police whose duties include the
abatement of such nuisances. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
 
Notes
1 1. See Title 7, Chapter 3 of this Code which defines nuisances and provides
  for their abatement.
6-2-25: FAILURE TO ABATE NUISANCE AFTER NOTICE:
(Rep. by Ord. 463, 8-1-1979)
6-2-26: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS; ICEBOXES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to leave outside of any
dwelling, building, or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling, or any other structure under his control, in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox,
refrigerator, or other container which has an airtight door or lid, snap, lock,
or other locking device, which may not be released from the inside, without
first removing said door or lid, snap, lock, or other locking device from said
icebox, refrigerator, or container. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-27: NOISES; LOUD, DISTURBING, UNNECESSARY:
Subject to the provisions of this Section, the creating of any unreasonably
loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of the Village is
prohibited.
Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the
life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and
welfare is prohibited.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises
in violation of this Section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive, namely:
   (A)   Blowing Horns: The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle or bus, so as to create an unreasonably loud or harsh
sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable
period of time.
   (B)   Radios, Phonographs: The playing of any radio, phonograph or any
musical instrument with such volume, particularly during the hours between
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. as to unreasonably
annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office,
hospital, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence.
   (C)   Yelling, Shouting, Hooting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or
singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or at any time or place so as to
unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any other type
of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
   (D)   Pets: The keeping of any animal, bird, or fowl which by causing
frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity.
   (E)   Blowing Whistles: The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any
stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, as a
warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper village authorities.
   (F)   Exhaust Discharge: To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor
boat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
   (G)   Building Operations: The erection, including excavation, demolition,
alteration, or repair of any building in any residential district or section,
the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section,
other than between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) P.M. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of
public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the inspector of
buildings.
   (H)   Noises Near Schools, Hospitals, Churches: The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof.
   (I)   Noises To Attract Attention: The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other
instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of
noise to any performance, show, or sale, or display of merchandise.
   (J)   Loudspeaker Or Amplifiers On Vehicles: The reasonable use of
amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are
noncommercial in character; provided, that a permit has been first obtained
from the village board. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
   (K)   Exception For Rendezvous Days: The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the noise caused by the discharge of muzzleloaded firearms on the
Fort Creve Coeur premises during rendezvous days provided that prior permission
is obtained from the village board. (Ord. 332-B, 7-21-1982)
6-2-28: STENCH BOMBS; NAUSEOUS GASES AND SUBSTANCES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, pour, deposit, or
discharge upon the person or the property of another any liquid, gaseous, or
solid substance which is injurious to person or property, or which is nauseous,
sickening, irritating or offensive to any of the senses with the intent to
unlawfully injure, molest, discomfort, discommode, or cause another in the use,
management, conduct, or control of his personal property. No person shall
attempt, or aid in the attempt or commission of, any of these prohibited acts.
   (B)   Accepted Uses: The prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section
shall not apply to police officers acting in line of duty or to proprietors of
business places or to employees using such substances for the protection of
their employer's and their business places when the substances referred to
herein are kept solely for the purposes of repelling robbers, thieves,
burglars, or other law violators. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-29: FIREWORKS:
(Rep. by Ord. 553, 8-14-1996)
6-2-30: THROWING MISSILES; BOTTLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person purposely or recklessly to cast, throw,
drop, (or break) any stone, rock, brick, glass bottle, or other missile or
substance from any overpass, or onto any street, alley, or other public way, or
in, at, or against any person, residence, building, car, or other property.
(Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-31: CURFEW LIMITATIONS FOR MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway at
the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal
guardian, or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age
approved by a parent or legal guardian, or unless engaged in a business or
occupation which the laws of this state authorize a person less than eighteen
(18) years of age to perform:
   (A)   Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive,
and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   (B)   Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. on Saturday and Sunday.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit a person in his custody
or control to violate this section.
A person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575-A, 1-23-2002)
6-2-32: SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS TO MINORS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after purchasing or otherwise
obtaining alcoholic liquor, to sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to
another person under the age of twenty one (21) years except in the performance
of a religious ceremony or service. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
   (B)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-33: POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINOR:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery
of alcoholic liquor is prohibited by this code to purchase or accept a gift of
alcoholic liquor or to have alcoholic liquor in his possession. (Ord. 363, 6-
17-1970)
   (B)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
   (C)   The presence in a vehicle other than a public omnibus of any alcoholic
liquor shall be prima facie evidence that it is in the possession of, and is
being carried by all persons occupying such vehicle at the time at which such
alcoholic liquor is found, except under the following circumstances:
      1.   If such liquor is found on the person of one of the occupants
therein; or
      2.   If such vehicle contains at least one occupant over twenty one (21)
years of age. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-34: CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR BY MINORS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty one (21) years of age
to possess or to consume alcoholic liquor. (Ord. 398-A, 11-18-1981)
   (B)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-35: EXCEPTIONS; MINORS CONSUMING LIQUORS:
Nothing in sections
6-2-33 and
6-2-34 of this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the possession, dispensing
or consumption by a minor of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious
service or ceremony, or the consumption by a minor under the direct supervision
and approval of the parent or parents or legal guardian of such minor in the
privacy of a home. (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-36: USE OF FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARD TO OBTAIN LIQUOR:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to display an identification card
that:
      1.   Is altered or defaced in any manner; or
      2.   Is false or forged; or
      3.   Is the identification card of another; or
      4.   Was obtained by means of false information to induce another to
sell, give, or deliver alcoholic liquor to the bearer.
   (B)   For purposes of this section an "identification card" is defined as
any document issued by a public officer in the performance of his official
duties which on its face purports to identify the name and age of the bearer.
(Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
   (C)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-37: SALE OF FIREARMS; WEAPONS TO MINORS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any firearm, bludgeon,
blackjack, slingshot, sand club, sandbag, metal knuckles, dagger, dirk, billy,
dangerous knife, stiletto, or any knife commonly referred to as a switchblade
which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a
button, spring, or other device in the handle of the knife to a minor.
   (B)   It shall be an affirmative defense for any person having sold such
weapon that:
      1.   The minor procured the sale by use of false or forged identification
cards; and
      2.   That he did not know, and could not reasonably have known of the
falsity or forgery; and
      3.   That he exercised reasonable diligence to determine the veracity of
the information (representation). (Ord. 363, 6-17-1970)
6-2-38: CRIMINAL HOUSING MANAGEMENT:
A person commits the offense of criminal housing management when, having
personal management or control of residential real estate, whether as legal or
equitable owner, or as a managing agent or otherwise, he knowingly permits by
his gross carelessness or neglect, the physical condition or facilities of the
residential real estate to become or remain so deteriorated that the health or
safety is endangered. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-39: TRESPASS; LAND AND BUILDINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Enter upon the private premises, property or land of another, or any
part thereof, after receiving notice from the owner, occupant or persons in
control of same, that such entry is forbidden; or
   (B)   Remain upon the private premises, property or land of another or any
part thereof, after receiving notice from the owner, occupant or person in
control of same to depart;
   (C)   Enter or remain in any building or facility which is owned, operated,
or within the control of the state, county or village or any agency thereof,
except during such hours as it is open to the public; provided, that this
section shall not apply to persons entering or remaining after such hours on
lawful business or employment.
   (D)   A person has received notice from the owner, occupant, or person in
control of the private premises, property, or land of another, within the
meaning of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, if the person has been
notified personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written
notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the
main entrance to such private premises, property or land, or the forbidden part
thereof. (Ord. 322-A, 2-17-1982)
6-2-40: MALICIOUS MISCHIEF; DESTRUCTION:
Any person who shall wilfully and maliciously tear up, injure, deface or
destroy any sidewalk, curbing, street paving or crossing upon any street, alley
or public ground; or any fire alarm, or sewer drain, or any other municipal
improvement; or any building or bridge, or any other property, real or
personal, belonging to the village or to any private person or corporation; or
any property used in any business impressed with a public interest and usually
designated as a public service corporation, that is waterworks, gas, electric
light, telephone, street, railroad, or steam heating companies; or who shall
maliciously and wilfully interfere or meddle in any way with the operation of
any such business as above enumerated. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968; amd. Ord. 428,
12-17-1975)
6-2-41: COIN OPERATED DEVICES; SLUGS, TAMPERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person: to insert, or attempt to insert in any
parking meter, vending machine, or other coin operated device, any slug,
counterfeit coin, or other foreign or metallic substance not a coin of United
States currency (denomination). (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-42: TRESPASS TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and without authority enter
any vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft, or any part thereof, of another without
his consent. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-43: PROSTITUTION DEFINED:
   (A)   Acts Of Prostitution: Any person who performs, offers or agrees to
perform any of the following acts for money commits an act of prostitution:
      1.   Any act of sexual intercourse; or
      2.   Any act of deviate sexual conduct. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of prostitution shall be fined not less
than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-44: KEEPING A PLACE OF PROSTITUTION:
   (A)   Acts Of Keeping A Place Of Prostitution: Any person who has or
exercises control over the use of any place which could offer seclusion or
shelter for the practice of prostitution who performs any of the following acts
keeps a place of prostitution:
      1.   Knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for the purpose of
prostitution; or
      2.   Grants or permits the use of such place under circumstances from
which he could reasonably know that the place is used or is to be used for
purposes of prostitution; or
      3.   Permits the continued use of a place after becoming aware of facts
or circumstances from which he should reasonably know that the place is being
used for purposes of prostitution. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of keeping a place of prostitution shall
be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-45: PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE:
   (A)   Acts Of Patronizing A Prostitute: Any person who performs any of the
following acts with a person not his spouse commits the offense of patronizing
a prostitute:
      1.   Engages in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct
with a prostitute; or
      2.   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with a prostitute with
the intention to engage in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual
conduct. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of patronizing a prostitute shall be fined
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-46: SOLICITING FOR A PROSTITUTE:
   (A)   Acts Of Soliciting For A Prostitute: Any person who performs any of
the following acts commits soliciting for a prostitute:
      1.   Solicit another for the purpose of prostitution; or
      2.   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose
of prostitution; or
      3.   Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose
of prostitution. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of soliciting for a prostitute shall be
fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-47: PANDERING:
   (A)   Acts Of Pandering: Any person who performs any of the following acts
for money commits pandering:
      1.   Compels a female to become a prostitute; or
      2.   Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a female may
practice prostitution. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of pandering by compulsion shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-48: PIMPING:
   (A)   Acts Of Pimping: Any person who receives money or other property from
a prostitute, not for a lawful consideration, knowing it was earned in whole or
in part from the practice of prostitution, commits pimping. (Ord. 332, 11-17-
1968)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of pimping shall be fined not less than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-49: PUBLIC INDECENCY; ACTS OR LANGUAGE:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any indecent, lewd, or
lascivious act in any public place in the village, or to utter any lewd or
offensive words or to use any threatening or abusive language within the
hearing of another person publicly.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a public place in a
state of nudity, or to make any indecent exposure or any other lewd or indecent
act or behavior.
   (C)   "Public place" for purposes of this section means any place where such
conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. (Ord. 332, 11-17-
1968)
6-2-50: OBSCENITY; DEFINED AND PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Unlawful; Definitions: It shall be unlawful to commit obscenity. For
purposes of this section "person" means an individual, public or private
corporation, government, partnership, or unincorporated association. Any
reference to the masculine shall include the feminine, and any reference to the
singular shall include the plural.
   (B)   Elements Of The Offense: A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he:
      1.   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene; or
      2.   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene; or
      3.   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise make available anything obscene;
or
      4.   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his body for gain; or
      5.   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material with
intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal laws or
regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      6.   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented or
held out by him to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (C)   “Obscene” Defined: Any material or performance is obscene if: (1) the
average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find
that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and (2) the
average person, applying contemporary adult community standards, would find
that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate sexual acts
or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the
genitals; and (3) taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
   (D)   Interpretation Of Evidence: Obscenity shall be judged with reference
to ordinary adults, except that it shall be judged with reference to children
or other specially susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of
the material or the circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed
for or directed to such an audience.
Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale, dissemination,
distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being commercially
exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is probative with
respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the conclusion that the
matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value.
In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence shall be
admissible to show:
      1.   The character of the audience for which the material was designed or
to which it was directed;
      2.   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for ordinary
adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would probably have
on the behavior of such people;
      3.   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits of
the material, or absence thereof;
      4.   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state;
      5.   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising or
other promotion of the material;
      6.   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or disseminator.
   (E)   Permissive Inference: An intent to disseminate may be inferred from
the creation, purchase, procurement, or possession of a mold, engraved plate or
other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for reproducing multiple
copies, or the possession of more than three (3) copies of obscene material.
   (F)   Affirmative Defense: It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      1.   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
   (G)   Severability Clause: If any section, subsection, subdivision
paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this section, or any part thereof, or
application thereof to any person, firm, corporation, public agency, or
circumstance, is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or
ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this section
or any part thereof. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the
board of trustees that this section would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, section, or
part thereof not then been included.
   (H)   Violation And Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A person who is
convicted shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 332-A, 8-19-1981; amd. Ord. 575, 11-14-2001; Ord. 947, 8-
25-2021)
6-2-51: OBSCENE MARKING IN PUBLIC VIEW:
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, mark, draw, cut, or make any
obscene representations, language, or imagery in any place open to public view.
(Ord. 332, 11-17-1968; Ord. 947, 8-25-2021)
6-2-52: OBSCENITY; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge under the preceding section that
the dissemination:
   (A)   Was not for sale or gain and was made only to personal associates
other than children under eighteen (18) years of age;
   (B)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other specific
educational purpose for possession of such material. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-53: WINDOW PEEPING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer, or peep into, or be found
loitering around within view of any window within a building occupied as a
residence of another with the intent of watching or observing the activities of
persons therein. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-54: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to gamble or to keep a gambling place
within the corporate limits of the village as these terms are defined herein:
   (A)   Gambling: A person commits gambling when he:
      1.   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other things of value;
or
      2.   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or any political
nomination, appointment or election; or
      3.   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale, or lease of, any gambling device; or
      4.   Knowingly owns or possesses any books, instruments, or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been or are recorded or registered; or
      5.   Sells pools upon the results of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment or election; or
      6.   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or offers
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery; or
      7.   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, or other similar device; or
      8.   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, or drafts, prints,
or publishes any lottery ticket or share, or any policy ticket or similar
device, or any advertisement of any lottery or policy game; or
      9.   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means; or knowingly installs equipment for the transmission or receipt of such
information; except that nothing in this subsection prohibits transmission or
receipt of such information for the use of news reporting of sporting events or
contests.
   (B)   Gambling Place: A gambling place is any real estate, vehicle, boat, or
any other property whatsoever used for the purpose of gambling.
   (C)   Gambling Device: A gambling device is any clock, tape machine, slot
machine, or other machines or devices for the reception of money or other
things of value on chance or skill or upon the action of which money or other
things of value is staked, hazard, bet, won, or lost; or any mechanism,
furniture, fixture, equipment, or other device designed primarily for use in a
gambling place. A gambling place does not include:
      1.   A coin in the slot operated mechanical device played for amusement
which awards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device, which
device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the operation
thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns to the
player thereof no money, property, or right to receive money or property.
      2.   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard.
   (D)   Lottery: A lottery is a scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes
are distributed by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration
for a chance to win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a
lottery, raffle, gift, or sale or some other name.
   (E)   Policy Game: A policy game is any scheme or procedure whereby a person
promises or guarantees by an instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token, or
other device that any particular number, character, ticket, or certificate
shall in the event of any contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the
purchaser or holder to receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
   (F)   Bingo: The games commonly known as bingo, pull-tabs, jar games and
bona fide raffles (including the selling of chances), when conducted and used
in accordance with the bingo license and tax act 1 , the Illinois pull tabs and
jar games act 2 , or the raffles act 3 , and the equipment used for such games,
are excluded from the definitions of "gambling" and "gambling device".
   (G)   Video Gambling: Games commonly known as video gambling or video
gaming, when conducted in accordance with the video gaming act 4  and the
equipment used for such games, are excluded from the definitions of "gambling"
and "gambling device". (Ord. 713, 6-13-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 25/2.
2 2. 230 ILCS 20/1-1.
3 3. 230 ILCS 15/1.
4 4. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
6-2-55: KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Cancellation Of Licenses Or Permits: It shall be unlawful for any
person to knowingly permit any premises or property owned or occupied by him
under his control to be used as a gambling place.
When any premises is determined by a court having jurisdiction to be a gambling
place, all licenses or permits issued under the authority authorizing the
serving of food or liquor on such premises shall be void; and no license or
permit so canceled shall be reissued for such premises for a period of sixty
(60) days thereafter; nor shall any person convicted of keeping a gambling
place be reissued such license for one year from his conviction and, after a
second conviction of keeping a gambling place, any such person shall not be
reissued such license or permit.
   (B)   Seizure Of Gambling Devices And Gambling Funds: Every gambling device
which is incapable of lawful use is contraband and shall be subject to seizure
and confiscation by village police officers. Any money or other thing of value
intrinsically related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the village. Disposition of such gambling devices as may be
seized or confiscated shall be made according to law. Any gambling device that
fully complies with the provisions of the video gaming act is exempt from this
section.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine
of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for the first offense and not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for a subsequent
offense; in addition to any other penalty herein provided. (Ord. 713, 6-13-
2012)
6-2-56: VIOLATION OF CIVIL RIGHTS; ELEMENTS:
A person commits a violation of civil rights when:
   (A)   He prevents, interferes with, or denies to another, or conspires to do
the same, the full and equal access to, and enjoyment of the facilities and
services of any office, place, business, accommodation, amusement, or
conveyance because of race, religion, color, or national ancestry; or
   (B)   He, as an official, refuses to employ, or discriminates in the
employment, or participates in a scheme which discriminates in the employment
for any work, job, office, or project because of race, religion, color, or
national ancestry; or
   (C)   He, as an official, denies or refuses to any person the full and equal
access, use, or enjoyment of the services, facilities, accommodations,
advantages or privileges of his office, or of any property accommodations or
facilities under his care because of race, religion, color or national
ancestry. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-57: VIOLATION OF CIVIL RIGHTS; SANCTIONS:
   (A)   Criminal Penalty: A person convicted of a violation of civil rights
may be fined not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575,
11-14-2001)
   (B)   Enjoining As A Public Nuisance: Any violation of civil rights
occurring in any public office, accommodation, or amusement is declared a
public nuisance and may be abated in any manner provided by this code for the
abatement of public nuisances.
   (C)   Discharge Of Public Officials: When a public official shall be found
guilty of a violation of civil rights the person(s) (or village attorney,
state's attorney) aggrieved may file a petition in the circuit court wherein
the public official holds office or is employed, to discharge the official
complained of from office. The court shall order that the official be
immediately relieved of his office or duties, and shall order the official to
resign or be removed or discharged. Any person violating or refusing to enforce
such court order or decree shall be deemed in contempt of court.
   (D)   Penalties Not Mutually Exclusive: The penalties and remedies herein
provided by this section shall not be deemed mutually exclusive.
   (E)   Necessity As Affirmative Defense: Conduct which would otherwise be an
offense is justifiable by reason of necessity if the accused was without blame
in occasioning or developing the situation, and reasonably believed such
conduct was necessary to avoid a public or private injury greater than the
injury which might reasonably result from his own conduct. (Ord. 332, 11-17-
1968)
6-2-58: BRIBERY; OFFERING OR ACCEPTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person:
   (A)   To offer, promise, or give to any official, police officer, or
employee of the village any money, reward, service, privilege or thing of value
which he may not lawfully accept, with intent to influence the performance (or
nonperformance) of any official act, function, duty, or employment.
   (B)   To agree to accept, to receive or retain any money, reward, service,
privilege or thing of value which he may not lawfully accept, knowing or with
reason to know such benefit was offered, promised, or given with intent to
influence him in the performance (or nonperformance) of an official act,
function, duty, or employment. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-59: SOLICITATION TO COMMIT OFFENSE:
A person commits solicitation when, with intent that an offense be committed,
he commands, encourages, or requests another to commit that offense. (Ord. 332,
11-17-1968)
6-2-60: CONSPIRACY TO COMMIT OFFENSE:
A person commits conspiracy when, with intent that an offense be committed, he
agrees with another to the commission of that offense. No person may be
convicted of conspiracy to commit an offense unless an act in furtherance of
such agreement is alleged and proved to have been committed by him or by a
coconspirator. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-61: SOLICITATION AND CONSPIRACY; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE:
It shall be a defense to a charge of solicitation or conspiracy that if the
criminal objects were achieved the accused would not be guilty of the offense.
(Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-62: PUBLIC SOLICITATION OF FUNDS; REGISTRATION:
   (A)   No person shall solicit money, services, subscriptions, or any
valuable thing for any religious, charitable, or philanthropic cause, unless
such person shall register with the clerk identifying the cause and its
officers, the soliciting agents within the village, and the duration of such
solicitation.
   (B)   The clerk shall issue a certificate of registration; and such
certificate shall contain the information required in subsection (A) of this
section and shall be displayed on demand by any police officer or by anyone so
solicited. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-63: SOLICITATION OR PROMOTION BY TELEPHONE:
It shall be unlawful for any person in his own name or in the name of or for
the benefit of any other person to conduct any sales campaign or sales
promotion of any nature whatsoever by the use of the telephone without first
registering with the clerk of the village.
Any person desiring to conduct such campaign shall register with the clerk on a
form to be provided for that purpose, giving the name of the person or
organization, the article or articles proposed to be sold, the terms of sale,
the length of time the campaign shall continue and the names and addresses of
all persons assisting in the sales campaign within the village.
No person shall for pecuniary compensation or profit conduct or make any
solicitation by telephone for or on behalf of any actual or purported
charitable use, purpose, association, corporation, or institution. (Ord. 332,
11-17-1968)
6-2-64: TELEPHONES; OBSCENE, ANONYMOUS, MISREPRESENTED CALLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or permit another to make, any
obscene, anonymous, or falsely represented telephone calls to another person
for the purpose or reason of nuisance or harassment. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-65: FALSE ALARMS:
It shall be unlawful to intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of
fire, or of need of police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the
commission of such act. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-66: INTIMIDATION; THREATS COMMUNICATED:
A person commits intimidation when, with intent to cause another to perform or
to omit the performance of any act, he communicates to another without lawful
authority, a threat to perform any of the following acts:
   (A)   Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person or
property; or
   (B)   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
   (C)   Commit any criminal offense; or
   (D)   Accuse any person of an offense; or
   (E)   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
   (F)   Take action as a public official against anyone or anything, or
withhold official action, or to cause such action or withholding; or
   (G)   To bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other collective (mob)
action. (Ord. 332, 11-17-1968)
6-2-67: THEFT:
A person commits theft when he knowingly:
   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   (B)   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
   (C)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
   (D)   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe
that such property was stolen, and
      1.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
      2.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      3.   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
As used in this section, "property" means anything of value. Property includes
real estate, money, commercial instruments, admission or transportation
tickets, written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning
anything of value, labor, or services, or otherwise of value to the owner;
things growing on, affixed to, or found on land, or part of or affixed to any
building; electricity, gas and water; birds, animals and fish, which ordinarily
are kept in a state of confinement; food and drink; samples, cultures,
microorganisms, specimens, records, recordings, documents, blueprints,
drawings, maps and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs,
prototypes, or models thereof or any other articles, materials, devices,
substances and whole or partial copies, descriptions, photographs, prototypes
or models thereof which constitute, represent, evidence, reflect or record a
secret scientific, technical, merchandising, production or management
information, design, process, procedure, formula, invention or improvement.
(Ord. 454, 7-5-1978)
6-2-68: PERSONS ENTITLED TO ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No dramshop operator, licensee nor any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver
alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, or to
any intoxicated person or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard,
spendthrift, insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental
treatment.
No person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall
sell, give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of
twenty one (21) years, except in the performance of a recognized religious
ceremony or service.
For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any licensee, or
his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any
person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of
the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty one (21) years.
Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty
one (21) years any false or fraudulent written, printed or photostatic evidence
of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives or furnishes to any
person under the age of twenty one (21) years, evidence of age and
identification of any other person, shall be deemed guilty of the violation of
this section and fined accordingly.
Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, who presents or offers to
any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or photostatic
evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not actually his own
for the purpose of otherwise procuring, purchasing, attempting to purchase or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic
beverage, or who has in his possession any false or fraudulent written,
printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity, shall be deemed guilty of
the violation of this section and fined accordingly.
Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years, who has any alcoholic
beverage in his possession on any street or highway or in any public place or
in any public place open to the public, shall be deemed guilty of the violation
of this section. This section does not apply to the possession by a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years making actual delivery of an alcoholic
beverage in pursuance of the order of his parents or in pursuance of his
employment. (Ord. 404A, 8-12-1998)
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
6-2-69: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Definitions: The following terms shall apply to this section as
written unless context indicates or requires a different meaning:
 
                        Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which
                        are identified as including any parts of the plant
                        Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not, the seeds
                        thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such
                        plant and any compound, manufacture, sale, derivative,
                        mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
                        resin including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all
                        other cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally
                        occurring or synthetically produced ingredients,
CANNABIS:               whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction,
                        or independently by means of chemical synthesis; but
                        shall not include the mature stalks of such plant,
                        fiber produced from stalks, oil or cake made from the
                        seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture,
                        salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature
                        stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber,
                        oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which
                        is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" does not
                        include industrial hemp as defined and authorized under
                        the Illinois Industrial Hemp Act (505 ILCS 89/5).
                        Includes equipment, products, or materials intended to
                        be used for planting, propagating, cultivating,
CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA: growing, harvesting, manufacturing, producing,
                        processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
                        repackaging storing, containing, concealing, ingesting,
                        or otherwise introducing cannabis into the human body.
CRTA:                   The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1 et
                        seq.).
MEDICAL CANNABIS ACT:   The Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act
                        (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
                        Any place where a person could reasonably be expected
                        to be observed by others. "Public place" includes all
                        parts of buildings owned in whole or in part, or
                        leased, by the State of Illinois, the Village of Creve
                        Coeur, or any other unit of local government. "Public
                        place" also includes all areas in a park, recreation
PUBLIC PLACE:           area, wildlife area or playground owned in whole or in
                        part, leased, or managed by the State, the Village of
                        Creve Coeur, or any other unit of local government.
                        "Public place" does not include a private residence
                        unless the private residence is used to provide
                        licensed child care, foster care, or other similar
                        social service care on the premises.
 
   (B)   In General. It is unlawful for any person who is twenty-one (21) years
of age or older to possess cannabis in excess of the following limits:
      1.   For residents of the State of Illinois:
         (a)   Thirty (30) grams of cannabis flower;
         (b)   Five hundred (500) milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis-
infused product;
         (c)   Five (5) grams of cannabis concentrate
      2.   For individuals who are not residents of the State of Illinois:
         (a)   Fifteen (15) grams of cannabis flower;
         (b)   Two hundred and fifty (250) milligrams of THC contained in a
cannabis-infused product;
         (c)   Two and a half (2.5) grams of cannabis concentrate.
   (C)   Persons under twenty-one (21).
      1.   Possession. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-
one (21) to possess or consume cannabis.
      2.   Sales to minors. No cannabis business, or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent, or employee thereof shall sell, give, or deliver
cannabis to any person under the age of twenty-one (21). No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining cannabis shall sell, give, or deliver such
cannabis to any person under the age of twenty-one (21).
      3.   Furnishing or using false or fraudulent ID. Any person under the age
of twenty-one (21) who presents or offers to any cannabis business, or any
officer, associate, member, representative, agent, or employee thereof, any
evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent, modified, or not their
own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, procuring, or attempting to order,
purchase, or procure cannabis, or who has in their possession any false,
fraudulent, or modified evidence of age or identity is guilty of a violation of
this Section
6-2-69(C).
   (D)   Medical use of cannabis. Notwithstanding anything in this Section to
the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any individual who is a registered
qualifying patient or a registered designated caregiver, as those terms are
defined in the Medical Cannabis Act, to engage in the medical use of cannabis,
or to possess cannabis for the purpose of engaging or assisting in the medical
use of cannabis in accordance with the provisions of the Act. An individual is
presumed to be acting lawfully and in compliance with this Section and the
terms of the Act where such individual is in possession of:
      1.   A valid registry identification card issued pursuant to the Act; and
      2.   No more than two and a half (2.5) ounces of cannabis (or such other
amount as authorized by the Medical Cannabis Act or the CRTA).
   (E)   Cultivation of cannabis. It shall be unlawful for any individual to
cultivate cannabis for personal use; provided, however, that a registered
qualifying patient under the Medical Cannabis Act may cultivate up to five (5)
cannabis plants, with a cumulative limit of five (5) plants per household in
accordance with the CRTA.
   (F)   Possession and use prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall
be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following:
      1.   Possession or use of cannabis on a school bus, unless permitted for
a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Medical Cannabis Act;
      2.   Possession or use of cannabis on the grounds of any preschool,
primary school, or secondary school, unless permitted for a qualifying patient
or caregiver pursuant to the Medical Cannabis Act;
      3.   Possession or use of cannabis in any correctional facility;
      4.   Possession of cannabis in a vehicle, unless the cannabis is in a
reasonably secured, sealed container and reasonably inaccessible while the
vehicle is moving;
      5.   Use of cannabis in a motor vehicle;
      6.   Possession or use of cannabis in a private residence that is used at
any time to provide licensed child care or similar social service care on the
premises;
      7.   Use of cannabis in any public place within the Village;
      8.   Use of cannabis knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone
under twenty-one (21) years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis
patient under the Act;
      9.   Smoking cannabis in any place where smoking is prohibited under the
Smoke Free Illinois Act (410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.);
      10.   Operating, navigating, or being in actual physical control of any
motor vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat while using or under the influence of
cannabis in violation of Section 11-501 or 11-502.1 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code;
      11.   Facilitating the use of cannabis by any person who is not allowed
to use cannabis under this Section;
      12.   Transferring cannabis to any person contrary to this Section, the
Medical Cannabis Act or the CRTA;
      13.   The use of cannabis by a person who has a school bus permit or a
commercial driver's license while on duty.
   (G)   Penalty. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00); a second or subsequent violation of this section by
the same person shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord.
448, 4-5-1978; amd. Ord. 575, 11-14-2001; Ord. 898, 1-22-2020)
6-2-70: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   CANNABIS: Includes marijuana, hashish and other substances which are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing
or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant and
any compound, manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such
plant, its seeds or resin including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature
stalks of such plant, fiber produced from stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture
or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of
germination. "Cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Illinois Industrial Hemp Act (505 ILCS 89/5).
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA: Includes equipment, products, or materials intended
to be used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging storing, containing, concealing, ingesting, or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102
of the "Illinois controlled substances act" 1 , as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are peculiar to and/or used in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body
cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the "Illinois controlled
substances act" 2 . It includes, but is not limited to:
   Kits peculiar to and/or used in manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance.
   Isomerization devices peculiar to and/or used in increasing the potency of
any species of plant which is a controlled substance.
   Testing equipment peculiar to and/or used for private home use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances.
   Diluents and adulterants peculiar to and/or used for cutting a controlled
substance by private persons.
   Objects peculiar to and/or used for ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing cannabis, cocaine, or a synthetic drug product or misbranded drug
in violation of the Illinois Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, into the human body,
including, but not limited to, the following items:
   Air driven pipes.
   Any item whose purpose, or use is in violation of this section.
   Bongs.
   Carburetion tubes and devices.
   Carburetor pipes.
   Chillums.
   Dug-out.
   Electric pipes.
   Ice pipes or chillers.
   Metal bats-pipes.
   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
   Screens.
   Smoking and carburetion masks.
   Snuff dispensers.
   Water pipes.
   (B)   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia:
      1.   A person who possesses an item of drug paraphernalia is guilty of an
ordinance violation for which a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to possess cannabis paraphernalia.
      3.   In determining whether an item is drug paraphernalia, the trier of
fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or controlled
substance to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a controlled
substance on the drug paraphernalia.
   (C)   Exempt Items; Determination: This section shall not apply to the
following:
      1.   Items marketed for use in the preparation, compounding, packaging,
labeling, or other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to
lawful research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale; or
      2.   Items marketed for, or historically and customarily used in
connection with, the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing,
testing, analyzing, packing, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden
hose, rakes, sickles, baggies, and cigarette rolling papers.
      3.   Items listed in this subsection (C) which are marketed for
decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable
or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this section.
      4.   Possession of hypodermic syringes or needles as authorized under the
Illinois Hypodermic Syringes and Needles Act (720 ILCS 635/0.01 et seq.).
      5.    Possession of any item of cannabis paraphernalia used or reasonably
intended for use in the lawful consumption of cannabis pursuant to the Medical
Cannabis Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) or the CRTA (410 ILCS 705/1 et. seq.).
   (D)   A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not less
than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00); a second or subsequent violation of this section by the same
person shall be punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (E)   Forfeiture And Seizure Of Property:
      1.   All paraphernalia is subject to forfeiture, provided, however, that
no cannabis or cannabis paraphernalia shall be subject to forfeiture solely for
the possession of cannabis or cannabis paraphernalia by authorized persons in
accordance with the CRTA or the Medical Cannabis Act. Property subject to
forfeiture under this section may be seized by any peace officer upon process
issued by any court having jurisdiction over the property. Judgments in favor
of the state in a criminal or forfeiture proceeding based upon this section
against a person's specific property shall serve process authorizing a police
officer to seize such property without further process.
      2.   Seizure by a police officer may be made without process:
         (a)   If there is probable cause to believe that the property is
directly dangerous to health or safety and existing circumstances do not allow
reasonable time for the officer to obtain lawful process; or
         (b)   In accordance with the provisions of the code of criminal
procedure of 1963, as amended.
      3.   The presence of items which are deemed violative of this section or
are otherwise subject to its forfeiture provisions in an inventory shall not
subject the entire inventory to seizure of forfeiture.
      4.   Property taken or detained under this section shall not be subject
to replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of the law enforcement
department or agency employing the seizing officer, subject only to the order
or judgments of the circuit court having jurisdiction over the forfeiture
proceedings. When property is seized under this section, the chief
administrative officer of the seizing department or agency may place the
property under seal, or remove the property to a place designated by him.
      5.   No disposition may be made of property under seal until the validity
of the seizure has been determined in a circuit court, unless such court upon
application therefor orders the sale of perishable substances and the deposit
of the proceeds of the sale with the clerk of the court. The circuit court
shall rule on the validity of the seizure within thirty (30) days after the
seizure, unless a continuance is obtained by a person from whom the items were
seized or a person who otherwise has standing to complain, or by the state for
good cause shown. In no event shall a continuance be granted to the state
pursuant to this section extending beyond thirty (30) days. If judgment is
entered in favor of the person from whom the property is seized, all seized
property shall be returned immediately. Appeals from orders of the circuit
court shall be heard within sixty (60) days from the date judgment is entered.
Judgments in favor of the person entitled to possession of the subject property
shall serve as a mandate to the agency holding said property to return same
forthwith.
      6.   When property is forfeited under this section, the chief
administrative officer of the seizing department or agency may retain it for
official use, or forward it to the bureau of narcotics and dangerous drugs,
United States department of justice, or its successor agency, for disposition.
(Ord. 563, 11-26-1997; Ord. 898, 1-22-2020)
 
Notes
1 2. 720 ILCS 570/102.
2    720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.
6-2-71: POSSESSION/USE OF SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
   SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG: Any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid,
stimulant, or psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms are defined herein such
as, but not limited to, the examples of brand names or identifiers listed on
exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by
this reference.
   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID: Any laboratory created compound that functions
similar to the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including isomers,
esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor
agonist, such as, but not limited to, the examples of brand names or
identifiers listed on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated herein by this reference.
   SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGEN: Any compound that mimics the effects of
any federally controlled schedule I substance, including, but not limited to,
any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters,
ethers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, such as, but
not limited to, the examples of brand names or identifiers listed on exhibit A
attached to the ordinance codified herein and incorporated herein by this
reference.
   SYNTHETIC STIMULANT: Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally
controlled schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including salts,
isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant
effect on the central nervous system, such as, but not limited to, the examples
of brand names or identifiers listed on exhibit A attached to the ordinance
codified herein and incorporated herein by this reference.
   (B)   Sale Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer
for sale, or deliver any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, a
synthetic stimulant or a synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen.
   (C)   Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess a
product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant or a
synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen.
   (D)   Use: It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or be under the
influence of a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant, or a synthetic
psychedelic/hallucinogen.
   (E)   Penalties: Any person found to be in violation of this section shall
be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each
violation of this section, or every day a violation continues to exist, shall
constitute a new and separate violation. (Ord. 710, 3-14-2012)
6-2-72: SOCIAL HOST RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
   ALCOHOL: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine,
whiskey, rum, brandy, gin, or any other distilled spirits including dilutions
and mixtures thereof from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or
solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and which contains one-half of
one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes
either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
   CONVEYANCE: Any vehicle, trailer, watercraft, or container operated for the
transportation of persons or property.
   EVENT OR GATHERING: Any group of two (2) or more persons who have assembled
or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
   HOST: To overtly aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control, or permit a gathering or event.
   ILLICIT DRUGS: Any drug, substance, or compound prohibited by law, as well
as drugs prescribed by a physician which are in the possession of or used by
someone other than the person to whom the drug was prescribed. “Illicit drugs”
includes cannabis, except where the possession and use thereof is explicitly
authorized by the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS
130/1 et seq.) or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/101 et
seq.).
   PARENT: Any persons having legal custody of a juvenile:
      1.   As a natural, adoptive, or step parent;
      2.   As a legal guardian; or
      3.   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
   PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, corporation, association
of one or more individuals, or other organization or business entity.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, street, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, parks, businesses or parking lots.
   REASONABLE STEPS: Reasonable actions taken by a person who is the host of an
event or gathering to prevent the consumption of alcohol, alcoholic beverages
and illicit drugs at the event or gathering, including, but not limited to,
controlling access to alcohol and alcoholic beverages; controlling the quantity
of alcohol and alcoholic beverages present; verifying the age of persons in
attendance by inspecting driver's licenses or other government issued
identification cards to ensure underage persons are not consuming alcohol or
alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs, from the location of the event or
gathering; and calling for law enforcement assistance in the event that
underage persons are in possession of alcohol, alcoholic beverages or illicit
drugs.
   RELIGIOUS CEREMONY: The possession, consumption and dispensation of alcohol
or an alcoholic beverage for the purpose of conducting any bona fide rite or
religious ceremony.
   RESIDENCE OR PREMISES: Any home, yard, farm, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park, or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specified
for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or
used with or without permission or compensation.
   RESPONSE COSTS: The costs associated with response by law enforcement, fire,
and other emergency response providers to an event or gathering, including, but
not limited to:
      1.   Salaries and benefits of law enforcement, code enforcement, fire or
other emergency response personnel for the amount of time spent responding to,
remaining at, investigating and otherwise dealing with an event or gathering,
and the administrative cost attributable to such responses;
      2.   The cost of any medical treatment for any law enforcement, code
enforcement, fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to,
remaining at, or leaving the scene of, or otherwise dealing with an event or
gathering;
      3.   The cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged, and
the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at,
leaving the scene of, or otherwise dealing with an event or gathering.
   UNDERAGE PERSON: Any individual person under twenty one (21) years of age.
   (B)   Prohibited Conduct And Responsibilities Of Persons Hosting An Event Or
Gathering:
      1.   Except as permitted by state law, it is unlawful for any person to
host an event or gathering at: a) his or her residence or premises, b) a public
place or any other residence or premises under his or her control, or c) in any
conveyance under his or her control, where illicit drugs, alcohol, or alcoholic
beverages are being consumed by an underage person, and the person hosting the
event or gathering, has actual or constructive knowledge that an underage
person is consuming illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages.
      2.   A person who hosts an event or gathering does not have to be present
at the event or gathering to be liable under this section.
      3.   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall be presumed to have
actual or constructive knowledge that underage persons have consumed illicit
drugs, alcohol, or alcoholic beverages if such person is present at the
location of the event or gathering at the time any underage person consumes
illicit drugs, alcohol or an alcoholic beverage. (The presumption can be
rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence.)
      4.   It is the affirmative duty of any person who hosts an event or
gathering at his or her residence or premises, a public place or any other
residence or premises under his or her control, or in any conveyance under his
or her control, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the consumption of
illicit drugs, alcohol, or alcoholic beverages by any underage person at such
event or gathering.
      5.   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall be deemed to have
actual or constructive knowledge that an underage person has consumed or is
consuming illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages at the event or
gathering if the person has not taken all reasonable steps to prevent the
consumption of illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages by underage
persons.
      6.   A person who hosts an event or gathering shall not be in violation
of this section if he or she: a) seeks assistance from the village police
department or other law enforcement agency to remove any person who refuses to
abide by the person's performance of the duties imposed by this section, or b)
terminates the event or gathering because the person has been unable to prevent
underage persons from consuming illicit drugs, alcohol or alcoholic beverages
despite having taken all reasonable steps to do so, as long as such request or
termination is made before any other person makes a complaint to the village
police department or other law enforcement agency about the event or gathering.
      7.   This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcohol
or alcoholic beverages that occur at a religious ceremony or exclusively
between an underage person and his or her parent, as permitted by state law.
      8.   A person is responsible for and subject to penalties for violating
this section if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels,
conspires with or otherwise procures another person in hosting an event or
gathering where that person has actual or constructive knowledge that underage
persons will be consuming alcohol, alcoholic beverages or illicit drugs at such
event or gathering.
   (C)   Penalties:
      1.   Responsible For Costs: Any person found to be in violation of this
section shall be responsible for any and all response costs.
      2.   Fines: Any person who violates or assists in the violation of any
provision of this section shall be deemed to have committed a petty offense and
shall be fined not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each
such violation. Each day on which, or during which, a violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
         (a)   The first violation of this section shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
         (b)   A second or subsequent violation of this section by the same
person, within a twelve (12) month period shall be punishable by a fine of no
less than seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00).
      3.   Enforcement: Violations of this section may be enforced by issuance
of a notice of violation for the fine and response costs amounts, and/or by
issuance of a "notice to appear" in court. (Ord. 746, 4-24-2013; amd. Ord. 898,
1-22-2020)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Animals Running At Large Prohibited
6-3-3: Inoculation And Registration Required
6-3-4: Collar Required With Registration Tags Attached
6-3-5: Removal Of Collar Or Tags Restricted
6-3-6: Animals Prohibited In Village
6-3-7: Temporary License For Prohibited Animals
6-3-8: Farm Animals Prohibited
6-3-9: Rabbits Restricted
6-3-10: Humane Care Of Animals
6-3-11: Abandonment Prohibited
6-3-12: Acts Of Cruelty To Animals Prohibited
6-3-13: Impoundment Of Victimized Animals
6-3-14: Diseased And Injured Animals
6-3-15: Dead Animals Prohibited
6-3-16: Reporting Animal Bites Required
6-3-17: Disposal Of Wild Animals Which Have Bitten Persons
6-3-18: Liberation Of Owned, Impounded Or Captured Animals Prohibited
6-3-19: Interference With Animal Control Agent
6-3-20: Provoking Animals Prohibited
6-3-21: Removal Of Waste
6-3-22: Animal Considered A Nuisance
6-3-23: Dangerous Dog Determination And Requirements
6-3-24: Vicious Dog Determination And Requirements
6-3-25: Village Fees For Redemption/Adoption
6-3-26: Duties Of Driver Of Motor Vehicle Striking Animal
6-3-27: Multiple Pet Owner License
6-3-28: Penalty
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   ANIMAL: Every nonhuman species of animal, both domestic and wild.
   ANIMAL CONTROL AGENT: An administrator, director, deputies and agents of the
animal shelter under contract with the village to provide animal control
services, the Tazewell County animal control director and its designee, or an
animal control officer of the village appointed by the mayor. The chief of
police of the village and the village's law enforcement officers are also
empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   ANIMAL HOARDER: A person who: a) possesses a large number of companion
animals; b) fails to humanely care for their animals providing food, water and
shelter as required, or who is cruel to animals in their care; c) keeps the
companion animals in an overcrowded or unsanitary environment; and d) displays
an inability to recognize or understand the nature of or has a reckless
disregard for the conditions under which the companion animals are living and
the deleterious impact they have on the companion animals' and owner's health
and well being.
   ANIMAL SHELTER: The animal shelter or shelters providing services to the
village for enforcement of this chapter including the Tazewell County animal
and rabies control department.
AT LARGE: Any animal when it is off the premises of its owner's real property
and not restrained by a competent person.
   BREEDER: A person who breeds animals for sale.
   CAT: All domestic members of the feline family Felis catus.
   COMPETENT PERSON: A person capable of physically controlling the animal in
question and to whose command the animal is obedient.
   CONFINE: The physical restraint of an animal by a fence, structure, chain,
rope or other means of a sufficient strength or construction to restrain the
animal in question.
   DANGEROUS DOG: (A) Any individual dog anywhere other than upon the property
of the owner or custodian of the dog and unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by
its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal; or
   (B)   A dog that, without justification, bites a person and does not cause
serious physical injury.
   DOG: Includes all domestic members of the canine family Canis familiaris.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL: The following are considered to be domestic animals:
   (A)   Dogs (not including hybrids of dogs).
   (B)   Cats (not including hybrids of cats).
   (C)   Domestic rodents (guinea pigs, hamsters, white rats, white mice).
   (D)   Farm animals (any member of the swine, ovine, caprine, bovine or
equine families, poultry or rabbits).
   (E)   Non-life threatening, nonpoisonous reptiles or amphibians.
   (F)   Nonpoisonous, non-life threatening fish.
   (G)   All birds, except those protected as wild birds by state or federal
statutes.
   (H)   Ferrets.
   DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete and independent, living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   ENCLOSURE FOR VICIOUS DOGS: A securely locked pen, kennel or structure of at
least six feet (6') in height designed and constructed for the keeping of a
vicious dog and designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
standards set forth herein. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure
sides and a secure top attached to the sides, as well as be suitable to prevent
the entry of young children. All structures used to confine vicious dogs must
be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the
structure and left unattended. Such structure must have a secure bottom or
floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded
in the ground not less than two feet (2'). All structures erected to house
vicious dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the
village. All such structures must be adequately lighted, ventilated and kept in
a clean and sanitary condition.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL: Any nondomestic animal not native to the state.
   KENNEL: An establishment where dogs or cats are bred, raised, trained or
boarded.
   MULTIPLE PET OWNER: Any person who harbors more than three (3) dogs or cats,
or any combination thereof, over four (4) months of age in a dwelling unit or
on property in the village.
   OWNER: Any person seventeen (17) years of age or older; or parent or
guardian of any person under the age of seventeen (17) years; or parent or
guardian of an incapacitated person having a right of property in an animal; or
who acts as custodian, cares for, keeps, feeds or knowingly permits an animal
to remain on or about any premises occupied by such person; or a person who
registers an inoculation certificate for an animal with the county.
   PERSON: An individual, partnership, corporation, joint stock association, or
joint venture, and includes any trustee, estate, receiver, assignee or personal
representative.
   POULTRY: Domesticated birds raised for show, eggs or meat.
   REDEMPTION FEE: Fees for reimbursement to the village for costs incurred
when impounding an animal and enforcing this chapter, which include the
handling and processing of the animal's entry and exit into the animal shelter.
This fee shall not include boarding, medical or transportation costs incurred
by the shelter in keeping such animal.
   RESTRAINT: Any animal that is not found on the property of its owner when it
is:
   (A)   Controlled by a line or leash not more than six feet (6') in length
when such line or leash is held by a competent person.
   (B)   Controlled by a leash of fifty feet (50') or less during a training
session conducted by a competent person.
   (C)   Confined within a motor vehicle.
   (D)   Confined in a cage or other animal carrier.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE: A structure of sufficient height and construction that
does not allow contact between the animal confined and other animals or
persons.
   STERILIZED: The surgical spay of a female animal or castration of a male
animal, so as to render such animal incapable of producing. Also known as
spayed and/or neutered.
   VICIOUS DOG: A dog that, without justification:
   (A)   Attacks a person and causes serious physical injury or death; or
   (B)   Any individual dog that has bitten another companion animal or human
upon three (3) separate occasions.
   WILD ANIMAL: Any living member of the animal kingdom (including exotic
animals) other than a domestic animal. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
6-3-2: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   (A)   The owner of any animal shall keep such animal confined or under
restraint at all times when it is off the premises of the owner's real property
and shall not permit such animal to be at large.
   (B)   Any animal found running at large may be apprehended and impounded in
any existing available public pound. Any dog, cat or other animal running at
large within the village which endangers the safety of any person or animal may
be slain or captured and impounded by an animal control officer or law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Dogs being used in hunting, field trials;
      2.   Dog shows while on public lands set aside for those purposes;
      3.   While on the private property of others with the actual, implied,
customary or constructive consent of the owner of such private premises;
      4.   While going to or coming from a hunting, field trial or dog show
site;
      5.   Bloodhounds or other dogs used for tracking in conjunction with
police activities;
      6.   Dogs of the canine corps of any police force, the state police, any
federal law enforcement agency, or the armed forces while being used to conduct
official business or being used for official purposes.
   (D)   Any animal ticketed for running at large a second or subsequent time
must be spayed or neutered (at owner's expense) within thirty (30) days after
being found to be at large within thirty (30) days of the finding, unless the
animal is already spayed or neutered. Failure to comply shall result in
impoundment with Tazewell County animal control. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-3: INOCULATION AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
   (A)   No person shall own, possess, keep, maintain or harbor any dog or cat
over the age of four (4) months of age without causing such dog or cat to be
inoculated against rabies as required by the code of Tazewell County and
registering such certificate of the inoculation with the office of the
administrator of the county rabies control program. Such inoculation shall be
required, regardless of whether the dog or cat is confined at all times to an
enclosed area. The registration of the rabies vaccination certificate may be
transferred from one owner to another, but not from one animal to another.
   (B)   If an animal is not inoculated against rabies after its owner has been
found to be in violation of this section two (2) times within a twelve (12)
month period, such animal shall be impounded by the animal control agent and
may be redeemed or disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-4: COLLAR REQUIRED WITH REGISTRATION TAGS ATTACHED:
No person shall own, possess, keep, maintain or harbor any dog or cat over four
(4) months of age within the village without providing such dog or cat with a
collar to be worn when said animal is outside a secure enclosure. Collars for
dogs shall be of sufficient strength to control and restrain the animal without
injury to the animal. Animals restrained by rope or chains must have collars.
The registration tag, issued pursuant to the code of Tazewell County requiring
inoculation by a licensed veterinarian, shall be attached to the collar. (Ord.
646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-5: REMOVAL OF COLLAR OR TAGS RESTRICTED:
No person shall, without the consent of the owner or keeper of any dog or cat,
take away or otherwise remove the registration tag, identification tag or
collar from any dog or cat. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-6: ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN VILLAGE:
   (A)   Prohibited: No person shall keep, harbor, possess, act as custodian or
have a right of property in a wild animal except zoos, veterinary hospitals,
animal shelters, corporations, or individuals, all of which must be legally
licensed by federal and/or state statutes, and only as otherwise permitted
herein. No person shall own, use, keep or permit to be at large within the
village any of the following animals: bees, pigeons, horses, cattle, sheep,
ponies, mules, goats, pigs, swine, hogs, ducks, geese, chickens, minks, skunks,
foxes, rabbits, or any other livestock or poultry or any wild or vicious
animals dangerous to mankind. Individuals owning or fostering animals trained
or to be trained for service to persons with disabilities are excepted. Any
individual keeping a service animal must, upon request, provide documentation
of fostering and training from a certified training organization. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any otherwise prohibited animal
when such animal is part of a show, fair, parade, or other demonstration for
which the village has issued a permit.
   (B)   Additional Animals Prohibited: No individual or corporation shall have
a right of property in, keep, harbor, care for, act as custodian of or maintain
in his possession any of the animals described below: any member of the family
Felidae (except the species Felis catus, domestic cat), all members of the
family Ursidae, all members of the family Hyaenidae, any member of the family
Canidae (except the species Canis familiaris, domestic dog), all members of the
family Elephantidae, any nonhuman primate, or any hybrids thereof.
   (C)   Impoundment: The animal control agent may impound animals of any
person violating this chapter. Such animals shall be redeemed by the owner upon
payment to the animal shelter manager or delegate the lawful fees accrued
pursuant to this chapter, after verification of appropriate licensing, and
after showing an ability to conform with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Permit: Any person desiring to secure a permit for the purpose of
having, possessing, exhibiting, or parading a prohibited animal as set forth in
this chapter, shall make application, in writing, to the village clerk. The
village clerk shall submit such application to the village board, and the
village board or a committee therefrom shall investigate the application, and
also the manner in which it is proposed to exhibit or parade such animal; or in
the case of a person desiring to possess the same, shall investigate the
premises upon which it is proposed to have or keep the same. After such
investigation has been completed and report made back to the village board, the
village board shall thereupon either approve or disapprove said application. If
the application is approved, the clerk shall issue a written permit to the
applicant giving the applicant the right to have, possess, exhibit or parade
said wild animal in the manner set forth in said application. If the
application is not approved, the owner of the animal will either make
arrangements to remove the animal from the village or the animal will be
euthanized.
The issuance of any such permit shall not relieve or discharge the owner or
possessor of said wild animal from any damage it may cause or do to persons or
property in the village, nor shall the village in any manner be obligated for
any such damage which may occur by reason of the fact that the village has
issued a permit to the person owning or possessing such animal or animals.
(Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-7: TEMPORARY LICENSE FOR PROHIBITED ANIMALS:
A license for a temporary exhibit of prohibited animals such as farm animals
otherwise prohibited by this chapter may be obtained if the following
conditions are satisfied:
   (A)   Applicant shall provide copies of current USDA permit, an itinerary of
performances scheduled thirty (30) days prior and thirty (30) days after
performance in the village of Creve Coeur, and a list of every animal to be
possessed or exhibited.
      1.   Each animal described in subsection
6-3-6(A) of this chapter shall be prohibited from any contact with the public.
      2.   The applicant shall supply certification of insurance naming the
host agency and naming the village of Creve Coeur as additional insured in the
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
      3.   The licensee or keeper of any animal shall promptly report the
escape of any such animal to the local law enforcement agency and the local
animal shelter.
   (B)   The provisions of this section relative to licensing do not apply to
any municipality, county, state or other publicly owned wildlife exhibit. (Ord.
646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-8: FARM ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
Except as provided in the zoning ordinance, and this chapter, all farm animals,
including, but not limited to, members of the swine, ovine, bovine, caprine or
equine families, poultry, and rabbits except as noted in section
6-3-9 of this chapter, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-9: RABBITS RESTRICTED:
   (A)   Possession of rabbits within the village is a violation of the law
except under the following conditions:
      1.   The owner shall provide a cage of at least eight (8) cubic feet,
with no dimension less than one foot (1') for each animal.
      2.   Each cage or structure shall be placed at least ten feet (10') from
all property lines.
      3.   The total number of rabbits shall be no more than three (3) or more
than one animal for every three thousand (3,000) square feet of lot area,
whichever is less.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, any rabbit over six (6) weeks old
shall be counted. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-10: HUMANE CARE OF ANIMALS:
   (A)   No owner shall fail to provide his/her animal with:
      1.   Sufficient, nutritious food.
      2.   Fresh, clean water at all times.
      3.   A shelter which has four (4) sides, a roof, floor, and bedding. The
shelter shall be of sufficient size to permit such animal to stand up and turn
around inside when fully grown and allow retention of body heat. The shelter
shall be placed to provide shade from the sun and protection from the weather.
      4.   Regular and sufficient veterinary care to prevent suffering and
maintain health. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-11: ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any animal within the village.
(Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-12: ACTS OF CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall:
      1.   Kill, wound or attempt to kill or wound any domestic animal.
      2.   Put to death any domestic animal except by euthanasia under the
supervision of a licensed veterinarian of the state.
      3.   Beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise
abuse an animal.
      4.   Cause, instigate, permit or attend any dogfight, cockfight,
bullfight or other combat between animals or humans.
      5.   Crop an animal's ears, dock an animal's tail or perform similar
surgeries except a licensed veterinarian of the state.
      6.   Allow any animal to remain unattended by a competent person in a
motor vehicle when the animal's life, health or safety is threatened.
      7.   Engage in "animal hoarding" as defined herein and as prohibited by
the humane care of animals act.
      8.   Engage in conduct prohibited by the Illinois animal control act or
humane care of animals act.
      9.   Be a hoarder of companion animals.
      10.   Allow animals to fight with each other for the purposes of betting,
sport or leisure. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-13: IMPOUNDMENT OF VICTIMIZED ANIMALS:
In the event that the animal control agent finds a domestic animal to be a
victim of cruelty, neglect, or abandonment as defined by this chapter, he shall
have the right to forthwith remove or cause to have removed any such animal to
a safe place for care or to euthanize such animal when necessary to prevent
further suffering, all at the owner's expense. Return to the owner may be
denied or withheld until the owner shall have made full payment for all
expenses incurred. Treatment of an animal by any method specified in this
section does not relieve the owner of liability for violations and for any
accrued charges. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-14: DISEASED AND INJURED ANIMALS:
   (A)   No diseased or sickly horse, cow, hog, dog, cat or other animal nor
any that has been exposed to any disease that is contagious among such animals
shall be brought into the village unless under veterinary care.
   (B)   Any animal, being in any street or public place within the village,
appearing, in the estimation of the animal control agent or any inspector of
the county health department, to be injured or diseased and past recovery for
any useful purpose, and not being attended and properly cared for by the owner
or some proper person to have charge thereof for the owner, and not having been
removed to some private premises or to some place designated by the animal
control agent or inspector within one hour after being found or left in such
condition, may be deprived of life as directed by such officer or agent.
   (C)   No person, other than inspectors or officers of the county health
department or law enforcement officers, or persons authorized by contract or
otherwise, shall in any way interfere with the removal of such dead, sick or
injured animal in such street or place. No person shall skin or wound such
animal in any street or public place, unless to terminate its life as herein
authorized; except that the owner or person having control of such animal may
terminate the life thereof in the presence and by the consent of a law
enforcement officer, an inspector of the county health department or the animal
control agent. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-15: DEAD ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   No person shall:
      1.   Allow the body, or any part thereof, of any dead animal to decompose
and putrefy by remaining on his property.
      2.   Skin, dismember, butcher, dress or exhibit any dead animals in view
of the public.
   (B)   The owner of an animal shall be responsible for the disposal of such
animal's remains on its death from whatever cause and regardless of the
location of such animal's remains. The owner of the property where a dead
animal is located if that dead animal is wild, unowned, or an animal whose
owner cannot be ascertained, shall be responsible for the disposal of the dead
animal's remains found on their property. Each day the animal's remains are on
the property constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-16: REPORTING ANIMAL BITES REQUIRED:
Persons having knowledge of someone being bitten by an animal must report,
within twenty four (24) hours, to the village police department or animal
control agent. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-17: DISPOSAL OF WILD ANIMALS WHICH HAVE BITTEN PERSONS:
Every wild animal which has bitten a person shall be humanely destroyed
immediately. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-18: LIBERATION OF OWNED, IMPOUNDED OR CAPTURED ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
No person shall remove from restraint or release from confinement any animal
belonging to another person, unless in an emergency or with the consent of the
owner. Additionally, it is unlawful for any person to liberate or attempt to
liberate any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter from a place
of confinement or from within a vehicle used for confinement and conveyance to
the animal shelter. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-19: INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL AGENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with the
animal control agent or any of his/her delegates or the police in the
performance of their duties, or to prevent or attempt to prevent the animal
control agent or any of his delegates or the police from capturing or
impounding any animal within the village. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-20: PROVOKING ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally provoke any animal so as
to create a nuisance to the neighborhood or cause a violation of any provisions
of this chapter. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-21: REMOVAL OF WASTE:
The owner of any animal shall promptly remove any deposit of such animal's
waste wherever it may exist in the village. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-22: ANIMAL CONSIDERED A NUISANCE:
   (A)   No person shall own, possess, or harbor a nuisance animal within the
village. An animal, other than a dog trained for law enforcement in the
performance of its duty, shall be considered a nuisance if such animal:
      1.   Damages real or personal property other than the owner's; or
      2.   Causes unsanitary, dangerous or unreasonably offensive conditions;
or
      3.   Causes a disturbance by excessive barking, caterwauling or other
noisemaking.
Each incident where an animal constitutes a nuisance constitutes a new and
separate offense. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-23: DANGEROUS DOG DETERMINATION AND REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The village shall protect its residents from dangerous dogs.
Therefore, the village, with the assistance of Tazewell County animal control
shall investigate complaints of dangerous dogs, and identify said animals in
the following manner:
      1.   Within ten (10) business days of becoming aware of any complaint or
alleged infraction that shows a dog is dangerous, the Creve Coeur police
department or the Tazewell County animal control shall notify the owner of the
animal that an investigation is under way to determine whether or not their dog
is dangerous. The investigator shall interview witnesses, gather evidence,
speak with the owner of the animal in question and make a detailed written
report. No dog shall be deemed dangerous unless it is shown to be a dangerous
dog by a preponderance of the evidence.
      2.   The investigator, either the Creve Coeur police department or
Tazewell County animal control, shall give the owner of the dog the opportunity
to defend their dog and provide an interview as to the reason for their dog's
conduct.
      3.   A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the dog's conduct was
justified because:
         (a)   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was
committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or was
committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property
occupied by the owner of the animal;
         (b)   The threatened person was abusing, assaulting or physically
threatening the dog or its offspring;
         (c)   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was
attacking or threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
         (d)   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting
itself, its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or
offspring.
      4.   Once the village or Tazewell County animal control determines a dog
is dangerous, they shall notify the owner of the determination and the owner
shall have thirty five (35) days to comply with the requirements of the
dangerous dog determination or the dog may be impounded.
      5.   If the owner disputes the determination, the owner must obtain
review through the circuit court within thirty (30) days of the determination.
The court shall review the matter de novo and will affirm the determination of
the village or Tazewell County animal control if the village meets the
preponderance of the evidence burden 1 . (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
   (B)   If deemed dangerous, Tazewell County animal control or the village
shall require the following:
      1.   The payment of a fifty dollar ($50.00) public safety fine to
Tazewell County animal control be deposited into the pet population control
fund.
      2.   Registration of the dangerous dog with the village clerk and the
payment of a onetime registration fee in the amount established annually by the
village board and published in the office of the village clerk.
      3.   Proof to the village and Tazewell County animal control that the dog
is spayed or neutered and microchipped. If the dog is not currently, the dog
must be spayed or neutered and microchipped at the owner's expense and proof
must be provided to the village and to Tazewell County animal control within
thirty (30) days.
      4.   Depending on the specific dog in question, Tazewell County animal
control or the village may also require:
         (a)   The dog receive behavioral training.
         (b)   The dog never be under the control of anyone under the age of
eighteen (18) years when it is on public premises.
         (c)   A muzzle whenever the dog is on public premises so that it
cannot bite any person or companion animal. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly permit any
dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when not under control by
leash or other recognized control methods. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. 510 ILCS 5/15.3(a).
6-3-24: VICIOUS DOG DETERMINATION AND REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   In order to have a dog deemed "vicious" a law enforcement officer or
the Tazewell County animal control must give notice of the infraction that is
the basis of the investigation to the owner, conduct a thorough investigation,
interview any witnesses, including the owner, gather any existing medical
records, veterinary medical records or behavioral evidence, and make a detailed
report recommending a finding that the dog is a vicious dog and give the report
to the village attorney and the owner of the dog.
   (B)   The village attorney shall then file an action in the circuit court
requesting that the dog be deemed a vicious dog.
   (C)   The village must prove its case by clear and convincing evidence.
   (D)   A dog may not be considered vicious if the court determines that the
conduct of the dog was justified because:
      1.   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing
a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog or was committing a
wilful trespass or other tort upon the premises or property occupied by the
owner of the animal;
      2.   The threatened person was abusing, assaulting or physically
threatening the dog or its offspring;
      3.   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking or
threatening to attack the dog or its offspring; or
      4.   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself,
its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
      5.   No dog shall be deemed "vicious" if it is a professionally trained
law enforcement dog, guide dog, or guard duty dog. Vicious dogs shall not be
classified in a manner that is specific as to breed. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
   (E)   If deemed vicious the judge may order the dog euthanized or shall
order that the dog only be released to its owner under the following
conditions:
      1.   The owner shall pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) public safety
fine to Tazewell County animal control to be deposited into the pet population
control fund.
      2.   The owner shall register the dog with the village clerk and pay the
fee in the amount established annually by the village board and published in
the office of the village clerk.
      3.   The dog shall be spayed or neutered within ten (10) days of the
finding at the expense of its owner and microchipped.
      4.   The dog is subject to enclosure (which must be inspected by the
Creve Coeur police department or Tazewell County animal control prior to the
dog's return to the household).
      5.   The owner shall be prohibited from selling or giving the dog to
others and shall be required to notify Tazewell County animal control in the
event that the owner is moving from the village.
      6.   The owner is required to keep liability insurance covering actions
of the dog in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00)
per incident.
      7.   If an owner fails to comply with these requirements, Tazewell County
animal control shall impound the dog and may euthanize the dog after fifteen
(15) days elapse. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
   (F)   No person shall keep or maintain any dog that is vicious unless the
dog is kept in an enclosure. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-25: VILLAGE FEES FOR REDEMPTION/ADOPTION:
   (A)   The village redemption fee for any registered dog or cat impounded at
the animal shelter shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The redemption fee for any
unregistered dog or cat impounded at the animal shelter shall be ninety dollars
($90.00).
   (B)   In addition to the redemption fees to be charged for every animal
impounded, the owner or redeemer of such dog or cat shall pay the animal
shelter for the cost of transporting it, boarding for the entire period that it
was impounded, the cost of microchipping if the animal is not microchipped and
the cost of spaying/neutering if the animal requires sterilization, and all
medical charges which have accrued as a result of medical treatment. These
redemption, boarding, and medical costs shall be paid by the owner, even if the
animal is not redeemed by the owner. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-26: DUTIES OF DRIVER OF MOTOR VEHICLE STRIKING ANIMAL:
Any person whose motor vehicle strikes a dog or cat within the village shall
promptly report such occurrence to the animal shelter or police department with
a description of the animal struck, condition of the animal and the location of
the striking. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
6-3-27: MULTIPLE PET OWNER LICENSE:
   (A)   License: Multiple pet owners shall obtain an annual license from the
village upon payment of a fee established annually by the village board and
published in the office of the village clerk. Such license shall be obtained no
later than thirty (30) days after assuming ownership of a fourth animal and
must be renewed annually by January 1. The village may charge a lower fee for
renewals or may even eliminate an annual fee at the inspector's election if the
owner's premises is rated excellent upon inspection. Payment by a multiple pet
owner shall not exempt such licensee from payment of county registration fees
for each dog or cat owned by him. Licenses shall only be granted if multiple
pet ownership is allowed under the village zoning ordinance.
   (B)   Inspection: An applicant for a multiple pet license shall consent to
the inspection of the premises where his animals are kept or maintained. Such
inspection shall be performed before issuance of the license or upon receipt of
a complaint. Annual inspections may be required for multiple pet owners with
marginally acceptable standards. Such inspection may be performed by the animal
control agent or delegate. Failure to comply with a request for inspection is a
violation of this chapter. Holders of multiple pet licenses shall conform to
the requirements of this chapter, and:
      1.   The animals shall be kept or maintained within a structure or
building that:
         (a)   Complies with this code and the code of Tazewell County.
         (b)   Does not constitute a nuisance or danger to the health or
welfare of its inhabitants nor surrounding residents.
      2.   If the animals are kept or maintained outside a building:
         (a)   The shelter shall be placed in the rear yard.
         (b)   The shelter shall be placed at least ten feet (10') from all
property lines.
         (c)   No more than two (2) dogs may be housed outside at any one time
on a property lot or lots of less than ten thousand eight hundred ninety
(10,890) square feet.
         (d)   A dog shall be deemed to be housed outside if said dog is
outside for more than eight (8) hours in the aggregate during any twenty four
(24) hour period or is outside for more than thirty (30) minutes between the
hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      3.   The applicant shall not have been found guilty of more than three
(3) violations of this chapter within the previous three (3) years from the
date of application.
   (C)   Revocation Of Multiple Pet License: Upon conviction of a second
violation of the requirements pursuant to this chapter, the animal agent shall
revoke the multiple pet license for a period of not less than three (3) months
nor more than five (5) years, the length of the revocation period to be
determined by the number and severity of the violations. After expiration of
the revocation period, the license shall not be automatically reinstated. The
former licensee must reapply for the license and show an ability to conform to
the existing ordinances before he may be issued a multiple pet license.
   (D)   Animals To Animal Shelter: Upon revocation of the license, the owner
shall relinquish ownership of his animals to the animal shelter.
   (E)   Impoundment Of Multiple Pets:
      1.   The animal shelter manager or delegate may impound the dogs and cats
of any multiple pet owner if such owner does not hold a multiple pet license.
      2.   Such animals shall be redeemed by the owner upon payment to the
animal shelter manager or delegate the lawful fees accrued pursuant to this
chapter and after application and approval for a multiple pet owner license.
   (F)   Nuisance: Multiple pet ownership shall be considered a nuisance unless
a license has been issued and maintained therefor.
   (G)   Public Hearing And Village Board Approval: A kennel or a breeder may
be licensed after a public hearing and upon recommendation of the village
board. No kennel license may issue until after a public hearing and upon the
recommendation of the village board of trustees. Public notice of said hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of local circulation by the village clerk at
the cost of the applicant no earlier than thirty (30) days and no later than
fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing. Once licensed, the kennel or breeder
must pay an annual fee established by the village board and published in the
office of the village clerk. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
6-3-28: PENALTY:
Except as otherwise provided herein, a violation of any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful by this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day an offense is committed shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 646A, 8-13-2015)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMALS 1
(Rep. by Ord. 646, 8-8-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 3 of this title.
CHAPTER 5
RAILROADS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Duty of Railroad Companies
6-5-2: Notice in Writing
6-5-3: Penalty For Failure to Comply
6-5-4: Warning Light and Watchman
6-5-5: Obstructing Streets
6-5-6: Blowing of Whistle Prohibited
6-5-7: Speed of Trains; Penalty
6-5-8: Ringing of Bell; Headlights
6-5-9: Blowing Off Steam
6-5-10: Spark Catcher
6-5-11: Enforcement
6-5-12: Laying of New Tracks
6-5-13: Duty of Chief of Police
6-5-14: Running Switches
6-5-15: Maintain Arc Lights at Crossings
6-5-1: DUTY OF RAILROAD COMPANIES:
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies or corporations whose tracks now
or may hereafter enter or pass through the corporate limits of the Village to
raise or lower their respective tracks to conform to any grade which is or may
be established by the President and Board of Trustees, of any street, avenue or
alley, upon or through which said railroad tracks may run, and where such
tracks run lengthwise of any street, avenue or alley to keep the same on a
level with the street or alley surface, so that such tracks may be conveniently
crossed at any place on such street or alley; and to make and keep open and in
repair their respective railroad tracks, so that the natural drainage of the
adjacent property shall not be impeded; and to construct and keep in repair
suitable and convenient crossings at the intersections of their said tracks
with any street, avenue or alley in the Village and to so construct and lay
down their tracks so as to interfere as little as possible with ordinary travel
upon or over the streets, avenues or alleys occupied or used by them. Any such
railroad company or corporation failing, neglecting, or refusing to comply with
any of the foregoing requirements of this Section, after reasonable notice to
do so in writing by the Board of Local Improvements or other City officer or
chairman of committee on railroads, shall be deemed in violation of this
Chapter.
6-5-2: NOTICE IN WRITING:
Whenever any street crossing, culvert or bridge shall be needed upon the line
of any railroad within the Village or shall need to be altered or repaired, and
the same shall have been ordered by the President and Board of Trustees, it
shall be the duty of the Board of Local Improvements to give to the railroad
company notice in writing of the work to be done and place where required; and
every railroad company or corporation neglecting or refusing to construct,
alter or repair any such crossing, culvert or bridge within thirty (30) days
after the service of said notice shall be deemed guilty of violating the
provisions hereof.
6-5-3: PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY:
In case of the failure or refusal of any railroad company or corporation to
construct or repair any crossing, culvert or bridge when duly notified so to
do, as provided in the preceding Section of this Chapter, the President and
Board of Trustees may order such crossing, culvert or bridge to be constructed,
altered or repaired at the expense of the Village and such railroad company
shall thereupon be liable to said Village in an action of debt, for the cost
and expense thereof.
6-5-4: WARNING LIGHT AND WATCHMAN:
Whenever any railroad company or corporation shall in pursuance of a resolution
or order of the President and Board of Trustees, be notified to keep a
conspicuous light of any kind at any point on its track crossed or intersected
by any street or avenue of said Village, or to keep a watchman or flagman at
any such point, for the protection of persons or property against injury at
such crossing, it shall be the duty of such railroad company or corporation at
its own expense, to place or keep such light as required, or to station and
retain such flagman, whose duty it shall be at all times to signal and warn
persons traveling in the direction of the railroad crossing, when there is
danger from the approach of locomotive engines and trains. Any railroad company
or corporation failing or refusing to comply with either of the requirements of
this Section after being duly notified as aforesaid, in writing by the Board of
Local Improvements or the Chief of Police, shall thereafter be liable to a fine
as may be provided by the Village Board.
6-5-5: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
Any railroad company, railroad engineer, train conductor or other person who
shall obstruct or impede any street, alley, sidewalk crossing or other
thoroughfare of said village by stopping any train thereon, or by leaving any
locomotive engine, car or cars thereon in excess of ten (10) minutes shall be
fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. If the duration of the obstruction
exceeds fifteen (15) minutes but no longer than twenty (20) minutes, the fine
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). In excess of twenty (20) minutes, the
fine shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575-A, 1-23-2002)
6-5-6: BLOWING OF WHISTLE PROHIBITED:
No railroad engineer, fireman or other person shall sound the whistle of any
locomotive engine within the village, except necessary brake signals and such
as may be absolutely necessary to avoid accidents, under a penalty not
exceeding twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. (Ord. 575-A, 1-23-
2002)
6-5-7: SPEED OF TRAINS; PENALTY:
No railroad company or conductor, engineer or other employee of such company
managing or controlling any locomotive engine, car or train upon any railroad
track, shall run or permit to run within the limits of the village any
passenger train or car at a greater rate of speed than ten (10) miles per hour,
nor any freight train or car at a greater rate of speed than eight (8) miles
per hour. (Ord. 16, 8-1-1921)
6-5-8: RINGING OF BELL; HEADLIGHTS:
The bell of each locomotive engine shall be rung continually while running upon
any railroad track within the village; and every locomotive engine, car or
train of cars running in the night on any railroad track in the village shall
have and keep a bright and conspicuous light at the forward end of such
locomotive engine, car or train of cars. If such engine or train be backing, it
shall have conspicuous light at the rear of the engine or train, so as to show
the direction in which the same is moving. (Ord. 16, 8-1-1921)
6-5-9: BLOWING OFF STEAM:
No railroad company or corporation shall cause or permit the cylinder cock or
cocks of any of their several locomotive engines to be opened so as to allow
steam to escape therefrom, at any time while running upon or along any railroad
track in any street or avenue, or when the engine is in immediate proximity to
any street or railroad crossing within the village, under a penalty of ten
dollars ($10.00) for each offense; provided, that when such engine shall be
standing at any such point or crossing in the village, and for three (3)
revolutions of the driving wheel after being put in motion the said cylinder
cocks may be opened for the purpose of allowing condensed steam to escape.
(Ord. 16, 8-1-1921)
6-5-10: SPARK CATCHER:
It shall not be lawful to run or cause to be run any locomotive in said village
without having placed on the top of the chimney thereof a bonnet or spark
catcher sufficient to prevent all accidents by fire from the sparks of such
locomotive. (Ord. 16, 8-1-1921)
6-5-11: ENFORCEMENT:
The board of local improvements shall execute and have enforced all orders of
the committee on railroads in reference to the keeping in repair of any street
crossing, sidewalk, bridge or culvert, or any other necessary improvement along
any street, avenue or alley, within the village which is occupied wholly or in
part by any railroad running into or through said village. (Ord. 16, 8-1-1921)
6-5-12: LAYING OF NEW TRACKS:
From and after the passage hereof it shall be unlawful for any railroad company
to make or lay down any new or other main track, sidetrack, or switch track of
such railroad through or upon, or across any street or alley of the village, or
operate the same over or across the same without first having obtained the
permission of so laying such main or sidetrack by petition to the president and
board of trustees for the privilege of laying such main switch or sidetrack on
and over or across such streets or alleys at some regular meeting of the board
of trustees, which petition therefor shall particularly set forth the streets,
alleys, and lots on and across which such main switch or sidetrack is proposed
to be constructed and operated. (Ord. 16, 8-1-1921)
6-5-13: DUTY OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the village to arrest and
prevent any or all persons and railroad companies from laying any main, switch
or sidetrack, or tracks in the limits of the village without first having
obtained the permission so to do as provided in section
6-5-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 16, 8-1-1921)
6-5-14: RUNNING SWITCHES:
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or any agent, servant, or
employee for any railroad company, or any person whatsoever to make or cause to
be made in said village what is known as a running switch; and it shall be
unlawful for any railroad company or any agent, servant or employee of any
railroad company or any person whatsoever to move, or run, or cause to be moved
or run, any railroad car or cars over or upon any railroad track in said
village at a greater speed than four (4) miles per hour unless said car or cars
are attached to some locomotive engine, and are under the care, charge and
guidance of some competent or efficient person. (Ord. 16, 8-1-1921)
6-5-15: MAINTAIN ARC LIGHTS AT CROSSINGS:
It shall be the duty of all railroad companies or corporations, whose tracks
now or may hereafter enter or pass through this village to keep and maintain at
all street crossings an arc light of two thousand (2,000) candlepower. (Ord.
16, 8-1-1921)
CHAPTER 6
WEEDS
SECTION:
6-6-1: Definitions
6-6-2: Height Of Grasses And Weeds
6-6-3: Weeds And Grass; Violation, Nuisance Declared
6-6-4: Notice And Abatement Procedure
6-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
   OWNER: Any owner (as shown on the records of the county assessor's office),
lessee, occupant, or agent or representative of any owner, lessee, or occupant
of any lot or parcel of land within the village.
   WEEDS: Any weed, grass, or other rank vegetation greater than eight inches
(8") in height, or any accumulation of dead weeds, grass, or brush, or poison
ivy, ragweed, Canadian thistle or other undesirable or noxious plants as
defined by state statute or regulation, including its seed, pollen or
particles. "Weeds or grass" shall not include crops and other plants cultivated
for agricultural purposes. (Ord. 461-C, 1-12-2005)
6-6-2: HEIGHT OF GRASSES AND WEEDS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants other than
trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants, to grow to a height
exceeding eight inches (8") anywhere within the village; any such plants or
weeds as exceeding such height are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ord. 461-
C, 1-12-2005)
6-6-3: WEEDS AND GRASS; VIOLATION, NUISANCE DECLARED:
It shall be unlawful for any owner to cause, maintain, or permit to remain the
following, and such is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and unlawful
activity:
   (A)   Any accumulation of weeds on any lot or parcel of land in the village;
any growth of grass or weeds on any lot or parcel of land in the village in
excess of eight inches (8") tall. (Ord. 461-C, 1-12-2005)
6-6-4: NOTICE AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURE:
   (A)   In the event that the provisions of this chapter are violated by any
"owner" as defined herein, any officer of the village possessing police power
may cause notice requiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter to be
served, either personally or by mail, or by posting of the property. Posting of
the property shall be by a sign not less than eight and one-half inches by
eleven inches (81/2" x 11") with letters not less than one-fourth inch (1/4")
in height. Posting, or written notice served personally or by mail upon the
owner, lessee or occupant or any person having the care or control of such lot
or land shall be deemed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Notice
by mail shall be sent to the record owner of the property at his last known
address. In any case, the posting of such property by the village shall be
deemed adequate notice. Notice shall be effective upon personal service or
posting, or if by mail, the day after the notice is placed in the mail.
   (B)   If the person upon whom said notice is served fails, neglects or
refuses to correct the violation within three (3) days of the effective date of
said notice, the village police chief, or his representative, or any other
authorized representative of the village, may cause the necessary work to be
performed and the actual cost of such work, plus the sum of seventy five
dollars ($75.00) for inspection and other costs in connection therewith, shall
be assessed and collected pursuant to the procedures established in this code
for the collection of costs of abatement of nuisances.
   (C)   In the event any such owner fails to abate the nuisance in the manner
aforesaid, the provisions of subsections
7-3-1(E), (H) and (I) of this code shall apply herein. (Ord. 461-C, 1-12-2005;
Ord. 937, 6-9-2021)
CHAPTER 7
ABANDONED, INOPERABLE AND UNUSED MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION:
6-7-1: Definitions
6-7-2: Inoperable And Unused Motor Vehicles Prohibited
6-7-3: Abandoned Vehicles
6-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle in the state of disrepair rendering the
vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or any vehicle that has not
been moved or used for seven (7) consecutive days or more and is apparently
deserted.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle: a) from which, for a period of seven
(7) days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or b) on which
the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own power.
"Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include any motor vehicle that has been
rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in
order to perform ordinary service or repair operations. However, a motor
vehicle upon which repairs or services are not concluded within seven (7) days
from the date of the notice specified in subsection
6-7-2(B) of this chapter shall not be deemed to be "rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform
ordinary service or repair operations" and shall be construed to be an
inoperable motor vehicle.
   MOTOR VEHICLE NOT REGULARLY USED: Any motor vehicle which: a) has not been
driven off the premises where it is parked or stored under its own motor power
for a period longer than four (4) months; b) is not registered, licensed or
properly displaying registration plates or stickers as required under article
IV of chapter 3 of the Illinois vehicle code; or c) exhibits damaged parts or
parts in disrepair, including, but not limited to, broken and missing windows,
body panels with holes, and fluid leaks, which pose an open threat of injury or
contamination for a period longer than fourteen (14) days.
   VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, whether subject to or exempt
from registration, excepting, however, bicycles, snowmobiles and devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 445-C, 1-23-2002)
6-7-2: INOPERABLE AND UNUSED MOTOR VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It is hereby declared a menace to the public safety and a nuisance for
any person to cause, permit or allow the existence of any inoperable motor
vehicle, any motor vehicle not regularly used, or any parts of a motor vehicle
to exist or to be stored upon any public or private property in view of the
general public; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall apply to
any motor vehicle or part thereof which is kept in a building, or to a motor
vehicle or parts thereof completely on the premises of a duly licensed
"junkyard", as defined by section
10-1-2 of this code. (Ord. 445-C, 1-23-2002)
   (B)   Whenever any police officer determines that a nuisance as declared in
this section exists, the police officer shall cause a written notice to abate
to be served upon the person who is causing, permitting or allowing the
nuisance to exist. Said notice shall give the person seven (7) days from the
date of service of the notice to abate the nuisance. Such notice shall be by
means of personal service or by first class mail. Personal service shall be by
a police officer of the Creve Coeur police department or any person authorized
by law to make personal service. (Ord. 816, 6-22-2016)
   (C)   Any person who shall cause, permit or allow such a nuisance to
continue to exist after the expiration of seven (7) days from the date of the
notice to abate shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. Each day that such nuisance continues
or exists after the expiration of the aforesaid seven (7) days shall be deemed
to be a separate offense. Further, each such inoperable motor vehicle shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Whenever any person causes, permits or allows such a nuisance to
continue or exist after the expiration of seven (7) days from the service of
the notice to abate, the village may, at its option, cause the abatement of the
nuisance specified in this section by the same method of disposal of abandoned
vehicles provided in section
6-7-3 of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing
upon the village a duty to abate the nuisance specified in this section. The
action authorized by this section shall be in addition to and without waiver to
any other remedies.
   (E)   A person shall fall within the class of persons who shall be deemed to
cause, permit or allow such a nuisance to exist if such person:
      1.   Has an ownership interest in or of the inoperable motor vehicle;
      2.   Causes the inoperable motor vehicle to be deposited at the site in
question;
      3.   Has an ownership or possessory interest in the real estate upon
which the inoperable motor vehicle is located;
      4.   Has an ownership interest in or operates a business which causes,
permits or allows such a nuisance to exist on the real estate upon which the
business is operated or on adjacent real estate which is under the control of
the business owner or operator; or
      5.   Has an ownership or possessory interest in the real estate upon
which a business is being operated and the operator or owner of said business
causes, permits or allows such a nuisance to exist on the real estate upon
which the business is being operated or on adjacent real estate which is under
the control of the person having an ownership or possessory interest in real
estate upon which said business is being operated.
   (F)   Illinois state law provides the village the power to:
      1.   Declare inoperative motor vehicles a nuisance, 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-40-3;
      2.   Define, prevent and abate nuisances, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-60-2; and
      3.   Promote health or suppress disease, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-20-5. (Ord. 445-C, 1-23-2002)
6-7-3: ABANDONED VEHICLES:
The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on any highway in this village
is unlawful and subject to the penalties set forth herein. The abandonment of a
motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on private or public
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in this
village is unlawful except on the property of the owner or bailee of such
abandoned vehicle.
   (A)   Report Of Abandonment: When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed
vehicle comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person who is not
the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the village
police department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the
village.
   (B)   Towing Of Abandoned Vehicles: The chief of the police department shall
authorize a towing service to remove and take possession of any abandoned,
lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle. Any such vehicle abandoned on the highway
may be ordered removed after a period of two (2) hours or more; provided,
however, an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially dismantled
vehicle that creates a traffic hazard because of its position in relation to
the highway or its physical appearance may be immediately removed from the
highway or private property adjacent to the highway upon order of the police
department of the village. The police department may order any vehicle
abandoned on private property to be towed immediately at the request of the
owner of the private property. When a vehicle is removed from either public or
private property by order of the police department under this section, the
owner of the vehicle will be responsible for all towing costs.
   (C)   Towing Report: When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the
village police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle
towed, listing the color, year, manufacturer, manufacturer's trade name,
manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number, license
plate year and number, and registration sticker year and number displayed on
the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location
towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and name of the officer
authorizing the tow. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and
its contents, maintain a record of the tow until the vehicle is claimed by the
owner or any other legal persons entitled to possession thereof, or until the
vehicle is disposed of as provided in this chapter.
   (D)   Costs Of Towing, Storage, And Other Fees: The owner, operator, or any
legally entitled person shall be responsible to the towing service for payment
of applicable removal, towing, storage and processing charges and collection
costs associated with the vehicle towed or held under order or authorization of
the law enforcement agency.
   (E)   Identity Of Owner Of Abandoned Vehicle; Notice:
      1.   When the village police department does not know the identity of the
registered owner or other legally entitled person, they will cause the motor
vehicle registration records of the state of Illinois to be searched by the
secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership
information.
The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of the state
police to be searched by a directed communication to the Illinois state police
for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the Illinois state police
files are searched with negative results, the information contained in the
national crime information center (NCIC) files will be searched by the state
police. The information determined from these record searches will be used by
the police department in sending notification by certified mail to the owner or
legally entitled person advising where the vehicle is held, requesting a
disposition be made and setting forth public sale information. Exceptions to a
notification by certified mail to the registered owner or other legally
entitled person are set forth in subsection (F) of this section.
      2.   When the registered owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of a vehicle cannot be identified from the registration files of
this state or from the registration files of a foreign state, if applicable,
the police department shall notify the state police for the purpose of
identifying the vehicle owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the state police will be
immediately forwarded to the law enforcement agency having custody of the
vehicle for notification of the owner as set forth in subsection (E)1 of this
section.
   (F)   Notice And Sale Of Abandoned Vehicles:
      1.   Whenever an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicle seven (7)
years of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner or other person
legally entitled to its possession for a period of thirty (30) days after
notice has been given as provided herein, the police department or towing
service having possession of the vehicle shall cause it to be sold at public
sale to the highest bidder. Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be
posted in a conspicuous place for at least ten (10) days prior to the sale on
the premises where the vehicle has been impounded. At least ten (10) days prior
to the sale, the police department where the vehicle is impounded or the towing
service where the vehicle is impounded, shall cause a notice of the time and
place of the sale to be sent by certified mail to the registered owner or other
person known by the police department or towing service to be legally entitled
to the possession of the vehicle. Such notice shall contain a complete
description of the vehicle to be sold and what steps must be taken by any
legally entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
      2.   In those instances where the certified notification specified herein
has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department or towing
service due to the addressee having moved, or being unknown at the address
obtained from the registration records of this state, the sending of a second
certified notice will not be required.
      3.   When the identity of the registered owner or other person legally
entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle of seven
(7) years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in
this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided herein without notice to the
registered owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of the
vehicle.
      4.   (a) When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other
legally entitled persons of an abandoned, lost or unclaimed vehicle seven (7)
years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means provided for in this
chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided in subsection (E) of this section
without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined.
         (b)   When any abandoned vehicle of more than seven (7) years of age
is impounded as specified by this chapter, or when any such vehicle is towed at
the request or with the consent of the owner or operator, and is subsequently
abandoned, it will be kept in custody for a minimum of ten (10) days for the
purpose of determining the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or
other legally entitled person and contacting the registered owner, lienholder,
or other legally entitled person by the U.S. mail, public service or in person
for a determination of disposition; and, an examination of the state police
stolen vehicles files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of
the ten (10) day period, without the benefit of disposition information being
received from the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally entitled
person, the chief of police will authorize the disposal of the vehicle in
either of the following two (2) ways:
            (1)   The police department will authorize the disposal of the
vehicle as junk or salvage;
            (2)   The towing service may sell the vehicle in the manner
provided in subsection (E) of this section, provided that this subsection (F)4
(b)(2) shall not apply to vehicles towed by order or authorization of a law
enforcement agency.
      5.   A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle may, however, be sold to
a person desiring to restore it.
   (G)   Reclamation By Owner Of Abandoned Vehicles: Any time before a vehicle
is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided herein, the owner or other
person legally entitled to its possession may claim the vehicle by presenting
to the police department proof of ownership or proof of the right to possession
of the vehicle. No vehicle shall be released to the owner or other person under
this section until all towing and storage charges have been paid.
   (H)   Disposition Report: When a vehicle in the custody of the police
department is reclaimed by the registered owner or other legally entitled
person, or when the vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as
provided by this chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the
police department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or
disposal.
   (I)   Proceeds Of Sale: When a vehicle located within the corporate limits
of this village is authorized to be towed away by the chief of police and
disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the proceeds of the public sale or
disposition, after the deduction of towing, storage and processing charges,
shall be disposed in the municipal treasury. (Ord. 445-C, 1-23-2002)
CHAPTER 8
JUNKED; DISABLED VEHICLES
(Rep. by Ord. 445-C, 1-23-2002)
CHAPTER 9
ILLEGAL DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
(Rep. by Ord. 480-A, 6-8-1994)
CHAPTER 10
TRUANCY AND EXCESSIVE ABSENTEEISM
SECTION:
6-10-1: Truancy And Excessive Absenteeism Prohibited
6-10-2: Parental Allowance Of Truancy Or Excessive Absenteeism Prohibited
6-10-3: Effective Date
6-10-1: TRUANCY AND EXCESSIVE ABSENTEEISM PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Truancy: It shall be unlawful for any person between the ages of seven
(7) and seventeen (17) years enrolled in a public, private or parochial school
within the corporate limits of the village, to absent himself or herself from
attendance at school without valid cause. Any person who should so absent
himself or herself shall be guilty of the offense of truancy.
   (B)   Excessive Absenteeism: It shall be unlawful for any person between the
ages of seven (7) and seventeen (17) years enrolled in a public, private or
parochial school within the corporate limits of the village to absent himself
or herself from attendance at school for five (5) or more student attendance
days during any one school year, unless such absenteeism is for valid cause and
has been approved by his or her school district.
   (C)   Emergency Conditions: Emergency or unforeseen absence due to illness
or other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting himself or
herself shall not constitute truancy or excessive absenteeism if a valid cause
has been obtained from the parent or person in loco parentis and such valid
cause is submitted in writing to the proper school authorities within twenty
four (24) hours after such absence.
   (D)   Valid Cause: A valid cause for absence is an illness that would
temporarily impair or interfere with a student's learning ability, observance
of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency or such
other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the parent, guardian or
custodian for the safety or health of the student. Valid cause shall not
include babysitting, employment activities (unless specifically sanctioned by
the student's school district) or any other reason that does not temporarily
impair or interfere with a student's learning ability.
   (E)   Penalty: Any person found guilty of truancy or excessive absenteeism
under this section shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Any person found guilty of truancy
or excessive absenteeism more than three (3) times in any school year shall be
fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each subsequent
offense. (Ord. 744, 4-10-2013)
6-10-2: PARENTAL ALLOWANCE OF TRUANCY OR EXCESSIVE ABSENTEEISM PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a parent or a person in loco parentis to
knowingly permit any person between the ages of seven (7) and seventeen (17)
years to commit an act of "truancy" or "excessive absenteeism" as defined in
section 6-10-1 of this chapter.
   (B)   A parent or person in loco parentis shall be considered to have
knowingly permitted a minor under section 6-10-1 of this chapter to commit an
act of "truancy" as defined in said section when the parent or person in loco
parentis knows that said minor absents himself or herself from attendance at
school without valid cause and the parent in loco parentis fails to act to
ensure that the minor attends the school in which he or she is enrolled.
   (C)   A parent or person in loco parentis shall be considered to have
knowingly permitted a person between the ages of seven (7) and seventeen (17)
years to commit the offense of "excessive absenteeism" as defined above when
the parent or person in loco parentis provides a written or oral excuse for the
minor's attendance which is false or does not amount to valid cause.
   (D)   A parent or person in loco parentis found guilty under this section
shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A parent or person in loco parentis found
guilty under this section more than three (3) times in any one school year
shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each
subsequent offense. (Ord. 744, 4-10-2013)
6-10-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and ten (10) day period of publication in the manner provided by law.
(Ord. 744, 4-10-2013)
CHAPTER 11
ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
6-11-1: Definitions
6-11-2: False Alarms
6-11-3: Service Fees
6-11-4: Failure To Pay Fees Due Village
6-11-5: Automatic Dialing Device
6-11-6: Local Alarms
6-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   ALARM SYSTEM: Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged
to signal the occurrence of a fire, robbery, illegal entry or other activity
requiring urgent attention and to which the Police or Fire Departments or
ambulances are expected to respond.
   ALARM USER: The person, other than a unit of local, State or Federal
government, in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm
system is maintained.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: A device which is interconnected to a telephone
line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit
by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for
emergency response.
   CHIEF: The chief of the Police Department or his designated representative.
   FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal eliciting a response by emergency services when
a situation requiring a response by them does not in fact exist, but does not
include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other
extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm
user, including power outages and telephone service outages.
   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM: An alarm system which, when activated, causes an audible
and/or visual signalling device to be activated only on the premises within
which the system is installed and which is intended to be heard or seen by
others outside of the protected premises. (Ord. 555, 9-25-1996)
6-11-2: FALSE ALARMS:
An alarm user shall be charged a service fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00)
for each false alarm in excess of two (2) in any calendar year and a fee of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each false alarm in excess of ten (10) in
any calendar year. (Ord. 555, 9-25-1996)
6-11-3: SERVICE FEES:
Within thirty (30) days after each false alarm, the Chief shall notify the
alarm user by mailing a notice to the address from which the false alarm was
received. If the alarm user believes that the alarm was not a false alarm, he
shall reply to the Chief within ten (10) days, stating the reasons why the
alarm was not a false alarm. In the absence of such reply, the alarm shall be
conclusively presumed to be a false alarm. The Chief shall determine, based
upon Police Department records and the user's reply, whether or not the alarm
was false and so notify the user. If the alarm is determined to be a false
alarm for which a service fee is due, the user shall remit to the Village
Treasurer the appropriate service fee for such false alarm within thirty (30)
days of notification by the Chief. (Ord. 555, 9-25-1996)
6-11-4: FAILURE TO PAY FEES DUE VILLAGE:
No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to pay when due any service fee owed to
the Village in connection with this Chapter. Any person, who shall be convicted
of violation of this Chapter, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each offense. (Ord. 555, 9-25-1996)
6-11-5: AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE:
It is unlawful for any person to program or to maintain an automatic dialing
device which is programmed to select an emergency 911 telephone line. (Ord.
555, 9-25-1996)
6-11-6: LOCAL ALARMS:
It is unlawful for any person to use or operate a local alarm system which does
not automatically discontinue emitting any audible signal within five (5)
minutes of activation and remain deactivated until manually reset. (Ord. 555,
9-25-1996)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
SEWERS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Definitions
7-1-2: Superintendent of Sewers
7-1-3: Bond
7-1-4: Salary
7-1-5: Duties
7-1-6: License Required
7-1-7: Workmanship
7-1-8: Permit
7-1-9: Permit Fee and Bond
7-1-10: Forfeiture of Permit or License
7-1-11: Change in Plans
7-1-12: Expiration of Permit
7-1-13: Storm or Surface Drainage Forbidden
7-1-14: New Buildings, Cesspools, Septic or Sewage Tanks
7-1-15: Sewage Treatment Required
7-1-16: Industrial Wastes and Sewage
7-1-17: Sewer Construction Work
7-1-18: Sewer Connections
7-1-19: Backfill and Trench Protection
7-1-20: Disturbing, Injuring, or Entering Sewers
7-1-21: Foreign Matter in Sewers
7-1-22: Harmful Wastes in Sewers
7-1-23: Explosive or Inflammable Matter in Sewers
7-1-24: Quality of Materials
7-1-25: Vitrified Clay
7-1-26: Cast-Iron Pipe; Materials
7-1-27: Joints on Clay Pipe
7-1-28: Cast-Iron Pipe; Joints
7-1-29: Lead Joints
7-1-30: Gasoline and Oil Traps Required
7-1-31: Sumps and Receiving Tanks
7-1-32: Function of House Connections and Drains
7-1-33: Independent Connections and Drains
7-1-34: Material
7-1-35: Laying
7-1-36: Pipes to be Closed
7-1-37: Back Water
7-1-38: Drainage of Roofs and Outside Areas
7-1-39: Foundation and Floor Drains
7-1-40: Inspections
7-1-41: Notification
7-1-42: Defective Work
7-1-43: Certificate of Approval
7-1-44: Fees
7-1-45: Condemned Materials
7-1-46: Use of Sewers Prohibited
7-1-47: Inspection; Right of Entry
7-1-48: Injury to Public Sewer System
7-1-49: Interference With Public Sewer System
7-1-50: Storm Drains
7-1-51: Revocation of Certificate
7-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms in this Chapter
shall be as follows:
   SUPERINTENDENT OF SEWERS: The term "Superintendent of Sewers" shall mean the
person designated or appointed by the Board of Trustees to administer the
provisions of this Chapter.
   APPROVED: The word "approved" shall mean acceptable to or accepted by the
Superintendent of Sewers as complying with the provisions of this Chapter.
   SATISFACTORILY: The terms "satisfactorily" or "satisfactory" shall mean in a
manner approved by the Superintendent of Sewers as complying with the
provisions of this Chapter.
   SEWAGE: The word "sewage" shall mean liquid waste flowing in or from
residents, human habitations, institutions, stables, garages, business
buildings and industries, and it may consist of a combination of any one or
more of these, and/or with such storm and ground water as may be admitted to be
or find its way into the sewers.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE; SANITARY SEWAGE: The terms "domestic sewage" and "sanitary
sewage" shall mean the waste or discharge from toilet or other household
plumbing fixtures, wash and dish water, interior basement drainage, and other
dirty water from place of human residence, business buildings or institutions
but not including industrial waste.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The term "industrial waste" shall mean liquid wastes or
wastes used in or resulting from industrial processes.
   STORM WATER: The term "storm water" shall mean that portion of rain, snow,
or sleet which flows off over the surface of the ground, streets and structures
into sewers and drainage channels or into low points.
   GROUND WATER: The term "ground water" shall mean water which is contained in
or flows through the ground.
   SOLID WASTES: The term "solid wastes" shall include garbage, ashes, rags,
manure waste, household food, offal, and other solids. The term "ashes" as
herein employed shall include coal, coke, wood, and the residuum resulting from
the combustion of any material or substances and include soot, cinders, slag
and charcoal.
   SEWER: The word "sewer" shall mean any outside conduit, pipe or structure
designed to serve two (2) or more properties, within the corporate limits of
said Village, used for conveying sewage of any kind, and shall include all
manholes, intercepting chambers, pumping plants, and other appurtenances
thereto within the corporate limits of said Village.
   SEPARATE SANITARY SEWER; SANITARY SEWER: The terms "separate sanitary sewer"
and "sanitary sewer" shall mean a sewer intended to carry domestic sewage and
such industrial waste as may be permitted, without the added mixture or storm
water.
   STORM SEWER: The term "storm sewer" shall mean a sewer which is intended to
carry storm and surface water and no domestic or sanitary sewage.
   VILLAGE SEWER; SEWER OF THE VILLAGE: The terms "Village sewer" or "sewer of
the Village" shall refer to any sewer constructed, under construction or
maintained or possessed by the Village and shall include all manholes,
intercepting chambers, pumping plants, or other appurtenances thereto.
   PRIVATE SEWER: The term "private sewer" shall mean a privately owned sewer.
   PUBLIC SEWER: The term "public sewer" shall mean a publicly owned sewer.
   SEWERAGE: The word "sewerage" shall mean the following:
   (A)   (Noun) shall mean the works comprising the complete system of sewers,
connecting the drains, with appurtenances of the Village, including pumping
stations, manholes and appurtenances thereof necessary to the collection,
treatment or disposal of sewage, including the sewage treatment plant, drains,
ditches, and overflow drains.
   (B)   (Adjective) shall mean having to do with the collection, treatment, or
disposal of sewage.
   SEWER CONSTRUCTION WORK: The term "sewer construction work" shall mean the
construction of any sewer for any purpose and shall include house sanitary
connections and house storm drains.
   HOUSE SANITARY CONNECTIONS; HOUSE CONNECTIONS: The terms "house sanitary
connections" and "house connections" shall mean the conduit or pipe for
conveying domestic sewage from residences, human habitations, institutions,
stables, garages, business buildings or industries, to the connection to a
sewer.
   HOUSE STORM DRAIN; HOUSE DRAIN: The terms "house storm drain" and "house
drain" shall mean a pipe or conduit which is used to conduct surface, storm,
ground root and yard drainage away from any building.
   EMERGENCY: A sudden and unexpected condition, the making of remedies for
which cannot be postponed until a permit has been secured without endangering
life or property.
   FITTINGS: The parts of a pipeline other than plain straight pipe, such as
elbow, tees, Y-branches, increasers, etc.
   HOUSE SLANT: A "T" or "Y" fitting in a sewer for the purpose of receiving,
if on a separate sanitary sewer, the outlet end of a house sanitary connection,
and if on a storm sewer the outlet end of a house storm drain or other source
of stormwater.
   MANHOLE: An opening constructed on a sewer, sufficient size to permit a man
to gain access thereto.
   CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the alteration, construction or repair of
any sewer, sanitary connection or storm drain. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-2: SUPERINTENDENT OF SEWERS:
There is hereby created the office of superintendent of sewers for the village.
(Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-3: BOND:
Said superintendent of sewers shall file an official bond in the penal sum of
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), the sureties thereon to be approved by the
village board. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-4: SALARY:
The superintendent of sewers shall receive such a salary as shall be designated
by the village board. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-5: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent of sewers:
   (A)   To examine and approve plans and specifications for sewer construction
work;
   (B)   To inspect sewers, including house sanitary connections and house
storm drains, and the materials to be used therein;
   (C)   To conduct tests thereon;
   (D)   To keep records of actions taken, and examinations, inspections and
tests made, and of permits and certificates issued;
   (E)   To make a monthly report of his acts and doings to the board of
trustees;
   (F)   To advise the public, when requested, in the matter of these
regulations relating to the sewerage system; and
   (G)   To arrest and prosecute offenders against the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-6: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Any person, other than the actual bona fide owner of the premises involved, who
desires to engage or who shall hereafter engage at any time in the
constructions, alteration or repair of any sewer, sanitary connection or storm
drain for any other person in the village shall, before commencing such work,
make application to the superintendent of sewers for a license so to do, and
shall deliver to the superintendent of sewers a general bond, or a certificate
addressed to the village certifying that such applicant is insured under a
general bond or other instrument in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) indemnifying and saving the village harmless of and from all
liability for damages to persons or property by reasons of or resulting
directly or indirectly from the construction, alteration, maintenance or repair
by such person of any sewer, sanitary connection or storm drain or any work or
act of omission or commission incidental thereto, or in connection therewith,
and shall be conditioned also upon the conformance by such applicant with all
the conditions and requirements of the provisions of this code for performing
such work and conditioned also upon the restoration by such applicant of the
street, alley, sidewalk and pavement disturbed by him, so as to leave the same
in as good condition as before the work was undertaken, during the period to be
covered by such license; such bond or certificate shall be signed by the
applicant for such license, and by the surety or sureties on such and/or
instrument of indemnification; upon receipt of which bond or certificate by
said superintendent of sewers, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of
sewers to present such bond or certificate to the board of trustees at the next
regular meeting of said board or at any special meeting called for that purpose
for approval or rejection; and, upon the approval of said bond or certificate
by the board, the superintendent of sewers shall forthwith issue to such
applicant a license to engage in the construction, alteration or repair of
sewers, sanitary connections and storm drains in the village for one year from
the date of the issuance of such license. Each application for such license
shall be accompanied by a fee established annually by the village board and
published in the office of the village clerk. Licenses shall run from May 1 of
each year to May 1 of the following year. Licenses shall be prorated from any
portion of a year's license in case license is taken out after May 1. (Ord.
806, 3-9-2016)
7-1-7: WORKMANSHIP:
All workmanship in connection with the construction of any sewer or house
sanitary connection or house storm drain shall be of such character as to fully
secure the results sought to be obtained in this chapter. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-8: PERMIT:
No sewer of any kind, public or private, or house sanitary connection, or house
storm drain, shall be constructed or made, altered or repaired, nor shall any
connection of any sewer or house sanitary connection or house storm drain, to
any sewer, public or private be constructed or made, altered or repaired
without first having obtained from the clerk a written permit therefor. No
permit shall be issued for such construction, alteration, or repair work until
the plans and specifications therefor or required data concerning it have first
been submitted to and approved by the superintendent of sewers.
Before issuing such permit an application shall be filed with the
superintendent of sewers; all applications for permits shall be in writing on
blanks to be furnished by the superintendent of sewers. The applications shall
be signed by the owner of the premises on which the proposed work is to be done
and shall be accompanied by a complete and legible set of plans and
specifications of the work to be done, or in lieu thereof such written
description or information as shall be acceptable to the superintendent of
sewers.
All details concerning the construction of any sewer or house sanitary
connections or house storm drains and their appurtenances shall be subject to
the approval of the superintendent of sewers. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-9: PERMIT FEE AND BOND:
Each application for such permit shall be accompanied by a fee established
annually by the village board and published in the office of the village clerk.
The above permit to a property owner-applicant shall not include the right to
dig or excavate on public property.
It is expressly stipulated that all work on public property is to be performed
by a person licensed to perform such work under the provisions of this chapter.
No applicant or contractor owing money to the village for fees required by this
chapter either for the work described in any such application or for any
previous work performed, or inspections made hereunder, or for any violation of
this chapter not rectified, shall be granted a permit for such work. (Ord. 806,
3-9-2016)
7-1-10: FORFEITURE OF PERMIT OR LICENSE:
Any person or other party to whom a permit or license shall have been issued
and who shall neglect, refuse or fail to make good any defect or fault in any
of the work done, or materials used under any permit or license from the
village within five (5) days after written notice thereof from the
superintendent of sewers, shall not be permitted to do any further or
additional work of constructing any sewer, connection or drain or appurtenance
until such defects or faults have been made good in manner satisfactory to the
superintendent of sewers; and any and all then existing permit or permits or
license in favor of such person or other party shall be revoked by the
superintendent of sewers and the bond of such person enforced as to past
defaults. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-11: CHANGE IN PLANS:
Any changes or modifications in the proposed work shall be considered as new
work and no such changes or modification shall be installed or made without a
supplementary permit therefor, subject to the same terms and conditions as
herein contained. The fee for such supplementary permit shall be as established
by the village board. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966; amd. Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
7-1-12: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
If the work is not commenced under any permit, or if the work is not
satisfactorily prosecuted after its commencement, such permit will be
considered as having expired and shall be null and void. This section is not to
apply to permits secured prior to completion of the sewer system. These permits
will be valid for the period of time allowed in the ordinances for original
connections to the sewer. (Ord. 304, 3-6-1966)
7-1-13: STORM OR SURFACE DRAINAGE FORBIDDEN:
The separate sanitary sewer system of the Village was built to carry away the
domestic or sanitary sewage, the commercial sewage, and as may be permitted,
the industrial wastes, of the Village. It was not designed to carry any storm
water, water from air conditioning units, cooling systems, surface water or
ground water. Any act which shall cause any storm water, water from air
conditioning units, cooling systems, surface water or ground water to be
conveyed to and into the sanitary sewers is herewith directly forbidden; it is
directly contrary to the provisions of this Chapter and shall be subject to the
penalties herein provided.
The sanitary or domestic sewage from all buildings shall be conveyed in house
sanitary connections to the public system of sanitary sewers. Sanitary or
domestic sewage shall be taken to include basement floor drainage; however,
this shall not include any storm or ground water intentionally conveyed to the
basement floor and from said basement floor to and into the sanitary sewer
system.
7-1-14: NEW BUILDINGS, CESSPOOLS, SEPTIC OR SEWAGE TANKS:
No cesspool, septic or other sewage tank shall be constructed hereafter on
property in which a public sanitary sewer is accessible.
No septic tank or cesspool now existing or hereafter constructed shall be
connected in any way, directly or indirectly, to the public sewer system.
No building permit for the construction of any new dwelling house or commercial
building within said Village shall be granted until the owner applying for such
construction permit shall furnish the Superintendent of Sewers plans and
specifications conforming to the provisions of this Chapter so that the
domestic sewage therefrom shall be discharged to the said sanitary sewer system
in the manner and by the means herein specified.
7-1-15: SEWAGE TREATMENT REQUIRED:
Where liquid wastes from any source are not discharged into a public sewer,
such wastes shall be treated or disposed of so as not to endanger or
contaminate any water supply that is or may be used for drinking or domestic
purposes or for bathing or so as not to create any nuisance or unsanitary
condition, which shall be considered either by the Superintendent of Sewers or
the Health Department of the Village as dangerous and unhealthy to the
residents and citizens of the Village.
Where sewage of any kind which is to be discharged into a public sewer is of
such a character as to endanger the sewer system, or is placing an over burden
upon a publicly owned sewage treatment plant, such sewage shall be
satisfactorily treated before being admitted to the public sewers.
7-1-16: INDUSTRIAL WASTES AND SEWAGE:
No person or persons shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged into
any public sewer system which directly or indirectly discharges into the sewer
system of the Village industrial wastes which are not first approved by the
Superintendent of Sewers and the Village Board.
7-1-17: SEWER CONSTRUCTION WORK:
In every case of proposed sewer construction work to be done, notice shall be
given and application properly made to the Superintendent of Sewers of the time
and place, when and where the work is to commence. Such notice shall be in
writing and given at least three (3) full days prior to the commencement of the
work.
7-1-18: SEWER CONNECTIONS:
All connections with any sewer fifteen inches (15") or smaller shall be made by
means of "Y" or "T" branches or other special fitting provided in such sewer
for that purpose.
If a connection to a sewer must be made at any other place where a "Y" or "T"
branch has not been placed, where feasible a "Y" fitting shall be placed in the
main sewer in the following manner; a section of sewer pipe shall be removed
from the main sewer by breaking it to pieces, care being taken not be break,
disturb or injure the adjacent pipe. The "Y" fitting shall then be inserted
without chipping or breaking the pipe or branch, where possible; where not
possible, the upper half (when in position) of the bell on the run of the "Y"
branch to be inserted, and the upper half of the nearest adjacent bell on the
existing pipe in the trench, shall then be carefully removed and the "Y" branch
inserted wrong side up, and revolved to bring the branch to the side it is
intended for, with the broken part of the bell up. The joint shall then be
cemented in the proper manner, and the bells encased in three inches (3") of
concrete.
A connection to a sewer may also be made by inserting in the sewer a standard
saddle fitting. Such a fitting used shall be one designed for the purpose and
shall not be improvised from the bell end of a straight length of pipe. Before
cutting the hole in the sewer for the saddle fitting the sides and bottoms of
the length of pipe in which the hole is to be cut, shall be strengthened by a
layer of concrete not less than three inches (3") in thickness at any point.
The hole in the pipe shall be carefully marked and chipped or pinched out, the
saddle placed so that no part projects into the pipe and carefully mortared
into position. Sections of pipe shall then be filled into the saddle to form a
riser and all such pieces of pipe which are vertically over the sewer, shall be
enclosed in a shaft of concrete having a thickness about the pipe of not less
than three inches (3"). The shaft shall firmly rest on the block of concrete
encasing the sewer pipe in which the connection was made. The concrete shaft
shall be poured into a form of light sheet metal or stove pipe which form shall
be left in place as the trench is backfilled. The earth backfill around the
shaft shall be carefully tamped and the backfill brought up uniformly on all
sides to prevent lateral loads on and the possible breaking of the shaft.
7-1-19: BACKFILL AND TRENCH PROTECTION:
All trenches and excavation shall be thoroughly protected by barricades and
lights as required to protect the public from possible injuries. All trenches
within public right of way shall be backfilled in six inch (6") layers which
shall be thoroughly compacted by hand or mechanical means. In lieu of placing
the backfill material in layers and compacting, sand backfill may be used and
thoroughly flooded with water to insure complete settlement.
7-1-20: DISTURBING, INJURING, OR ENTERING SEWERS:
No person other than an authorized Village employee shall disturb, injure or
enter any public sewer, manhole, catch basin, or other part of the public sewer
system without a written permit from the Superintendent of Sewers.
7-1-21: FOREIGN MATTER IN SEWERS:
No butcher's offal, garbage, dead animals, or liquids containing silt, hair,
fibers, grease, oils or other obstructing material shall be permitted to enter
any public sewer system.
7-1-22: HARMFUL WASTES IN SEWERS:
Corrosive or harmful wastes and wastes at a temperature higher than one hundred
forty degrees (140°) Fahrenheit shall not be discharged into a public sewer.
7-1-23: EXPLOSIVE OR INFLAMMABLE MATTER IN SEWERS:
No explosive or inflammable matters shall be discharged into any sewer.
Cleaning establishments, buildings used for housing or repairing automobiles,
gasoline and oil service stations, and other buildings or establishments where
gasoline, oils, calcium carbide or other explosive or inflammable matters are
stored, sold, or handled, the frains from which are connected to the public
sewers, must be provided with an approval intercepting pit or tank so
constructed, located, and maintained as to prevent the entrance into the sewer
of such explosive or inflammable matter.
7-1-24: QUALITY OF MATERIALS:
All materials used in the sewers, house sanitary connection, or part thereof,
shall be free from defect.
7-1-25: VITRIFIED CLAY:
All vitrified clay pipe shall conform to the standard specifications for extra
strength clay sewer pipe of the American Society for Testing Materials, and
shall conform as nearly as possible to that type and quality of the pipe as has
been used in the construction of public sewer system.
7-1-26: CAST-IRON PIPE; MATERIALS:
All cast-iron pipe and fittings used for sewers of house connections or drains
shall be coated with asphaltum or coal- tar pitch and shall conform to the
standard specifications for extra heavy cast-iron pipe and fittings of the
American Society for Testing Materials or shall conform to the latest standard
specifications for cast-iron water pipe of the American Water Association,
which specifications by reference thereto are hereby made a part of this
Chapter.
7-1-27: JOINTS ON CLAY PIPE:
All joints in new sanitary sewers and house sanitary connections wherein
vitrified pipe shall be used shall consist of factory made resilient
compression joints meeting the A.S.T.M. "Specifications for Vitrified Clay Pipe
joints having resilient properties" (Designation C425).
7-1-28: CAST-IRON PIPE; JOINTS:
All joints in cast-iron pipe shall be lead joints.
7-1-29: LEAD JOINTS:
In jointing two (2) pipes the spigot end shall be properly seated in the
adjacent ball end and adjusted so as to give a uniform space for the joint,
which will be made with twisted hemp packing and soft pig lead. The packing
shall be thoroughly driven into the bell so that the lead, after having been
poured and caulked into the joint shall have a depth of at least two inches
(2"). The joints shall be thoroughly caulked with proper tools.
7-1-30: GASOLINE AND OIL TRAPS REQUIRED:
A gasoline and oil trap shall be provided on the waste from all garages,
automobile wash floors, cleaning establishments, or establishments from which
gasoline, benzine or other similar substance may be discharged. Said trap shall
be installed on the waste pipe above its junction with any other pipe or
receptacle containing sewage. The passing of human or animal excrement through
such a trap is prohibited.
7-1-31: SUMPS AND RECEIVING TANKS:
In a building in which the whole or part of the plumbing system lies below the
house connection to the public sewer the outlet from said plumbing system or
part thereof shall discharge into a sump or receiving tank from which the
sewage shall be pumped through a pipe to the house connection or to the public
sewer.
The said sump or receiving tank shall be adequate in capacity. It should be
discharged not less frequently than once each hour. It shall be constructed in
a water-tight and substantial manner of masonry, vitrified clay, or metal. It
shall be provided with an air-tight cover. Any pipe discharging into the sump
or receiving tank shall not be submerged.
No storm, surface or ground water shall be conducted to a sump or tank
receiving domestic sewage. Such water may be conducted to a separate sump for
the purpose of pumping it to the surface of the ground or to a storm sewer if
such exists. (Ord. 304, 3-6-66)
In the event that only the floor drain in a building is involved at property
where the sanitary sewer was not constructed deep enough to serve the floor
drain, then the floor drain, alone, may be omitted from connection with the
public sanitary sewer, instead of complying with the requirements for sump
construction. In this case, adequate provision shall otherwise be made. (Ord.
334, 1-2-69)
7-1-32: FUNCTION OF HOUSE CONNECTIONS AND DRAINS:
The domestic sewage from residences, human habitations, institutions, stables,
garages, business buildings and industries shall be conveyed from said
structures in a conduit or pipe herein termed a "house sanitary connection".
The connection shall extend to a public separate sanitary sewer, if such a
sewer serves the property. No storm, surface or ground water shall be permitted
to enter this house sanitary connection.
7-1-33: INDEPENDENT CONNECTIONS AND DRAINS:
Each residence, institutions or business building should have its own separate
house sanitary connection. A house sanitary connection shall not be permitted
to serve more than two (2) such adjacent residences or other unit except under
an abnormal situation and then only by express permission of the Superintendent
of Sewers. A single connection for two (2) structures will be allowed only
where one building stands at the rear of another and no house connection can be
constructed directly to a public sewer.
7-1-34: MATERIAL:
   (A)   The house sanitary connection shall be six inch (6") vitrified clay or
four inch (4") or six inch (6") cast-iron pipe, except that within five feet
(5') of the outside of a building it shall be of cast-iron, and have a minimum
inside diameter of four inches (4").
   (B)   All underground pipes when within four feet (4') or less of the
surface of the ground under a driveway shall be of cast-iron pipe, or of
vitrified clay pipe having an envelope of concrete of a mix of 1:2:4 or better
and at least three inches (3") in thickness.
   (C)   Where a connection or drain is laid at less distance than five feet
(5') from the exterior wall of any building, or in ground where it will be
subjected to vibration, or to settlement, cast-iron pipe shall be used. Where
the ground is of sufficient solidity for a proper foundation or where special
supports or secure foundations are provided, vitrified clay or cast-iron pipe
may be used.
7-1-35: LAYING:
No house sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet (3') of any
bearing wall which might be thereby weakened. The house sewer shall be laid at
a sufficient depth to protect it from frost.
All sewer and drain pipes shall be laid carefully in a trench in a straight
line and on a straight grade. Where deviation from a straight run is necessary,
it shall be made with a curve or other acceptable fitting.
In the bottom of the trench a groove shall be cut for each hub, in order to
give the pipe a solid bearing for its entire length, and the soil backfill
shall be well rammed on either side of the pipe.
7-1-36: PIPES TO BE CLOSED:
The ends of all pipes not to be immediately connected shall be securely stopped
by tile, brick, cement, or other water-tight and durable material.
7-1-37: BACK WATER:
Where the plumbing system of a building may be subjected to back flow of sewage
or water, suitable provision shall be made to prevent overflow into the
building by the installation of a satisfactory backwater valve or valves or
other satisfactory means.
7-1-38: DRAINAGE OF ROOFS AND OUTSIDE AREAS:
No roofs and outside areas of any kind shall be drained into the house sanitary
connection or the separate sanitary sewer system. No roof downspouts or
conductors shall in any case be connected up to discharge directly or
indirectly to the house sanitary connection or the separate sanitary sewer
system of the Village.
7-1-39: FOUNDATION AND FLOOR DRAINS:
Where drains are placed under the cellar floor or used to encircle the outer
walls of a building for the removal of ground, surface or storm water, they
shall not in any case be connected directly or indirectly to the house sanitary
connection or to the separate sanitary sewer system of the Village.
7-1-40: INSPECTIONS:
All piping and appurtenances of a sewer system or house sanitary connections
shall be inspected by the Superintendent of Sewers to insure compliance with
all the requirements of this Chapter, and the installation and construction of
the system in accordance with any approved plans and the permit.
7-1-41: NOTIFICATION:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner or his agent to notify the
Superintendent of Sewers orally, by telephone, or in writing, not less than
eight (8) working hours before the work is to be inspected and have a time set
for the inspection.
   (B)   If the Superintendent of Sewers finds on inspection that the work and
the materials entered into said work is not satisfactory the owner or his agent
shall remedy said defect and then renotify as above the Superintendent of
Sewers and arrange for a reinspection.
   (C)   If the Superintendent of Sewers fails to appear within twenty four
(24) hours of the time set for an inspection, the inspection shall be deemed to
have been made.
7-1-42: DEFECTIVE WORK:
If upon inspection, defects in material or in work shall be found, such defects
in work or materials shall be redone or replaced within three (3) days or as
the Superintendent of Sewers may direct and inspection repeated.
7-1-43: CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL:
If said sewer construction work is approved by the Superintendent of Sewers he
shall issue a certificate of satisfactory inspection, but no certificate shall
be issued unless all sewer construction is in strict conformity with the rules
and regulations of this Chapter.
7-1-44: FEES:
Before the certificate of satisfactory inspection is issued all fees due the
Village in connection with the application for a permit required under the
terms of this Chapter shall have been paid to the Superintendent of Sewers.
7-1-45: CONDEMNED MATERIALS:
The presence of any material, other than provided for in this Chapter, near the
site of the work, shall be sufficient cause for condemning part of or the
entire work.
If inspection discloses defective material, or unworkmanlike construction which
does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter, such defective materials,
or unworkmanlike construction shall be condemned, and the owner or his agent
shall proceed no further with the use of such defective material or
unworkmanlike construction.
Condemned materials not yet installed shall be removed forthwith from the site
of the work and construction already installed shall be removed within three
(3) days following the condemnation thereof or as the Superintendent of Sewers
may direct.
7-1-46: USE OF SEWERS PROHIBITED:
No part of any new, reconstructed or repaired sewer work shall be used for
which a certificate of approval has not been issued by the Superintendent of
Sewers. Any person or persons attempting to use or flow any sewage into the
public sewer system from any new, reconstructed or repaired sewer work without
the obtaining of the certificate of approval as herein provided, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the fines and penalties herein provided
and in addition thereto the Superintendent of Sewers shall proceed forthwith to
disconnect such new constructed or repaired sewer work for which no certificate
of approval has been issued and may enter upon any public or private property
for the purpose of such disconnections.
7-1-47: INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY:
In order that the sewers of the public sewer system may be fully protected
against improper use and injury, the Superintendent of Sewers shall have the
free and unobstructed access to any part of any premises where house sanitary
connections to be connected directly or indirectly to the public sewer system
or house storm drains have been constructed for the purpose of examining the
construction, condition and usage of the same, at any time of the day between
the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. during
construction or any time thereafter, and any owner, occupant or other person
refusing to allow said Superintendent of Sewers access to the premises for said
purpose, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined, as provided under
the penalties of this Chapter.
7-1-48: INJURY TO PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM:
No person shall wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface, destroy or
injure any public sewer or appurtenance thereto in the Village.
7-1-49: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM:
No person or persons shall interfere with, molest, uncover, take off covers
from manholes or lampholes, or disturb any portion of the public sewer system
or appurtenances thereto in the Village.
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this Chapter or any
Section thereof, shall become liable to the Village for any expense or damage
occasioned by the Village by reason of such violation and in addition thereto,
shall be subject to any of the fines and penalties herein provided. (Ord. 304,
3-6-66)
7-1-50: STORM DRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit the discharge of any
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes, garbage, junk or other wastes into any
storm sewer or drain in the Village. (Ord. 318, 7-19-67)
It shall further be unlawful for any person to connect or cause to be connected
any drain carrying, or to carry, any toilet, sink, basement, septic tank,
cesspool, industrial waste, or any fixture or device discharging polluting
substances to any storm water drain in the Village. (Ord. 343, 5-21-69)
7-1-51: REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
The permit or license of a sewer builder shall become void in the Village when
he shall refuse or neglect within three (3) days time after notification
thereof in writing to make such necessary corrections to the sewer work either
in workmanship or material as shall have been ordered by the Superintendent of
Sewers or if such person shall permit the use of his name by another person or
persons for the purpose of obtaining a permit or license to do sewer work.
Any sewer builder who shall construct or install any sewer work in violation of
any of the provisions of this Chapter and any builder, contractor, architect,
or designer designing, drawing or issuing plans for, or having charge of such
sewer work or who shall permit it to be so constructed or installed shall be
liable to the penalties as provided in this Code. (Ord. 304, 3-6-66)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE
SECTION:
7-2-1: Division I - Definitions
7-2-1-1: Definitions
7-2-2: Division II - Accumulation, Collection, Removal And Disposal Of Garbage
7-2-2-1: Accumulation Of Garbage
7-2-2-2: Duty To Remove Garbage
7-2-2-3: Disposal Sites; Burning
7-2-3: Division III - Regulation Of Residential Garbage Collection
7-2-3-1: License Required
7-2-3-2: Granting License
7-2-3-3: Revocation Of License
7-2-3-4: Transfer Of License
7-2-3-5: Emergency Powers
7-2-3-6: Service Charges
7-2-3-7: Liability Of Owner Or Occupant
7-2-3-8: Nonpayment Of Bills
7-2-3-9: Enforcement
7-2-3-10: Use Of Village Licensee For Residential Garbage Required
7-2-4: Division IV - Regulation Of Nonresidential Garbage Collection
7-2-4-1: Scope
7-2-4-2: Permit Required
7-2-4-3: Condition And Maintenance Of Vehicles
7-2-4-4: Placing And Maintenance Of Containers; Dumpster Screening
7-2-4-5: Transfer Of License
7-2-5: Division V - Enforcement
7-2-5-1: Penalty
7-2-6: Division VI - Conflicting Ordinances Repealed
7-2-6-1: Conflicting Ordinances
7-2-7: Variances
7-2-1: DIVISION I - DEFINITIONS:
7-2-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
   GARBAGE: Decaying animal or vegetable matter, refuse, inflammable waste,
ashes, paper, rubbish or such other matter usually known as garbage.
   MOBILE HOME: Any vehicle or similar portable structure of any floor area
under nine hundred (900) square feet, so constructed as to permit its use as a
conveyance upon public streets or highways and designed to permit the occupancy
thereof as a dwelling place of one or more persons for year round living
without a permanent foundation; excepting, however, those structures considered
to be recreational vehicles and trailers as hereinafter defined.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL: Commercial business establishments, building construction
sites, facilities under the direct control of the federal government, the state
of Illinois, or any of its political subdivisions, and any other facility not
having to do with living accommodations.
   PERSON: All natural persons, each and every form of doing business
(including, but not limited to, sole proprietorships, corporations,
partnerships and joint ventures) but shall not include the federal government,
the state of Illinois or any of its political subdivisions.
   RESIDENTIAL: Having to do with living accommodations, including, but not
limited to, single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiple-family dwellings,
apartments, condominiums and churches. "Residential" shall not include
commercial business establishments, building construction sites, or facilities
under the direct control of the federal government, the state of Illinois, or
any of its political subdivisions. (Ord. 216-B, 4-24-1986; amd. Ord. 899, 2-28-
2020)
7-2-2: DIVISION II - ACCUMULATION, COLLECTION, REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE:
7-2-2-1: ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE:
   (A)   The owner, occupant, or lessee of any premises in the village, shall
not permit to accumulate upon such premises any garbage except as hereinafter
provided.
   (B)   All garbage shall be placed in containers constructed in such manner
as to be strong, water tight, rodent proof, and not easily corrodible. Such
containers shall be fitted with two (2) handles or a bail, shall have a
capacity of not more than thirty (30) gallons, and shall have tight covers, the
same to be in place at all times except when garbage or refuse is being
deposited therein or removed therefrom.
   (C)   In the alternative, garbage may be placed in containers of a type
which can be automatically emptied by the vehicles used in the collection and
removal of garbage. However, boxes and crates may be stacked. Odd articles,
which the garbage collector’s equipment could reasonably be expected to handle,
shall be bundled or otherwise altered so that two (2) persons could reasonably
be expected to handle them.
   (D)   If one container is not sufficient to hold the quantity of garbage or
refuse accumulated before collections, a sufficient number of containers shall
be obtained. All containers shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition at
all times.
   (E)   Garbage shall be well drained of liquids and wrapped in paper or other
material before being deposited in garbage containers.
   (F)   Each Mobile Home located within the Village shall be required to have
a metal covered garbage container and such container shall be covered and
flytight. (Ord. 216-B, 4-24-1986; amd. Ord. 899, 2-28-2020)
7-2-2-2: DUTY TO REMOVE GARBAGE:
   (A)   The owner, occupant, or lessee of any premises in the village shall
cause to be removed from said premises all garbage as often as necessary to
prevent any excessive or undue accumulation.
   (B)   Where a property is served by a public alley, the containers and
refuse shall be placed on the lot at the rear thereof near the alley property
line, and, if any property is fenced, the containers and refuse may be placed
inside of the fence at the entrance thereto. Where a property is not served by
a public alley, the containers and refuse shall be placed at the curb or street
line by seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of the designated collection day.
   (C)   Where a property is not served by a public alley, the garbage
containers shall be removed from the curb or street line within eight (8) hours
following collection. (Ord. 216-B, 4-24-1986)
7-2-2-3: DISPOSAL SITES; BURNING:
   (A)   The disposal of garbage by any individual, firm, or corporation in any
place, private or public, within the village limits or the distance of one-half
(1/2) mile beyond such limits, other than at a site or sites duly authorized by
the president and board of trustees of the village, is prohibited.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep, or deposit
anywhere within the limits of the village or the distance of one-half (1/2)
mile beyond such limits any garbage in such manner that it may be carried or
deposited by the action of the sun, wind, rain, or snow into or upon any
street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place or onto any
occupied premises within the village.
   (C)   The burning of garbage within the village limits or the distance of
one-half (1/2) mile beyond such limits is prohibited. (Ord. 216-B, 4-24-1986)
7-2-3: DIVISION III - REGULATION OF RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE COLLECTION:
7-2-3-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall collect, remove or dispose of residential garbage without first
having obtained a license to do so; provided that any person desiring to
collect, remove or dispose of residential garbage from his own premises,
without the aid of a licensed residential garbage collector, may do so.
There shall be no more than one license for residential garbage collection,
authorizing the collection of garbage from residential dwelling units within
the Village.
The penalty for any residential garbage collection company collecting garbage
from a residential dwelling unit without an exclusive license duly authorized
by the Village, shall, upon conviction, be assessed a fine of not less than
$250.00, nor more than $750.00, plus court fees and attorneys' fees per
occurrence. Every day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a
separate occurrence. Each residential dwelling unit from which the residential
garbage collection company collects shall be deemed a separate violation. (Ord.
216-D, 2-12-2003; amd. Ord. 899, 2-28-2020)
7-2-3-2: GRANTING LICENSE:
   (A)   The mayor of the village, with the concurrence of the majority of the
board of trustees, shall grant an exclusive license to a person selected in
accordance with the provisions of this division to collect, remove and dispose
of residential garbage within the village.
   (B)   Persons who want to be considered for said license shall complete and
return the application in the manner stated therein.
   (C)   In granting said license, the mayor and board of trustees shall take
into account:
      1.   The apparent ability of the applicant to comply with the
specifications. In determining the apparent ability of the applicant, the mayor
and board of trustees shall consider, but not limit their consideration to, the
following:
         (a)   If the applicant's disposal activities are currently in
operation.
         (b)   The applicant's recent experience in the disposal industry.
         (c)   Whether the applicant presently owns such disposal equipment as
to effectively carry out the requirements of the specifications and this
chapter;
      2.   The terms of this chapter, and all laws and regulations relating to
the disposal of garbage; and
      3.   The schedule of rates quoted in the application form for the
services described in the specifications. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-3-3: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The mayor of the village, with the concurrence of a majority of the board of
trustees, may revoke a license granted pursuant to this chapter for any of the
following causes:
   (A)   Any misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application
for the license;
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (C)   Failure to perform according to the specifications under which the
license is granted;
   (D)   Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor where such conviction indicates
the licensee's inability to operate a safe, honest and legitimate business
within the village;
   (E)   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine or charge owed to the village;
or
   (F)   Refusal to cooperate with the reasonable requests of an official of
the village authorized to investigate compliance with the provisions hereof.
The right of revocation set forth in this section shall be in addition to the
right of enforcement available to the village under section
7-2-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-3-4: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
The license to collect, remove and dispose of residential garbage may not be
assigned, loaned, sold, transferred, used as collateral or otherwise
encumbered. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-3-5: EMERGENCY POWERS:
Should the licensee's failure to collect, remove and dispose of residential
garbage in accordance with the terms of this chapter or his license pose an
imminent health or safety hazard to the residents of the village, the
president, with the concurrence of a majority of the board of trustees, may
make reasonable temporary arrangements for the collection, removal and disposal
of garbage to relieve the emergency and the licensee will reimburse the village
for all expenses incurred in connection therewith. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-3-6: SERVICE CHARGES:
There are hereby established "service charges" to be collected from residential
users in an amount not in excess of contract obligations and the cost of
billing and collecting such service charges. In determining the amount of
service charges, the village shall take into consideration the amount of the
tax levy, if any, for solid waste collection and disposal pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19-4. (Ord. 648, 1-9-2008)
7-2-3-7: LIABILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, the user thereof or the owner
of any beneficial interest of any trust holding title to the land or
improvements shall each be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the
service charges on such premises. Unpaid service charges shall become a lien on
the property. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-3-8: NONPAYMENT OF BILLS:
(Rep. by Ord. 648, 1-9-2008)
7-2-3-9: ENFORCEMENT:
If payment of any amount due for solid waste disposal service, additional
charges, or benefits when the same becomes due shall not be made as provided in
this chapter, the village may file or cause to be filed a complaint in the
circuit court of Tazewell County for either the collecting of the charges from
the responsible party or parties; or in the alternative seek a lien against the
property. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-3-10: USE OF VILLAGE LICENSEE FOR RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE REQUIRED:
All owners of residential dwelling units within the Village are required to
utilize the services of and maintain an account with the residential garbage
collection company who is awarded the exclusive license by the Village for the
collection of residential garbage. All residential dwelling unit owners shall
be required to pay service charges for residential garbage collection as
required by Section
7-2-3-6 of this Code. In the case of rented residential dwelling units, it
shall be the duty of the property owner to ensure the timely payment of the
service fees.
Residents shall not share garbage containers or accounts without the written
permission from the Health and Safety Committee of the Village Board.
If a resident maintains a dwelling unit as well as a commercial business
establishment, the resident may utilize the same garbage collection service
that provides garbage collection for the commercial business establishment
without using the Village's licensed residential garbage collection company,
provided the property owner obtains a variance from this Section
7-2-3-10 in accordance with section
7-2-7 of this Chapter, and further provided the following conditions exist:
   (A)   The same person owns both the commercial business establishment and
the dwelling unit; and
   (B)   The garbage collection service utilized by the commercial business
establishment is available to the occupants of the dwelling unit and is
adequate to meet the garbage disposal needs of both the commercial business
establishment and the dwelling unit; and
   (C)   The garbage container used for the dwelling unit satisfies the
requirements of section
7-2-2-1(B) of this Chapter. (Ord. 899, 2-28-2020)
7-2-4: DIVISION IV - REGULATION OF NONRESIDENTIAL GARBAGE COLLECTION:
7-2-4-1: SCOPE:
This section
7-2-4 regulates the collection, removal and disposal of nonresidential garbage
and is intended to regulate all garbage collection, removal and disposal that
is not within the scope of section
7-2-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-4-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, removing, or disposing of
garbage or refuse for hire under this section
7-2-4 within the village limits, without first obtaining a permit to engage in
such business. Every person desiring to engage in such business shall make
application to the village clerk by setting forth the name of such person, the
residence thereof or the address or place of business, together with a
description of the vehicle or vehicles to be used in the collection,
transporting, or disposal of such garbage, and deposit with said application
the fee for such permit. A permit shall be issued only with the approval of the
mayor and board of trustees of said village upon consideration at a duly
constituted meeting, and each such permit so issued shall expire May 1
following the issuance thereof. The permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
per year, or any unexpired part thereof, payable in advance as aforesaid to the
village clerk. Before issuing such a permit, the corporate authorities shall
satisfy themselves that any vehicle to be used for such purpose complies with
the requirements of this section
7-2-4 and also shall satisfy themselves that the permit holder is capable of
complying with the requirements of this chapter. The permit may be revoked when
deemed necessary to the public welfare by the mayor and board of trustees at a
duly constituted meeting. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter
shall constitute grounds for revocation. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-4-3: CONDITION AND MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES:
Any vehicle used for the purposes set forth in this section
7-2-4 shall be maintained in good mechanical condition and shall be equipped
with a garbage tight body to prevent the littering of streets and public
places, and shall be so maintained and equipped at all times. (Ord. 216-D, 2-
12-2003)
7-2-4-4: PLACING AND MAINTENANCE OF CONTAINERS; DUMPSTER SCREENING:
No garbage or refuse shall be collected by any authorized agency or person
unless it is placed and maintained as designated by the provisions of this
chapter.
All property used for non-residential purposes with a refuse disposal area
containing dumpsters shall have screening on all exposed sides of any refuse
disposal area consisting of a solid six foot (6') high fence or wall. The fence
may be chain link if slats are utilized to ensure privacy. Variations from
these requirements may be granted in accordance with section
7-2-7 of this Chapter. The failure to screen in accordance with this Chapter
shall be considered a "nuisance" and subject to the provisions of Chapter 3 of
this Title. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003; amd. Ord. 899, 2-28-2020)
7-2-4-5: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
The license to collect, remove and dispose of nonresidential garbage may not be
assigned, loaned, sold, transferred, used as collateral or otherwise
encumbered. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-5: DIVISION V - ENFORCEMENT:
7-2-5-1: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, any person who violates this chapter
shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) plus court costs and attorneys' fees for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each calendar day during which
a violation occurs or continues. The owners of real property upon which a
violation is found to exist, as well as the persons actually violating this
chapter, shall be jointly and severally liable for such violation. (Ord. 216-D,
2-12-2003; amd. Ord. 899, 2-28-2020)
7-2-6: DIVISION VI - CONFLICTING ORDINANCES REPEALED:
7-2-6-1: CONFLICTING ORDINANCES:
Ordinance 216-B and all other existing ordinances, or such thereof, in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter are repealed. (Ord. 216-D, 2-12-2003)
7-2-7: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request For Variance: A person requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Village Building
Inspector. The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which
a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority To Grant Variances: The Village Building Inspector shall
make a recommendation on the variance application to the Health and Safety
Committee. The Health and Safety Committee shall then make a recommendation for
final ruling on the variance request to the Board of Trustees, and the Board of
Trustees shall decide whether a variance is authorized.
   (C)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: As a condition for authorizing a
variance, the Village may require the person requesting the variance to meet
reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained
within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter. (Ord.
899, 2-28-2020)
CHAPTER 3
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-3-1: Nuisances; Creating; Maintaining
7-3-1: NUISANCES; CREATING; MAINTAINING 1 :
   (A)   Definition: For the purpose of this chapter the following term shall
mean:
   NUISANCE: Any act or offense which is a nuisance according to the common law
or the statutes of the state of Illinois or declared or defined to be a
nuisance by the ordinances of this village. In addition, the officials of this
village shall be authorized to abate any nuisance while not specifically
defined within this section which shall constitute the unreasonable,
unwarranted or unlawful use by a person of property, real or personal, or from
his own improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct which works an
obstruction or injury to the right of another, or of the public, and produces a
material, annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt that the law will
presume an actionable nuisance. Nuisances may be abated which are public or
which are both public and private in nature. A nuisance is also any condition
or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the
property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in
the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are
located. Nuisances include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   To deposit, keep, scatter or store lumber, junk, trash or debris.
      2.   To deposit, keep, scatter or store abandoned, discarded or unused
objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans
or containers.
      3.   To deposit, keep or store junk motor vehicles or disabled motor
vehicles which includes any vehicle, including trailers, without currently
valid license plates, or in either substantially wrecked, discarded,
dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition or as defined in title 6,
chapter 7 of this code.
      4.   To keep diseased animals.
      5.   To keep any house of prostitution, indecent exhibition or use any
real estate or personalty for lewdness, assignation or for the use of
controlled substances as defined by statute.
      6.   To cause or allow the carcass of any animal or any offal, filth or
noisome substance to be collected, deposited or remain under ownership control
to the prejudice of others.
      7.   To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or
common sewer, street or public way.
      8.   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any spring,
river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of others.
      9.   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets,
alleys, commons, landing places and ways to burying places.
      10.   To erect, continue or use any building or any real estate or any
other place for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by
occasioning noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or
dangerous to the health of individuals or of the public.
      11.   To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of the same
on, or affixing them to fences, walls, windows, building exteriors, utility
poles or on hydrants or other public or private property, or on rocks or other
natural objects without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway or other
public place, without permission of the proper authorities.
      12.   To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon any public
property or right of way, highway, park, street or parkway anywhere in the
village, any trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked motor vehicles or
parts thereof, or miscellaneous waste.
      13.   To own, maintain or keep a dwelling unit unfit for human
habitation, or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety or health because of
lack of repair, defects in the plumbing system, lighting or ventilation, the
existence of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions likely to cause
sickness among the persons residing in the premises or residing in proximity
thereof.
      14.   To store or place any materials in a manner which may harbor rats
or rodents.
      15.   To produce or permit to be produced whether on public or private
property any offensive noise to the disturbance of the peace or quiet of any
person residing in the vicinity.
      16.   To keep a tent erected on any property within the village for more
than fourteen (14) continuous days or to use a tent for other than recreational
purposes as a shed, or as living quarters. A tent, for the purposes of this
section, is not a decorative structure used to cover summer patio furniture.
      17.   Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis as
defined in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-10), except as
authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.).
   (B)   Duty Of Maintenance Of Private Property: No person owning, leasing,
occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance
thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner
causing substantial diminution in the value of other property in the
neighborhood in which such premises are located.
   (C)   Notice To Abate: It shall be the duty of the police chief or his
designee to serve or cause to be served upon the person in control of any
private property, whether as owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or otherwise to
remove from the property any nuisance or abate any nuisance as defined under
the terms of this chapter.
   (D)   Form Of Notice: The notice shall allow the person five (5) days to
remove or abate the described nuisance; and in the event the nuisance is not so
removed or abated the provisions of this code shall apply. The notice shall be
given by personal service or by first class mail, addressed to the person
occupying or in control of the premises in question or engaging in the conduct
that constitutes the nuisance.
   (E)   Penalty For Failure To Abate A Nuisance: If a person allows a nuisance
to exist as defined in this chapter and fails to abate the nuisance within the
period allowed by this code, then, upon conviction thereof, the person shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which the nuisance is permitted to
exist.
   (F)   Abatement By Village: In addition to the penalty provided for in this
code, whenever any person fails to abate the nuisance within the period allowed
by this code, then the village shall cause the nuisance to be abated, including
the right to seek injunctive relief to enjoin continuation of a nuisance where
there is no adequate remedy at law, and the expenses therefor shall be
recoverable from the owners, jointly and severally, and the cost thereof shall
also be a lien upon the land until paid. Any person who by reason of another's
violation of any provision of this section suffers damage to himself different
from that suffered by any other property owners throughout the village
generally may bring an action to enjoin or otherwise abate the existing
violation.
   (G)   Summary Abatement: Whenever, in the opinion of an officer of the
village possessing police powers, the maintenance or continuation of a nuisance
creates an imminent threat of serious injury to persons or serious damage to
persons or real property, or if the nuisance can be abated summarily without or
with only minor damage to the items or premises which are creating the
nuisance, and the continuation of the nuisance poses a substantial threat of
injury to persons or property or a substantial interference with the quiet
enjoyment of life normally present in the village, the officer shall proceed to
abate the nuisance; provided, further, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent
or person in possession, charge or control of the real or personal property
which has become a nuisance is unknown or cannot readily be found, the
municipal officer with police power may proceed to abate the nuisance without
notice. Where abatement of the nuisance requires continuing acts by the village
authorities beyond the initial summary abatement and any other additional
emergency abatements, it shall seek abatement of the nuisance on a permanent
basis through judicial process as soon as reasonably possible.
   (H)   Recording Of Notice Of Lien: Within sixty (60) days after the costs
and expenses are incurred by the village for abatement, the village may file a
notice of lien in the office of the recorder of deeds of Tazewell County,
Illinois. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof for
purposes of recording; 2) the amount of money representing the costs and
expenses incurred or payable for the service; and 3) the date or dates when the
costs and expenses were incurred by the village.
   (I)   Payment And Release: Upon payment of the costs and expenses by the
owner or persons interested in the property to which a lien is attached, the
lien shall be released by the village and, if notice of a lien has been filed,
the village shall provide to the owner or interested party a release that may
be filed of record; provided, however, no lien shall be released until the
total costs and expenses, including the actual costs, filing fees and other
costs of administration and interest, are satisfied by payment in full. (Ord.
463-03, 7-14-1993; amd. Ord. 575, 11-14-2001; Ord. 783, 5-27-2015; Ord. 816, 6-
22-2016; Ord. 898, 1-22-2020)
 
Notes
  1. See also title 6, chapter 2 of this code, "Miscellaneous Offenses";
1 especially section
  6-2-24, "Creating, Maintaining Nuisances".
CHAPTER 4
LITTERING
SECTION:
7-4-1: Littering; Creating
7-4-2: Definition Of Littering
7-4-3: First Amendment Rights
7-4-4: Penalties
7-4-1: LITTERING; CREATING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Throw or deposit litter in any park or upon any street or other public
place within the village except in public receptacles and in such a manner that
the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where
public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away by
the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere; or
   (B)   Throw or deposit litter on any private property within the village,
whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control
of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection
in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited
by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any
private property; or
   (C)   Throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within
the village whether owned by such person or not. (Ord. 556, 3-26-1997)
7-4-2: DEFINITION OF LITTERING:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, "litter" means
any discarded product, substance or waste. "Litter" may include, but is not
limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or
other lawn or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, handbills, circulars or
other printed materials, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other
packaging or construction material, motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil,
carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of any kind, any
object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard, or anything else
of an unsightly or unsanitary nature. (Ord. 556A, 3-11-1998)
7-4-3: FIRST AMENDMENT RIGHTS:
The village, as trustee for the public has the duty to keep village streets
open for movement of people and property, to prevent street littering and to
protect the property rights of its citizens; provided, however, that the
enforcement of this chapter shall not unreasonably interfere with freedom of
speech or freedom of the press. This chapter shall not apply to the
distribution of any pamphlet, handbill, circular, newspaper or other printed
material (regardless of content) so long as dissemination or distribution is
by:
   (A)   Placing the printed material in a receptacle provided by either the
distributor or the property owner;
   (B)   Placing the printed material in waterproof containers which are left
either on a hook affixed to a delivery post or similar structure;
   (C)   Placing the materials at the entry door;
   (D)   Personal delivery;
   (E)   Mail delivery; or
   (F)   Any other reasonable means of dissemination or distribution that would
not impose a burden upon either the village or property owners in cleaning or
maintaining public areas or private property. (Ord. 556A, 3-11-1998)
7-4-4: PENALTIES:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is continued or permitted
to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be punishable as
such. (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
CHAPTER 5
TATTOOING BODY
SECTION:
7-5-1: Definition
7-5-2: License Required
7-5-3: License Fee
7-5-4: Application For License
7-5-5: Temporary Licenses
7-5-6: Penalties
7-5-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, to "tattoo" means to insert pigment under the surface
of the skin of a human being, by pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to
produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the skin. (Ord. 561, 10-8-
1997)
7-5-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of tattooing
without first having obtained a license from the village. (Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
7-5-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for engaging in the business of operating a tattooing business
within the village shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per annum, payable
in advance to the village clerk at the time application for a license is made.
(Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
7-5-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for licenses to operate a tattooing establishment shall be
made in writing, with a copy of the operator's state registration from the
department of public health attached, to the village clerk and shall be
accompanied by the license fee for the period for which the application is
made. Any change of ownership shall require a new application and license with
payment of fees. (Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
7-5-5: TEMPORARY LICENSES:
There may be issued a temporary license for use by an organization not for
profit, for use at picnics, festivals, dinners, or charity events, for a period
of not to exceed six (6) days in any one calendar year. The license fee for
such license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for the first day, and two dollars
($2.00) for each day thereafter. Should there be a separation of events, then
each period of separation of more than five (5) days shall be deemed a new
application and fee, but not more than a total of six (6) days shall be
permitted in any one calendar year. As with a normal license, a temporary
license will not be granted without a copy of the operator's department of
public health registration on file with the village. (Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
7-5-6: PENALTIES:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is continued or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be
punishable as such. (Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
CHAPTER 6
RESERVED
SECTION:
7-6-1: Reserved
7-6-1: RESERVED
(Reserved by Ord. 899, 2-28-2020)
CHAPTER 7
BODY PIERCING
SECTION:
7-7-1: Definitions
7-7-2: License Required
7-7-3: License Fee
7-7-4: Application For License
7-7-5: Temporary Licenses
7-7-6: Penalties
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and terms defined below shall have
the following meanings:
   BODY PIERCING: Any procedure whereby a part or parts of the human body are
pierced by a sharp instrument in order to allow insertion of a piece or pieces
of jewelry, a ring or other ornamental device through the orifice thus created.
   OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, company, corporation or association that
owns or operates an establishment where body piercing is performed. (Ord. 567,
3-11-1998)
7-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a
body piercing establishment without first having obtained a license from the
village. (Ord. 567, 3-11-1998)
7-7-3: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for engaging in the business of operating a body piercing
establishment within the village shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) per
annum, payable in advance to the village clerk at the time application for a
license is made. (Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
7-7-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for licenses to operate a body piercing establishment shall be
made in writing, with a copy of the operator's state registration from the
department of public health attached, to the village clerk and shall be
accompanied by the license fee for the period for which the application is
made. Any change of ownership shall require a new application and license with
payment of fees therefor. (Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
7-7-5: TEMPORARY LICENSES:
There may be issued a temporary license for use by an organization not for
profit, for use at picnics, festivals, dinners, or charity events, for a period
of not to exceed six (6) days in any one calendar year. The license fee for
such license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for the first day, and two dollars
($2.00) for each day thereafter. Should there be a separation of events, then
each period of separation of more than five (5) days shall be deemed a new
application and fee, but not more than a total of six (6) days shall be
permitted in any one calendar year. As with a normal license, a temporary
license will not be granted without a copy of the operator's department of
public health registration on file with the village. (Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
7-7-6: PENALTIES:
Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is continued or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense, and shall be
punishable as such. (Ord. 677, 7-27-2011)
CHAPTER 8
INSPECTIONS
SECTION:
7-8-1: General
7-8-2: Frequency Of Inspections
7-8-3: Inspection Procedure And Penalties
7-8-4: Leased Or Rented Premises
7-8-5: Other Actions
7-8-6: Severability
7-8-1: GENERAL:
   (A)   Every dwelling, along with all accessory structures located upon the
same lot or a contiguous lot, may be inspected systematically for compliance
with this chapter. Systematic inspections of dwellings may consist of both
exterior and interior inspections.
Exterior inspections may include the dwelling and any accessory structures, and
any environmental violations. Interior inspections, however, shall be limited
to the following health and life threatening violations:
      1.   Compliance with title 4, chapter 1, "Building Code", of this code.
      2.   Compliance with title 4, chapter 5, "Unsafe Or Dangerous Buildings",
of this code.
      3.   Compliance with chapter 1, "Sewers"; chapter 2, "Garbage"; chapter
3, "Nuisances"; and chapter 4, "Littering", of this title.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following:
hotels, motels, hospitals, and units of local government or other governmental
agencies not subject to the housing code, building code, or zoning ordinance of
the village of Creve Coeur.
   (C)   When a nonresidential business or activity, or a state or federally
licensed and inspected use occupies a portion of a building or premises which
would otherwise be subject to this section, the provisions of this section
shall be applicable to the residential and common or public areas of such
building or premises. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
7-8-2: FREQUENCY OF INSPECTIONS:
   (A)   All dwellings subject to this chapter may be inspected at least once
every five (5) years. Written notice of the date of the inspection shall be
given to the owner and/or dwelling occupant at least five (5) days prior to the
date of the inspection. Said notice shall advise the owner and/or occupant of
the inspection, his/her right to refuse inspection of the dwelling unit, and
the village's right to seek issuance of an administrative search warrant in the
event of any such refusal. No inspection of an occupied dwelling shall occur
without the consent of the owner and/or occupant unless an administrative
search warrant is obtained. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or
occupant to be present at the dwelling unit on the date and time of inspection
to provide access for inspection.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall preclude the inspection of any premises
subject to this chapter more frequently than set forth in subsection (A) of
this section; provided, however, that any inspection more frequent than set
forth in subsection (A) of this section, shall be based upon a citizen
complaint or other indicia that are more probable than not that a housing
violation exists.
   (C)   A property owner desiring to notify the village that access is denied,
prior to a request for an inspection, may do so by advising the village in
writing that they wish to deny access to their property and require the village
to obtain an administrative search warrant. Said notice should be in writing
and should contain the following information: 1) owner name and address (agent
if applicable); and 2) property address and tax identification number. An
owner's denial of access shall not preclude a tenant from granting access. The
village will make every reasonable effort to recognize any other
constitutionally recognized method of refusing access to a building, but will
recognize denials for access when the above information is provided for each
property.
   (D)   The village is authorized to and may elect to obtain an administrative
warrant in the event that the property owner and/or occupant denies access to
or refuses inspection of the dwelling. A denial of access includes, but it is
not limited to, a written denial of access pursuant to Section
7-8-2(C), denial of entry at the scheduled date and time of inspection or re-
inspection, absence from the dwelling on the scheduled date and time of the
inspection or re-inspection, or any action or nonaction taken by the owner and/
or occupant that demonstrates an intent to refuse an inspection or re-
inspection. If the village elects to obtain an administrative warrant pursuant
to this Section
7-8-2(D), a five hundred-dollar ($500.00) fee will be assessed to the owner
and/or occupant who refuses inspection to cover the cost necessary to prepare,
obtain, and execute the administrative warrant. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013; Ord.
943, 7-14-2021)
7-8-3: INSPECTION PROCEDURE AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   If, upon completion of the inspection, the premises are found to be in
compliance with all applicable village codes or ordinances and other applicable
laws, the village shall provide written acknowledgment of same to the owner
and/or occupant upon request.
   (B)   If, upon completion of the inspection, the dwelling is found to have
one or more health or life threatening violations, or exterior housing code or
environmental violations, the village shall provide written notice of such
violations to the owner or designated agent who shall then have thirty (30)
days to correct said violation. If a dwelling is found to have one or more
health or life threatening violations, a fifty dollar ($50.00) charge will be
assessed for a reinspection fee to cover the cost of the reinspection to ensure
that the violations of the code found in the initial inspection are abated.
   (C)   If the dwelling passed inspection with no major health or life
threatening violations but minor violation(s) was/were noted, the minor
violation(s) must be remedied at the next scheduled inspection. In the event
that the minor violation(s) was/were not corrected, the building inspector
shall issue a citation under this section immediately. Each violation not
corrected shall be a separate offense and the fine shall be in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50.00) to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per uncorrected
violation.
   (D)   If the village building inspector or his designee determines that any
applicable village code or ordinance has been violated after notice of such
violation(s) has been given and the time allowed to correct any such violation
(s), he/she may reenter said premises under the same administrative search
warrant to verify that the violations have been removed. (Ord. 787, 8-12-2015)
7-8-4: LEASED OR RENTED PREMISES:
Any dwelling or part thereof which, by reason of its unsanitary condition or of
its being infected with disease, is unfit for human habitation or which from
any other cause is a source of sickness among the inhabitants of the village or
which otherwise endangers the public health is hereby deemed a public nuisance.
This section, and the following provisions, pertain specifically to dwellings
leased or rented within the village whether or not registered with the village
as required by ordinance:
   (A)   No person owning, occupying or in control of any building or premises
shall use or permit the use of the same for the existence or performance of any
thing or act dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
   (B)   No owner, agent, lessee or person in possession, charge or control of
any building, or any part thereof, shall lease or let the same, or any portion
thereof, or allow the same to be occupied by any person as a dwelling unless
such premises are in a clean, wholesome and sanitary condition and fully comply
with all provisions of the minimum housing regulations of this code.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person occupying any dwelling or
premises, or portion thereof, not to remove or cause to be removed therefrom,
before vacating the same, all garbage, ashes, rubbish, refuse or miscellaneous
waste, or to leave such building or premises in any condition detrimental or
dangerous to health.
   (D)   No owner, lessee or keeper of any apartment house, rooming house,
boarding house, or dormitory shall cause or allow the same to be overcrowded or
so great a number of persons to dwell, remain or sleep in any such house, or
any portion thereof, as to cause any danger or detriment to health.
   (E)   The village building inspector or his designee is hereby authorized
and empowered to cause a sanitary inspection to be made of any and all
dwellings within the village at any reasonable hour.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of the village building inspector to cause an
examination to be made of any building or premises alleged to be a public
nuisance. If the village building inspector or his designee finds that a public
nuisance exists, as defined in this code, he shall serve written notice upon
the owner or person in control of the building or premises, or his agent, or
the occupant, directing such person to abate such nuisance and within forty
eight (48) hours to place such building or premises in a condition which shall
not endanger the public health.
   (G)   Upon failure of an owner or person in control to place any building or
premises in a sanitary condition within forty eight (48) hours of the notice
required by the preceding subsection, the village building inspector or his
designee shall proceed to abate such nuisance, and is authorized in addition
thereto, to post notice on the building or premises that such is unsafe for
habitation, and to enforce the provisions of this code including title 4,
chapter 5 of this code. Such inspector or designee shall keep an account of the
costs and expenses of placing such premises in a sanitary condition, and upon
completion of the same shall certify such costs to the village clerk. The clerk
shall bill the owner or the person in control of the premises for such costs
and expenses incurred by the village. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
7-8-5: OTHER ACTIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from taking action under any
applicable village code or ordinance for any violation thereof or limit the
right or authority of the village to seek injunctive relief or other
appropriate legal remedy for any violation of such code or ordinance. (Ord.
634A, 12-11-2013)
7-8-6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter shall be held invalid, its invalidity shall
not affect any other provisions of this chapter that can be given effect
without the invalid provision, and for this purpose the provisions of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable. (Ord. 634A, 12-11-2013)
CHAPTER 9
SMOKE FREE ILLINOIS ACT
SECTION:
7-9-1: Smoking Prohibited In Public Places And Places Of Employment
7-9-2: Definitions
7-9-3: Exemptions
7-9-4: Penalties
7-9-1: SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in a public place or a place of
employment within the village of Creve Coeur.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke within fifteen feet (15') of
the entrance of any public place or place of employment within the village.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle owned, leased,
or operated by the village.
   (D)   It is unlawful for the owner, employer, occupant or lessee in control
of a public place to knowingly permit smoking in any enclosed area in a public
place or place of employment that is not specifically exempted as described in
section
 7-9-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 674, 6-9-2010)
7-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:
   BUSINESS: Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
association, limited liability partnership, limited liability company or other
business entity, whether formed for profit or nonprofit purposes.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR E-CIGARETTE: Any device that utilizes or employs a
battery or other mechanism to heat a solution or substance intended for
inhalation and which causes such device to produce or the user to exhale smoke,
nicotine, vapor, aerosol, or other substance other than those produced or
exhaled by unenhanced human expiration of air from the lungs. “Electronic
cigarette” includes, but is not limited to, any electronic nicotine delivery
system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic
hookah, vape pen, vape pod, or other similar product or device. “Electronic
cigarette” also includes any cartridge or container of a solution or substance
intended to be used with an electronic cigarette and any solution or substance
intended for use in an electronic cigarette. However, “electronic cigarette”
does not include cigarettes as defined by the Illinois Cigarette Tax Act;
tobacco products as defined by the Tobacco Products Act; products approved by
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as tobacco cessation products,
tobacco dependence products, or for other medical purposes and used solely for
such purpose; asthma inhalers or other medical devices approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, prescribed by a physician for the purpose of
mitigation, treatment or prevention of a medical condition, and used solely for
such prescribed purpose; and products approved for use under and in accordance
with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   EMPLOYEE: Any person, who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a non-profit entity.”Employee” includes the owner or operator
of a sole proprietorship or other similar business entity.
   EMPLOYER: Any person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or non- profit entity, that employs
the services of one or more employees.
   ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
   ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other activities.
   NICOTINE: Any form of nicotine, regardless of whether it is naturally,
chemically, or synthetically derived, including any salt or complex thereof.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private
employer within the village that employees are required to enter, leave, or
pass through during the course of employment, including, but not limited to,
entrances and exits to places of employment, including a minimum distance of
fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation
intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and
work areas; restrooms; conference and class rooms; break rooms and cafeterias;
and other common areas. A private residence or home based business, unless used
to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult care, or other similar social
service care on the premises, is not a "place of employment".
   PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE: A not for profit association, whether incorporated or
not, that is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof
used exclusively for club purposes at all times and is operated solely for a
recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic
purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and only sells alcoholic beverages
incidental to its operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club"
means an organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive
committee or similar body chosen by members at an annual meeting, has
established bylaws, a constitution, or both, to govern its activities, and has
been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club
under 26 USC 501.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation, a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
   PUBLIC ENTRANCE: Every doorway or other entrance to a public place or place
of employment.
   PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to
the public, regardless of whether the building or vehicles is owned in whole or
in part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, the village of
Creve Coeur, or any other public entity and regardless of whether a fee is
charged for admission, including a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A public place does not include a
private residence unless the private residence is used to provide licensed
childcare, foster care or other similar social service care on the premises. A
public place includes, but is not limited to:
   Any business.
   Auditoriums.
   Bars/taverns.
   Bowling alleys.
   Cafeterias.
   Commercial establishments.
   Common or public areas (including, without limitation, lobbies, hallways,
waiting rooms, reception areas, public restrooms, elevators and staircases) and
common areas of multiple-family residences, condominiums, dormitory buildings,
nursing home care facilities, and other multiple- family residential
structures.
   Concert halls.
   Convention facilities.
   Educational facilities.
   Enclosed or partially enclosed sports arenas.
   Exhibition halls.
   Financial institutions.
   Food stores.
   Gaming facilities.
   Government owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles
owned, leased, or operated by the State of Illinois, State of Illinois
subcontract, or the village.
   Healthcare facilities or clinics.
   Indoor shopping malls.
   Laundromats.
   Libraries.
   Lobbies.
   Museums.
   Not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the sleeping quarters within a
hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast, or other similar public
accommodation that are rented to guests, excluding private residences.
   Nursing homes.
   Offices.
   Polling places.
   Private clubs.
   Public conveyances.
   Public restrooms.
   Public transportation facilities.
   Reception areas.
   Restaurants.
   Retail food production and marketing establishments.
   Retail service establishments.
   Retail stores.
   Rooms, chambers, halls, or other locations within which meetings, hearings,
or gatherings are held, to which the public is invited or in which the public
is permitted, including specifically, but without limitation, any indoor
enclosed area under the control of the village where there is in progress any
public meeting.
   Schools.
   Skating rinks.
   Theaters, indoor or outdoor.
   Ticket areas.
   Vehicles of public transport.
   Waiting areas.
   RESTAURANT: An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias
that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, and a
kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for
serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the restaurant.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail establishment that derives more than eighty
percent (80%) of its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants, or
herbs and cigars, cigarettes, pipes, and other smoking devices for burning
tobacco and related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products
is merely incidental. “Retail tobacco store” includes an enclosed workplace
that manufactures, imports, or distributes tobacco or tobacco products, when,
as a necessary and integral part of the process of making, manufacturing,
importing, or distributing a tobacco product for the eventual retail sale of
that tobacco or tobacco product, tobacco is heated, burned, or smoked, or a
lighted tobacco product is tested, provided that the involved business entity:
(1) maintains a specially designated area or areas within the workplace for the
purpose of the heating, burning, smoking, or lighting activities, and does not
create a facility that permits smoking throughout; (2) satisfies the eighty
percent (80%) requirement related to gross sales; and (3) delivers tobacco
products to consumers, retail establishments, or other wholesale establishments
as part of its business. “Retail tobacco store” does not include a tobacco
department or section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment
with any type of liquor, food, or restaurant license.
   SMOKE OR SMOKING: Inhaling, exhaling, burning, smoking, or carrying any
lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other lighted
smoking equipment. “Smoke” or “smoking” includes the use, inhaling, exhaling,
or burning of any nicotine product or electronic cigarette.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leave and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. “Tobacco product” includes any
component, part, and accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately. “Tobacco product” does not include electronic cigarettes, nicotine
products, and products that have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration for sale as tobacco cessation products, tobacco dependence
products, or for other medical purposes and used solely for such purpose.
   VILLAGE: The village of Creve Coeur. (Ord. 674, 6-9-2010; amd. Ord. 886, 7-
24-2019)
7-9-3: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, smoking is
allowed in the following areas:
   (A)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a
childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based
business open to the public.
   (B)   Any public place or place of employment that is a tobacco dealer,
whose principal business is the sale at retail of tobacco and tobacco related
products; provided that smoke generated by smoking on the premises of the
tobacco dealer does not infiltrate into enclosed areas where smoking is
otherwise prohibited; and no food or liquor license has been granted.
   (C)   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
   (D)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as
smoking rooms provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor must be
contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into nonsmoking rooms
or other areas where smoking is prohibited. No more than twenty five percent
(25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as
rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking
may not be changed, except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms.
   (E)   Private vehicles, not including public transportation facilities or
government vehicles. (Ord. 674, 6-9-2010)
7-9-4: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine
of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (B)   Any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public
place or a place of employment that knowingly permits smoking in an area where
smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of
an offense punishable by a fine of not less than:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first offense;
      2.   Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second offense; and
      3.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a third or subsequent offense.
   (C)   Each day that any violation of this chapter shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
which may be abated by an action in the circuit court for injunctive relief, or
other means provided for by the law, and the village may take action to recover
the costs of the nuisance abatement. (Ord. 674, 6-9-2010)
TITLE 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
WATERWORKS AND WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 1
SECTION:
8-1-1: Establishment Of Water Department
8-1-2: Application For Connection To Village Water System
8-1-3: Installation And Title
8-1-4: Inspection And Approval
8-1-5: Village Not Liable For Interruption Of Service Or Supply
8-1-6: Rates
8-1-7: Tank Charges For Water
8-1-8: Rates For Water And/Or Sewer Outside The Village Limits
8-1-9: Deposit For Water Services By Residential Renters And Contract
Purchasers
8-1-10: Commercial Renters
8-1-11: Liability Of Owner, Occupant, Owner Of Beneficial Interest And User
8-1-12: Service Disconnection; Nonpayment Of Bills
8-1-13: Enforcement
8-1-14: Fire Sprinkler Systems
8-1-15: Application And Permit
8-1-16: After-Hours Service Calls
8-1-17: Water Meters
8-1-18: Intergovernmental Agreement Providing For Water Supply Cooperation In
The Event Of Emergency
8-1-19: Cross-Connection Control
8-1-20: Prohibition Of Watering
8-1-21: Water Leakage
8-1-22: Tampering
8-1-23: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency Requirements, Infrastructure
Financial Assistance Program
 
Notes
1 1. See Chapter 1A of this Title for public and private sewer regulations.
8-1-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF WATER DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby established a Water Department of the Village which shall be
responsible for the operation of the water treatment and distribution of the
Village, under the provisions of this Chapter, or such other ordinances or
amendments hereto, as may from time to time be enacted by the Mayor and the
Board of Trustees of this Village. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-2: APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION TO VILLAGE WATER SYSTEM:
Any and all persons desiring water from the Village water system shall apply
for a service permit at the Village Water Department. The applicant shall also
obtain from the Village an approved water meter at such cost as is from time to
time established by the Village Board. All costs and fees must be paid in
advance before service will be allowed. Any and all connections into the
Village's water distribution system shall be made by the Public Works
Department, unless otherwise approved, in writing by the Public Works
Department. The applicant shall be responsible for time and material charges
for the work performed by the Village and for any applicable inspection fees.
Each application shall contain all of the information required by the Public
Works Department. A permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be
paid at the time the application is submitted. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995; amd.
Ord. 293-M, 11-13-1996)
8-1-3: INSTALLATION AND TITLE:
All services hereafter installed shall be a minimum of one inch (1") pipe. All
work completed and materials used shall meet the specifications of the Public
Works Department. The title of all material used from the main, up to and
including the curb stop, shall, upon installation and approval, vest in and
become the property of the Village. The service line from the curb stop to the
meter shall remain the responsibility of the property owner. The curb stop is
Village property and is not to be used by anyone other than Village employees.
Installation and repair by a contractor for connections to or in any manner
perform any work upon any of the mains, connections or appliances pertaining to
the waterworks of the Village shall upon request file a performance bond with
the Village Clerk in the amount equal to the cost of the work. Sureties on the
performance bond are subject to Village approval. The contractor shall in
writing indemnify, defend and save harmless the Village from and against all
claims for damages to persons or property by reason of or resulting directly or
indirectly from the construction, alteration or repair in doing any work in and
about said water mains, connections or appliances pertaining to the Village
waterworks. The contractor shall in all respects in performing such work be
governed by the rules and regulations now in force or hereinafter adopted by
the Village for water main connections. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995; amd. Ord. 293-
N, 11-27-1996)
8-1-4: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
All service line installations for which a permit was issued shall be made at
such point or in such manner as directed by the public works department and
plumbing inspector, and no connection, work or installation shall be backfilled
or covered in any manner until the same has been inspected. Approval shall be
noted on the posted permit and signed by the inspecting officer. (Ord. 293-M,
11-13-1996)
8-1-5: VILLAGE NOT LIABLE FOR INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE OR SUPPLY:
The village shall have the right to shut off the supply of water whenever it is
necessary to make repairs or improvements, enforce rules, or for any operating
reason. When possible, a reasonable notice will be given to the customer.
However, in an emergency situation the water may be shut off without notice.
The village shall not be liable because of any shutoff or discontinuance of
service for any direct or resultant damages to any person, company, or
customer. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-6: RATES:
There are hereby established rates and charges for the use and for the services
supplied by the village, as of July 1, 2014, and creating a capital improvement
fee surcharge for each user account.
For purposes of this section, one "unit" is defined as follows:
One single-family dwelling.
Each unit of an apartment that will accommodate a single family.
One trailer home that will accommodate a single family.
In addition to the usage rates set out in this section, each user account of
the water and/or sewer services shall be charged a flat fee of ten dollars
($10.00) per unit for the "water and sewer capital improvement fund" each
month. The rates per unit are as follows:
Effective July 1, 2014:
Rates for single- and multiple-family dwellings, planned unit developments, and
trailer courts:
 
Monthly Metered Rates  Water Only      Sewer Only      Water And Sewer
First 3,000 gallons    $17.50          $11.81          $29.31
All over 3,000 gallons $1.00 per 1,000 $2.00 per 1,000 $3.00 per 1,000 gallons
per unit               gallons         gallons
 
 
Monthly Unmetered Rates Water Only Sewer Only Water And Sewer
Flat rate               $27.31     $19.50     $46.81
 
Rates for business, industrial, commercial, schools, churches, restaurants,
hotels, motels, and nightclubs:
 
Monthly Metered Rates  Water Only      Sewer Only      Water And Sewer
First 3,000 gallons    $17.50          $11.81          $29.31
All over 3,000 gallons $1.00 per 1,000 $2.00 per 1,000 $3.00 per 1,000 gallons
                       gallons         gallons
 
Effective January 1, 2015:
Rates for single- and multiple-family dwellings, and planned unit developments:
 
Monthly Metered Rates Water Only      Sewer Only      Water And Sewer
Base rate             $18.00          $12.00          $30.00
Per gallon usage      $2.00 per 1,000 $2.00 per 1,000 $4.00 per 1,000 gallons
                      gallons         gallons
 
For mobile home parks, the total charge for water and sewer usage is a
combination of the following: The fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per mobile home
for the "water and sewer capital improvement fund" each month, a base rate
amount calculated by the total number of mobile homes at the rate of thirty
dollars ($30.00) per month, being eighteen dollars ($18.00) water usage and
twelve dollars ($12.00) sewer usage, and a metered usage rate per gallon used
of four dollars ($4.00) per thousand gallons, being two dollars ($2.00) water
usage and two dollars ($2.00) sewer usage. Annually, the number of mobile homes
will be determined by the mobile home park and submitted to the Village for
confirmation, which number will then be used for the calculation of the monthly
Capital Improvement Fund fee and the base rate amount.
For residential users, a senior citizen discount for users over sixty two (62)
years old, after January 1, 2015, will apply and the water and sewer usage fees
will not apply to the first two thousand (2,000) gallons used.
The total charge for water and sewer usage for metered accounts is the
combination of the base rate amount and the applicable monthly usage amount.
 
Monthly Unmetered Rates Water Only Sewer Only Water And Sewer
Flat rate               $27.31     $19.50     $46.81
 
Rates for business, industrial, commercial, schools, churches, restaurants,
hotels, motels, and nightclubs:
 
Monthly Metered Rates Water Only      Sewer Only      Water And Sewer
Base rate             $18.00          $12.00          $30.00
Per gallon usage      $2.00 per 1,000 $2.00 per 1,000 $4.00 per 1,000 gallons
                      gallons         gallons
 
The total charge for water and sewer usage for metered accounts is the
combination of the base rate amount and the applicable monthly usage amount.
An annual rate increase of three percent (3%) on the base rates for water and
sewer will be added to all water accounts effective the first billing in March
2017, and every March thereafter. Examples for next four (4) years:
 
           Water Base Sewer Base Water And Sewer
March 2017 $18.54     $12.36     $30.90
March 2018 19.09      12.73      31.82
March 2019 19.66      13.11      32.77
March 2020 20.24      13.50      33.74
 
(Ord. 767B, 2-28-2017)
8-1-7: TANK CHARGES FOR WATER:
Flat rate $6.50/1,000 gallons
For water, a charge shall be made of six dollars fifty cents ($6.50) for each
one thousand (1,000) gallons or fraction, and shall only be taken from the
system where authorized. (Ord. 293-I, 6-14-1995)
8-1-8: RATES FOR WATER AND/OR SEWER OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE LIMITS:
Monthly bills for service outside the Village, where permitted, shall be one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the rate that would be charged if premises were
inside the Village limits. (Ord. 293-I, 6-14-1995)
8-1-9: DEPOSIT FOR WATER SERVICES BY RESIDENTIAL RENTERS AND CONTRACT
PURCHASERS:
Before water service is provided to any residential tenant or contract
purchaser, the tenant/contract purchaser shall deposit the sum of one hundred
fifty dollars ($150.00), which shall be held in escrow by the Village until the
service is discontinued. The term "residential tenant" includes an owner of a
trailer home situated on leased property. Said deposit shall then be applied
first to any unpaid balance and any balance remaining shall be refunded to the
depositor.
Should any deposit remain after the deduction of any unpaid balance, and should
such refundable portion of the deposit not be claimed within thirty (30) days
after the termination of water service, and the Village be unable to locate the
residential tenant or contract purchaser entitled to the deposit refund, the
Village shall charge a non-refundable dormancy fee of five dollars ($5.00) per
month, deducted from the remaining deposit on the first of each month, to cover
the Village's transactional and administrative costs in maintaining the deposit
escrow account, until such time as the deposit is claimed or its funds are
exhausted. All applicants for water service shall be notified of this dormancy
fee upon application for water services. The Village shall also send written
notice to existing water service customers, who have made a deposit prior to
the adoption of this dormancy fee, of the adoption of this dormancy fee. (Ord.
767C, 1-9-2019)
8-1-10: COMMERCIAL RENTERS:
Commercial renters shall be required to make a cash deposit of two and one-half
(21/2) times the average estimated monthly usage, which shall be held in escrow
by the Village until the service is discontinued. Said deposit shall then be
applied first to any unpaid balance and any balance remaining shall be refunded
to the depositor.
Should any deposit remain after the deduction of any unpaid balance, and should
such refundable portion of the deposit not be claimed within thirty (30) days
after the termination of water service, and the Village be unable to locate the
commercial renter entitled to the deposit refund, the Village shall charge a
non-refundable dormancy fee of five dollars ($5.00) per month, deducted from
the remaining deposit on the first of each month, to cover the Village's
transactional and administrative costs in maintaining the deposit escrow
account, until such time as the deposit is claimed or its funds are exhausted,
provided further that, should any amount of the deposit remain unclaimed, after
all deductions, thirty six (36) months from the termination of water service,
that remaining portion of the deposit shall be declared abandoned property and
shall be surrendered to the Illinois State Treasurer, all in accordance with
the Revised Uniform Unclaimed Property Act 1  as amended from time to time. All
applicants for water service shall be notified of this dormancy fee upon
application for water services. The Village shall also send written notice to
existing water service customers, who have made a deposit prior to the adoption
of this dormancy fee, of the adoption of this dormancy fee. (Ord. 767C, 1-9-
2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 1026/15-101 et seq.
8-1-11: LIABILITY OF OWNER, OCCUPANT, OWNER OF BENEFICIAL INTEREST AND USER:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof, the user thereof or the owner
of any beneficial interest of any trust holding tied to land or improvements
shall each be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the water service
charges on such premises. Unpaid water service charges shall become a lien on
the property. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-12: SERVICE DISCONNECTION; NONPAYMENT OF BILLS:
   (A)   Bills for water service shall be sent monthly on or before the first
day of the month, for service finished during the previous month, and except as
noted herein all billings shall be payable on or before the fifteenth day of
the month. If the bill is not paid in full by the fifteenth day of the month, a
penalty of five dollars ($5.00) shall be added. If payment is not paid by the
twenty seventh day of the month, an additional penalty of ten dollars ($10.00)
shall be added, and water service shall be shut off without further demand. For
the purpose of collecting the accounts, the Clerk is authorized to file a lien
against any property if any service bill becomes delinquent for more than
thirty (30) days. All owners shall be guarantors of tenants and contract
purchasers and will be held for any delinquency in such services. There will be
an additional charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to have water service
turned back on for nonpayment of a water bill.
   (B)   In respect to mobile home parks, as defined by Illinois' Mobile Home
Park Act, all billings shall be payable on or before the twenty fifth day of
the month. If the bill is not paid in full by the twenty fifth day of the
month, a penalty of three percent (3%) of the bill amount shall be added. If
payment is not paid by the last day of the month, a penalty of six percent (6%)
of the bill amount shall be added, and water service shall be shut off without
further demand. For the purpose of collecting the accounts, the Clerk is
authorized to file a lien against any property if any service bill becomes
delinquent for more than thirty (30) days.
   (C)   In the event that the owner or occupant receiving water service in the
Village issues a check in payment for any water charges which is returned by a
bank because of insufficient funds, a closed account, or any other reason
except an error by the bank, a twenty dollar ($20.00) service charge will be
added to the account. (Ord. 767B, 2-28-2017)
8-1-13: ENFORCEMENT:
If payment of any amount due for water service, additional charges, or benefits
when the same becomes due shall not be made as provided in this chapter, the
Village may file or cause to be filed a complaint in the Circuit Court of
Tazewell County for either the collecting of the charges from the responsible
party or parties; or in the alternative seek a lien against the property. (Ord.
293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-14: FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS:
   (A)   All existing and future fire sprinkler systems directly or indirectly
connected to the village water system shall comply with the regulations of the
Illinois environmental protection agency and the Illinois state plumbing code.
   (B)   No hazardous chemicals are allowed in the systems directly or
indirectly connected to the village water system.
   (C)   All future systems must be approved by the public works department
before issuing a building permit (for new construction) or before installing
such a system (for existing structures).
   (D)   All systems using a pump must be equipped with a low pressure cutoff
switch set at twenty (20) psi at the village main. The owner of the premises
shall maintain said cutoff switch, test it and certify to its accuracy at least
once a year. Said certificate must be made in writing by a qualified party
acceptable to the public works department. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-15: APPLICATION AND PERMIT:
In order to procure water service an application shall be filed on the form
provided by the public works department and a permit fee paid prior to issuance
thereof. The fee for the permit and application shall be five dollars ($5.00).
(Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-16: AFTER HOURS SERVICE CALLS:
If service is required after normal business hours for nonemergency work, a
service charge of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be charged to the owner. (Ord.
293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-17: WATER METERS:
   (A)   The owners or occupants of all homes or buildings of whatsoever kind,
or the owners of existing buildings who connect said structures, or restore the
service, to the water system of the village shall be required to have a village
approved water meter by January 1, 2015. The location of each meter shall be
approved by the public works department.
   (B)   There shall be a water meter service charge equal to the actual cost
of the meter and remote device. Alternatively, a meter payment program is
hereby established where a user, other than a rental property or business which
are not eligible for the program, may enroll to pay the actual cost of the
meter and remote device payable in equal monthly installments over the course
of thirty six (36) months as payment for the meter. Installation of meter shall
be the responsibility of the homeowner in accordance with specifications
supplied by the public works department. In those cases where payment of those
charges would work an undue hardship on the user, payment arrangements may be
made at the discretion of the public works department. After installation in
the system, the meter shall be inspected by a representative of the public
works department for approval. If installation does not meet specifications, a
fifteen dollar ($15.00) charge will be made for each additional trip to inspect
meter installation. When meter installation is approved, the meter and readout
device shall become the property of the village. Larger sized meters will be
charged according to costs of materials.
   (C)   Existing users of the village water which do not have meters at this
time may request that a water meter and remote readout device be installed on
their building as outlined in this section. Once a meter is installed, however,
it must remain in service thereafter. No later than January 1, 2015, every
existing user of the village water must have installed and in operation a water
meter as outlined in this section, and no “grandfathering” of lesser
requirements will exist. If the user has not purchased a water meter as of
January 1, 2015, they will automatically be enrolled in the meter payment
program at that time.
   (D)   Businesses, industrial and commercial users, schools, churches,
restaurants, hotels, motels, and nightclubs without usable water meters must
install meters acceptable to the public works department by November 30, 1994.
All village water users must have water meters purchased and installed by
January 1, 2015, or the user will be charged a twenty five dollar ($25.00)
monthly noncompliance fee until the meter is installed and the department has
inspected and approved the installation.
   (E)   Any owner or occupant of premises using the water service of the
village shall permit entrance and access to said premises by the public works
department for the purpose of inspection of the water meter, replacement, or
installation thereof upon said premises. If it is necessary to repair or
replace the meter due to normal use, wear and tear, the user shall reimburse
the village for the actual cost of repair or replacement less a credit for the
amount paid for the original meter installation. If it is necessary to repair
or replace the meter due to damage to the seal or meter from any tampering or
vandalism, the user shall pay all of the costs of a new meter, installation or
repair and shall receive no credit for the original meter installation.
   (F)   Any village water meter shall be taken out and tested upon complaint
of the user. If upon testing, the meter is not within three percent (3%) of
being accurate, it shall be repaired or replaced as determined by the
supervisor of the public works department. The user shall reimburse the village
for the actual cost of testing, repair or replacement of the water meter.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use any type of
jumper, either metallic or nonmetallic, or any other common device or to in any
way alter the operation of any water meter. Nor shall the user allow any
tampering or vandalism of the meter or seal by any persons.
   (H)   Any person violating any provisions of this section, upon conviction,
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such violation, provided that the
penalty provided herein shall not apply to persons in violation of the
provisions of this section, but in lieu thereof, any person in violation of
this section who, after receiving written notice thereof from the public works
department, does not comply within one week after receipt of such written
notice, shall have water service terminated until such time as said violation
has been corrected.
(Ord. 767, 7-23-2014; amd. Ord. 767D, 5-22-2024)
8-1-18: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT PROVIDING FOR WATER SUPPLY COOPERATION IN
THE EVENT OF EMERGENCY:
   (A)   Continuance Of Water Main Connections And Shutoff Valves: Previously
heretofore, pursuant to a prior intergovernmental agreement between the parties
hereto, the village of North Pekin was granted the right to install shutoff
valves and connections with the water mains of Creve Coeur. It is agreed by and
between the parties that unless this agreement is otherwise terminated as
provided herein, the village of North Pekin shall continue to maintain in place
the presently existing shutoff valves and connections with the water mains of
Creve Coeur.
   (B)   Maintenance And Repairs: It is agreed by and between the two (2)
municipalities that all costs incurred for upkeep and repair of the master
meter and shutoff valves installed and maintained in conjunction with the
connection with the water main of Creve Coeur shall be paid for by the village
of North Pekin, Illinois. Said master meter and shutoff valves shall be and
remain the property of the village of North Pekin and at any time this
agreement should be terminated, the village of North Pekin shall have the right
to remove said meter and shutoff valves.
   (C)   Water Supply Production: Each municipality shall maintain the ability
to supply to the other water at forty (40) psi (pounds per square inch) except
at such time as the supplying municipality may be in an emergency situation, or
otherwise unable to do so.
   (D)   Water Rates: During the time the valves and connections described and
provided for herein are in operation, the consumer municipality shall pay to
the supplying municipality a sum equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the
highest rate between two (2) municipalities per one thousand (1,000) gallons of
water in effect at the time of consumption. The amount of water consumed shall
be determined by the increase or decrease of water pumped at each one of the
municipality's wells.
   (E)   Emergency Purposes Only: It is further agreed that the valves shall
only be used in case of an emergency or in instances where either party, due to
planned shutdown or otherwise, has unavailable to it sufficient water to meet
its needs, and not for the purpose of supplying the normal water needs of the
consuming municipality. The water operator of each municipality shall
immediately notify the water superintendent of the other municipality when
water is turned on or shut off by means of the connections made pursuant to
this agreement. At any time an emergency condition is to last for a period of
greater than thirty (30) days, the other municipality shall have the right to
terminate water consumption by means of the shut off valves installed on the
water main of Creve Coeur as agreed to herein. Any such shut off valve shall
not be left in the "on" position after the emergency ceases to exist,
regardless of the fact that thirty (30) days may not have elapsed since the
commencement of the emergency.
   (F)   Quality Of Water: The supplying municipality shall not be liable for
the quality of the water after water leaves the main of the supplying
municipality and enters the mains of the consumer municipality. Each
municipality shall undertake all efforts necessary to provide cross connection
protection.
   (G)   Term Of Agreement: This agreement shall be in full force and effect
from the date of execution and hereafter until amended or changed by mutual
agreement of both respective corporate authorities. It is agreed that neither
North Pekin nor Creve Coeur shall either directly or indirectly seek any
modification of this agreement through court action.
This agreement may be terminated by either municipality by giving to the other
six (6) months' notice in writing, authorized by the corporate authority of the
notifying municipality, indicating the intention to so do.
   (H)   Invalidity: If any provision of this agreement shall be declared
invalid for any reason, such invalidation shall not affect the other provisions
of this agreement which can be given effect without the invalid provision, and
to this end, the provisions of this agreement are to be severable.
   (I)   Construction: This agreement shall be construed in accordance with the
laws of the state. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-19: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
   (A)   Backflow Prevention Device: If, in accordance with the Illinois
plumbing code or in the judgment of the public works department, an approved
backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water
supply system, the public works department will give notice to the water
customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer
shall, at his own expense, install such an approved device at a location and in
a manner in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code and all applicable local
regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices
as required by the Illinois plumbing code and local regulations.
   (B)   Cross Connection Control Devices: Only cross connection control
devices which are approved by the research foundation for cross connection
control of the University of Southern California, American waterworks
association, American society of sanitary engineering, or American national
standards institute or certified by the national sanitation foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specifications shall be used. Installation
of approved devices shall be made only as specified by the research foundation
for cross connection control of the University of Southern California, American
waterworks association, American society of sanitary engineering, or American
national standards institute. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on site.
   (C)   Approval Of Private Water Supply: No person shall establish or permit
to be established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby
a private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the village waterworks may enter the supply of the
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
public works department and the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   (D)   Surveys And Investigations: It shall be the duty of the public works
department to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and
other properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual
or potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at
least every two (2) years, or as often as the public works department shall
deem necessary.
   (E)   Right To Enter: The village or its authorized agent shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the village public water
supply for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross
connections, and the village or its authorized agent shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public
water supply or distribution, system of the village public water supply for the
purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the
required cross connection control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or
occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the public works
department any information which he may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when
demanded, shall, within the discretion of the public works department, be
deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
section.
   (F)   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined in
accordance with the general penalty provisions of this code for each offense;
and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues. The public works department is hereby
authorized and directed to discontinue, after ten (10) days' written notice to
the occupant thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection
in violation of the provisions of this section is known to exist and to take
other precautionary measures without notice as he may deem necessary to
eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply distribution
mains, including, without limitation, the right to immediate cancellation of
water service without notice to any party to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination of the water supply; provided, that in the reasonable opinion of
the public works department or the environmental protection agency such action
is required to prevent actual or potential contamination of the water supply.
Such written notice may be either delivered personally to the occupant, or may
be sent to such person by certified mail.
   (G)   Return Receipt Requested: Water service to such property shall not be
restored until such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance
with the provisions of this section, and until a reconnection fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00) is paid to the public works department. Neither the
village nor its agents shall be liable to any customer of the water supply for
any injury, damages, or lost revenues which may result from the termination of
said customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this section,
whether or not said termination of the water supply was with or without notice.
   (H)   Contamination: The person or persons or entity responsible for
backsiphoned material or contamination through backflow, or the consumer
responsible if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through
an illegal cross connection or any improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear all costs associated
with the enforcement of this section, including reasonable attorney fees and
court costs incurred by the village.
   (I)   Adoption Of Regulations For Control Of Cross Connections: The board of
trustees of the village public water supply shall adopt such regulations as
they shall deem necessary to promote the elimination or control of existing
cross connections in furtherance of this section. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-20: PROHIBITION OF WATERING:
   (A)   The mayor of the village is hereby empowered and authorized by his
order to prohibit the use of water from the village water system for the
watering of lawns and gardens, washing of automobiles, and filling of swimming
pools during periods of water shortage or low water pressure in the water
system.
   (B)   Any party who so uses such water during the period of such prohibition
shall be in violation of this section, and upon conviction thereof, subject to
penalty as provided herein. Any party who persists in the continued use of such
water during the period of such prohibition shall be subject to a fine of up to
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such violation and/or immediate
termination of water service by the order of the village mayor. (Ord. 575-A, 1-
23-2002)
8-1-21: WATER LEAKAGE:
In the event there exists a water leak between the curb stop and meter or
building shut off, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property
on which said leak is located to repair said leak within ten (10) days after
receiving written notice from the village by first class mail, advising the
property owner or other responsible party or parties of the leak. If said leak
is not repaired within a ten (10) day period, the village shall discontinue
water service to the property without further notice. If said leak is
determined to be a hazard to the safety of the citizens of the village by the
public works department or by its authorized agent the water service shall be
discontinued without notice until the repair is made. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-22: TAMPERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the village to tamper
with, alter, operate, or injure any part of the village waterworks or supply
system, or any meter, remote meter reading device, valve, curb stop, or fire
hydrant of said system. (Ord. 293-J, 6-14-1995)
8-1-23: ILLINOIS ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY REQUIREMENTS, INFRASTRUCTURE
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE PROGRAM:
   (A)   Annual Review Of Rates And Charges: The adequacy of the water and
sewer rates and charges shall be reviewed not less often than annually, by
certified public accountants for the village in their annual audit report. The
water and sewer rates shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in
local capital costs or operating, maintenance and replacement costs.
   (B)   Revenues And Accounts: All revenues and monies derived from the
operation of the water and sewer system shall be deposited in the water account
of the water and sewer fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the
water department manager separate and apart from all other funds of the village
treasurer and deposited not more than five (5) days after receipt of the same,
or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
mayor. The water department manager shall receive all such revenues from the
water and sewer system and all other funds and monies incident to the operation
of such system as the same may be delivered to her and deposit the same in the
account of the fund designated as the water and sewer fund of the village. Said
manager shall administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by
statute of the "Revised Cities and Villages Act", effective January 1942.
The village water department manager shall establish a proper system of
accounts and shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete
and correct entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the water and
sewer system, and at regular annual intervals she shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the water system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the water facilities,
including a replacement cost. The financial information to be shown in the
audit report shall include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the water plant for the
current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
   (C)   Agency Access To Records: The Illinois environmental protection agency
or its authorized representative shall have access to any books, documents,
papers and records of the village which are applicable to the village system of
user charges for the purpose of making audit, examination, excerpts and
transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the special and
general conditions to any state grant.
   (D)   Appeals: The method for computation of rates and service charges
established for user charges shall be made available to a customer within five
(5) days of receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the
method used or in the computations thereof shall be resolved by the village
trustees within twenty (20) days after notification of a formal written appeal
outlining the discrepancies. (Ord. 293R, 4-8-1998)
CHAPTER 1A
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SEWERS
SECTION:
8-1A-1: Use Of Public Sewers Required
8-1A-2: Private Sewage Disposal
8-1A-3: Building Sewers And Connections
8-1A-4: Use Of The Public Sewers
8-1A-5: Protection Of Sewage Works From Damage
8-1A-6: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
8-1A-7: Extension Of Sewer Mains
8-1A-8: Change In Occupancy
8-1A-9: Penalties
8-1A-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
Village or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
Village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Village, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the
Village and abutting any street, alley or right of way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the
Village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within ninety
(90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public
sewer is within one hundred feet (100') of the property line. (Ord. 499, 8-22-
1985)
8-1A-2: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
   (A)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
subsection
8-1A-1(D) of this Chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Section.
   (B)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Superintendent of the Sewage Department. The application for such permit shall
be made on a form furnished by the Village, which the applicant shall
supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed
necessary by the Village Board. A permit and inspection fee of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the Village at the time the application is
filed. (Ord. 499, 8-22-1985)
   (C)   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent of the Sewage Department. The Superintendent of the Sewage
Department or his authorized agent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the Superintendent of the Sewage Department when the work is ready for
final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The
inspection shall be made within forty eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice
by the Superintendent of the Sewage Department. (Ord. 499, 8-22-1985; amd. Ord.
293-M, 11-13-1996)
   (D)   The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the State of Illinois
Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act and Code and with the State of Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency. No permit shall be issued for any private
sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where
the area of the lot is less than thirteen thousand (13,000) square feet. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
   (E)   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section
8-1A-1(D), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this Chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the Village.
   (G)   No statement contained in this Section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by any County Health
Department.
   (H)   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be
connected to said sewer within ninety (90) days and the private sewage disposal
system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or
dirt.
8-1A-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent of the Sewage
Department.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with Federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Act and more stringent State and local standards.
   (C)   There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (a) for
residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the Village. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Village Board. A permit and
connection fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the Village at the time the
application is filed. All industrial waste producers, as a condition of
building permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity. The permit and
connection fee for all industrial waste producers shall be determined by
negotiation with the Village Board. In no case shall the fee be less than two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (E)   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
Village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
   (G)   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Superintendent of the
Sewage Department, to meet all requirements of this Chapter.
   (H)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
Village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois shall apply.
   (I)   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary
sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is
approved in accordance with subsection (K) of this Section, and discharged to
the building sewer.
   (J)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the Village, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Superintendent of
the Sewage Department before installation.
   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent of the Sewage Department when the building sewer is ready for
inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made
under the supervision of the Superintendent of the Sewage Department or his
representative.
   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Village Board.
8-1A-4: USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS:
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural
outlet approved by the Superintendent of the Sewage Department. Industrial
cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of
the Superintendent of the Sewage Department, to a storm sewer, or natural
outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths
(5.5) or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Village Board that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving
stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming the opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Village Board will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F), (65°C).
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty two (32°) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°), (0
and 65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths'
(3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Village Board.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Village Board for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrates exceeding limits which may be
established by the Village Board as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the State, Federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Village Board in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
      8.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of nine and five-tenths
(9.5).
      9.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the Village Board in compliance with
applicable State and Federal regulations.
      10.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as permitted
by the Village Board in compliance with applicable State and Federal
regulations.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
      12.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection (D) of this Section, and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter 1, EPA
Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs Part 128 - Pretreatment
Standards, Federal Register Volume 38, No. 215, Thursday, November 8, 1973, and
any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the Village Board may have
a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving
waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public
nuisance, the Village Board may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of subsection (K) of this Section.
If the Village Board permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Village Board, and subject to the requirements of
all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the Village Board, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes,
sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be
required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall
be of a type and capacity approved by the Village Board, and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
   (H)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole. When
required by the Village Board, the owner of any property serviced by a control
manhole shall install such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Village
Board. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this Chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the Village Board or regulatory
agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the Village Board, but no less than once per
year the industry must supply a complete analyses of the constituents of the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the Federal, State, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the Village Board at such times and in
such manner as prescribed by the Village Board. The owner shall bear the
expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the Village
Board. At such times as deemed necessary, the Village Board reserves the right
to take measurements and samples for analyses by an outside laboratory service.
   (J)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this Chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.
   (K)   No statement contained in this Section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the Village Board and
any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the Village Board for treatment, subject to
payment therefor, in accordance with the provisions hereof, by the industrial
concern, provided such payments are in accordance with Federal and State
guidelines for user charge system and industrial cost recovery system.
8-1A-5: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
8-1A-6: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   (A)   The Superintendent of the Sewage Department and other duly authorized
employees of the Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter. The Superintendent of the Sewage Department or
his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection (A) of this section, the village board or duly authorized
employees of the village, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the
U.S. environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held
harmless for injury or death to the village employees and the village shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by village
employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and
sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of
the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection
8-1A-4(H) of this article.
   (C)   The superintendent of the sewage department and other duly authorized
employees of the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
permitted to enter all private properties through which the village holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord.
499, 8-22-1985)
8-1A-7: EXTENSION OF SEWER MAINS:
   (A)   The board of trustees shall first determine if an extension of a sewer
main is economically feasible based on the estimated cost of the extension and
the number of existing potential users that will be served by the extension. If
the extension is economically feasible then the village may install and pay the
cost of the extension at the discretion of the board of trustees. If the
village elects not to pay the cost of extending the sewer main then the person
or persons desiring sewer service shall install the extension at their own
personal expense upon written consent by the board of trustees. The village
shall not pay for any extensions to an undeveloped area such as a subdivision
being developed.
   (B)   When a sewer extension is installed by someone other than the village
the following conditions must be satisfied:
      1.   The village must approve all plans and specifications for any
extensions. The cost to the village of reviewing and approving the plans and
specifications shall be paid by the person submitting the documents.
      2.   Before any extensions are installed, the plans and specifications
must be reviewed and approved by the state of Illinois, environmental
protection agency.
      3.   Ownership, rights of way, and title must be conveyed to the village
for all extensions installed by anyone other than the village. The village will
maintain the mains thereafter.
      4.   No extension will be permitted if, in the opinion of the board of
trustees, the system does not have the necessary capacity to serve the proposed
extension. (Ord. 499, 8-22-1985)
8-1A-8: CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   Any user requesting a termination of service shall give written notice
to the village ten (10) days prior to the time such termination of service is
desired.
   (B)   If the user is not the owner of the premises, the user shall be
primarily responsible for payment of all charges and the property owner shall
be secondarily responsible for all charges not paid by the user.
   (C)   There shall be no charge for transferring the sewer service to the
subsequent user. (Ord. 499, 8-22-1985)
8-1A-9: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
section
8-1A-5 of this article shall be served by the village board with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village board
may revoke any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any
provision of this chapter. (Ord. 499, 8-22-1985)
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (A) of this section shall be fined an amount not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reason of such violation. (Ord. 499, 8-22-1985)
CHAPTER 2
SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
8-2-1: Permission to Construct; Lay
8-2-2: Construction of Sidewalks
8-2-3: Material
8-2-4: Dangerous Walks
8-2-5: Concrete Sidewalks
8-2-6: Private Construction Report
8-2-7: Obstructions
8-2-1: PERMISSION TO CONSTRUCT; LAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or lay any sidewalk upon any
of the streets and alleys of the Village without first having obtained
permission from the President and Board of Trustees to construct or lay the
same according to the provisions of this Code. The provisions of this Chapter
and all other provisions relating to sidewalks shall apply equally to the
outside or border street, as well as to all other streets of the Village.
8-2-2: CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS:
When any person directly interested shall make application to the President and
Board of Trustees for the construction of any sidewalk upon any of the streets
of the Village, the President and Board of Trustees may order the construction
of the same under the supervision of the Board of Local Improvements, of such
material and such width as they may direct. The cost of the material and the
expense incurred in the construction of such sidewalk shall be paid by the
party applying for the same, unless otherwise ordered by the President, and
Board of Trustees; provided, that when the party applying for such sidewalk
shall desire the same to be over six feet (6') in width. The President and
Board of Trustees may so order, if the party applying shall agree to pay all
necessary expense incurred thereby, and enter into an obligation to keep such
additional width of sidewalk in good condition and repair, without any expense
to the Village, so long as said sidewalk shall remain in use, and well and
truly keep said Village from all harm, damages and costs of suit, actions,
judgments, and executions that shall or may at any time arise, come or be
brought against said Village on account of any accident that may occur to any
person by reason of said portion of said sidewalk being out of repair or in a
dangerous condition at any time hereafter.
8-2-3: MATERIAL:
All sidewalks hereafter constructed in any portion of said Village shall be
composed of concrete, and shall be of such width as shall be determined by
resolution of the President and Board of Trustees.
8-2-4: DANGEROUS WALKS:
Whenever it is brought to the notice of the President or to the Board of Local
Improvements that any sidewalk or part thereof in said Village has become
dangerous to the public safety, he shall cause the same to be immediately
repaired or removed and report such action to the next meeting of the Village
Board.
8-2-5: CONCRETE SIDEWALKS:
All concrete sidewalks hereafter constructed in the Village shall be in
accordance with the specifications furnished by the Clerk, as furnished by the
Board of Trustees, and when any person shall enter into any contract for the
construction of concrete sidewalk within the Village, before entering upon the
performance of the same, he shall file with the Clerk a bond in the penal sum
of five hundred dollars ($500.00) with good and sufficient security, to be
approved by said Clerk, conditioned that such sidewalk shall be constructed in
accordance with the plans and specifications furnished by the Clerk, and that
such sidewalks shall be by him kept in good condition and repair for the period
of one year after the completion thereof.
8-2-6: PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION REPORT:
When any person shall obtain permission to construct any sidewalk within the
Village, as hereinbefore provided, he shall construct the same under the
direction and supervision of the Street and Alley Committee, and according to
the plans and specifications furnished him by the Clerk and when such sidewalk
is completed he shall apply to the Street and Alley Committee for their
acceptance of the same, and if the Street and Alley Committee shall refuse to
accept the same, he shall report to the Village Board the amount of sidewalk so
constructed, the material composing the same, and the manner in which it has
been constructed, for their acceptance or rejections, and if the President and
Board of Trustees refuse to accept the same, he shall proceed at once to
rebuild it according to the plans and specifications furnished by the Clerk,
and if he shall refuse or neglect to rebuild such sidewalk as herein provided,
and such sidewalk is in a dangerous condition or constructed contrary to any
provisions relating to sidewalks, the Board of Local Improvements shall remove
or rebuild the same as the President and Board of Trustees may direct.
8-2-7: OBSTRUCTIONS:
Whoever shall place, throw or have caused to be placed any obstruction in or
upon any sidewalk within said Village, except as authorized by ordinance of the
Village, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 11, 8-1-21)
CHAPTER 3
ILLINOIS RIVER REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Swimming, Skiing Prohibited
8-3-2: Emergency Exceptions
8-3-1: SWIMMING, SKIING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe or water ski in the Illinois
River, easterly of the channel of said River, southerly of the Peoria-Pekin
Union Railroad Bridge and northerly of the Southerly Village limits bordering
the Village; the area above described being dangerous to life due to currents,
under-currents, stumps and submerged objects and sloughs that exist therein, as
well as being unhealthy due to pollution from various sources.
8-3-2: EMERGENCY EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing herein shall apply to emergency cases beyond the control of the
individual, not otherwise classed as voluntary nor to low enforcement or rescue
agencies performing their duties. (Ord. 323, 10-4-67)
CHAPTER 4
PIPING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-4-1: Laying Pipe Near Water Supply
8-4-2: Pipe Encasement Requirements
8-4-1: LAYING PIPE NEAR WATER SUPPLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, repair, replace or use any pipe
containing gasoline, chemicals or other noxious chemicals harmful to the public
water supply, unless such pipes are encased for one thousand feet (1,000') in
all directions from the water supply in this Village. All existing pipes
carrying such gasoline, chemicals or noxious chemicals, shall be encased as
hereinafter provided, within one year from the date of passage hereof, and no
new installation, repairs, alterations or replacements shall be made on
existing installations within said one thousand feet (1,000') of any public
water supply, without full compliance with this Chapter.
8-4-2: PIPE ENCASEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
All pipes required to be encased under the provisions of Section
8-4-1 hereof shall comply with the following:
   (A)   All pipe lines containing gasoline, chemicals or other chemicals
harmful to a public water supply shall be encased as described in subsection
(J) hereof for one thousand feet (1,000') in all directions from any public
water supply in the Village.
   (B)   The encased pipes shall be laid on a gradient so as to give fluid
velocity of one foot (1') per second. This shall be accomplished by having the
pipes pitched so that it falls from a high point both ways to a manhole.
   (C)   Manholes shall be located one thousand feet (1,000') from the nearest
well or source of supply. Said manholes may contain more than one pipe
encasement, and all such manholes shall be well vented and so constructed as to
give a bottle-tight enclosure.
   (D)   Cathodic protection shall be provided for all pipes not enclosed and
no connections may be made at the manholes or their pipe encasement.
   (E)   All manholes shall be so constructed as to allow visual inspection.
   (F)   All manhole rings and covers, if pipes contain inflammable materials,
shall be constructed of nonspark materials.
   (G)   Manholes shall provide a well in case of leakage in the encased pipes.
The well shall be three feet (3') deeper than the lowest invert of the pipe
encasement.
   (H)   In case of a break in the enclosed pipe, the material shall be pumped
from the manhole into a closed tank or other similar type container so that the
ground around the manhole or in the restricted area, is in no way contaminated.
   (I)   The Village shall have the right to make visual inspection of all
manholes at all times, with right to ingress and egress upon any property
along, through or over which such manholes or pipes are installed. If a leak is
discovered, and the level of the escaping material in the well of the manhole
exceeds the height of the lowest invert of the encased pipe, the Village
reserves the right to pump out the escaping material and to collect from any
responsible party all costs and expenses incurred in connection therewith.
After the leak is corrected, the encased pipe shall be flushed with water to
eliminate all contamination in the pipe encasement. The Village shall have the
right to determination of the disposition of such waste flushings.
   (J)   Piping except in piping sections in pits and manholes, shall be
enclosed in a separate continuous sleeve of glass- cloth-reinforced polyester
pipe as manufactured by Haveg Corporation under the designation of "No. 7790"
or an approved equal, as approved by the Board of Local Improvements. Wall
thickness of encased pipe shall be three-sixteenths inch (3/16") minimum. The
pipe shall be laid in perfectly straight lines and shall continuously slope to
manholes and pits. Both ends of the pipe and its supports shall be supported
concentrically in a steel wall sleeve with the annular space between the pipe
and its sleeve packed with neoprene sponge and caulked water-tight with
neoprene putty. The encasing pipe shall be furnished with straight ends for
butt weld joining. Joints shall be resin bonded with welding materials, as
provided by Haveg Corporation, or an approved equal. The welding materials
shall include a resin, catalyst, glass fiber mats and wrapper strips. Approved
materials and welding shall be as prescribed by the Board of Local Improvements
as determined from established and recommended practices. (Ord. 264, 7-19-61)
CHAPTER 5
STREETS
SECTION:
8-5-1: Deposits On Streets
8-5-2: Removal Of Injurious Material
8-5-3: Other Obstructions Prohibited
8-5-4: Vehicles; Materials; Removal
8-5-5: Penalty
8-5-1: DEPOSITS ON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon any street, alley,
road or highway, any glass, bottle, nails, tacks, cans, lumber, junk, vehicle
bodies or parts, debris, waste, refuse, garbage, bricks, blocks, or any other
substance likely to injure any person, animal, or vehicle, or likely to
interfere with the free and unobstructed use of any street, alley, road or
highway by any traffic, within the village. (Ord. 258-A, 10-13-2004)
8-5-2: REMOVAL OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person who drops or permits to be dropped or
thrown, upon any street, alley, road or highway any glass, bottle, nails,
tacks, wire, cans, lumber, junk, vehicle bodies or parts, debris, waste,
refuse, garbage, bricks, blocks, or any other substance, or any spillage from
loads, or any other destructive or injurious material, to fail or refuse to
immediately remove the same or cause the same to be removed.
It shall further be unlawful for any person removing any wrecked or damaged
vehicle from any street, alley, road or highway, to fail to remove any glass,
parts or other injurious substance dropped upon the said street, alley, road or
highway, from such vehicle or vehicles so involved. (Ord. 258-A, 10-13-2004)
8-5-3: OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon, operate, or remain to be
present upon any street, alley, road or highway within the village, or to use
thereon, roller skates, skateboards, or motorized scooters. Further, it shall
be unlawful for any person to operate any remote control car, truck or other
remote operated mechanical device on or about any such public street, alley,
road or highway. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to place upon any
public roadway any basketball hoop, whether portable or permanent, or near or
adjacent thereto, in such a manner as would cause or allow a person to be in
the roadway while utilizing such basketball hoop, or other device, or which
would allow for the interference with the traffic flow or plowing of snow upon
any such street, alley, road or highway. (Ord. 258-A, 10-13-2004)
8-5-4: VEHICLES; MATERIALS; REMOVAL:
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon the highway, streets,
road or alley, in violation of any of the provisions of this code, or any
glass, bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans, lumber, junk, vehicle bodies or parts,
debris, waste, garbage, blocks, bricks, spillage from loads, any other
destructive materials, or materials likely to cause injury, or any such item,
device or gaming tool mentioned in section
 8-5-3 of this chapter, such officer is hereby authorized to remove the same or
require the driver, owner, or person in charge thereof, or responsible
therefor, to remove the same, or said officer may employ another to remove the
same at the expense of the owner, person in charge or other person responsible
therefor, which sum may be first advanced by the village of Creve Coeur, and
recovered in a civil action against said owner, person in charge or responsible
party, whether or not said owner, person in charge or responsible party was
aware of the existence of the incurrence of said charge or expense, or not.
(Ord. 258-A, 10-13-2004)
8-5-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating or aiding in the violation of this chapter shall pay a
penalty therefor in the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the first
violation, fifty dollars ($50.00) for any second violation, and the sum of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the third and each successive
violation in a twelve (12) month period. Each day a person fails to comply with
or violates any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 258-A, 10-13-2004)
CHAPTER 6
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Permit Required
8-6-2: Drains; Permit to Change; Fill
8-6-3: Barricades
8-6-4: Bonds
8-6-5: Issuance of Permits
8-6-6: Permit Fee
8-6-7: Notice of Improper Work
8-6-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, excavate or dig in any street,
alley or public thoroughfare in the Village without first procuring a permit
for such work from the Commissioner of Streets, and the furnishing of a
suitable bond, based on the faithful performance of all rules and regulations
prescribed pertaining to such work, including the backfill with sand and the
repaving of such street, in the manner as directed by said Commissioner.
8-6-2: DRAINS; PERMIT TO CHANGE; FILL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to change, alter, fill or deposit debris or
other object in any drain, or to interfer with any drain by construction or use
of a driveway, without first obtaining a permit for such work from the
Commissioner of Streets, specifying in detail, the exact nature of any such
work and such work so specified shall then be performed or constructed in
accordance with such permit.
8-6-3: BARRICADES:
All openings, excavations or other diggings shall be adequately barricaded and
well lighted with stormproof lights, from sunset to sunrise and all backfill
shall be made with sand, properly compacted and resurfaced with materials of
like kind and quality, to be approved by the Commissioner of Streets.
8-6-4: BONDS:
Bonds shall be furnished by the person to the approval of the Commissioner of
Streets, based on the full and proper compliance with this Chapter and to
indemnify the Village against all loss or damage the Village may suffer or
sustain by reason of improperly performing the work or from loss or damages
caused by reason of injury to a member of the public which said bond shall be
not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or such additional sum as the
Street Commissioner may deem appropriate.
8-6-5: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
Permits shall be issued and the same shall be conspicuously posted at the sight
of any such work. Such permit shall be issued under the signature of the
Commissioner of Streets, and bear the name and address of the person to whom
issued, and shall state the expiration date.
8-6-6: PERMIT FEE:
The permit fee for such permit shall be one dollar ($1.00) to be paid to the
Commissioner of Streets.
8-6-7: NOTICE OF IMPROPER WORK:
Any work improperly performed shall be corrected within twenty four (24) hours
after notice given by the Street Commissioner, and unless corrected within said
time, the Village may complete such work and look to the bondsmen to make
compensation therefor, without further notice or demand whatsoever. (Ord. 245,
11-17-57)
CHAPTER 7
DRIVEWAYS
SECTION:
8-7-1: Permission Required to Cut Curbing
8-7-2: Culverts Required for Certain Driveways
8-7-1: PERMISSION REQUIRED TO CUT CURBING:
   (A)   No person shall cut any curbing nor construct or use any driveway over
any curbing, where curbings are provided, along any street or highway in the
Village, unless permission or approval thereof is first obtained from the State
Highway Department, where they have jurisdiction, and approval by the street
foreman and the Building Inspector.
   (B)   No person shall cut, install or construct any driveway over, upon, or
through any curbing along State Bond Issue Route No. 24 (State Route 29), in
the Village without permission in writing and compliance with the requirements
of the State Division of Highways, and also with the approval and consent of
the street foreman and the Building Inspector. (Ord. 235A, 11-9-88)
8-7-2: CULVERTS REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN DRIVEWAYS:
   (A)   No driveway shall be installed within the Village across any manmade
or natural drainage ditch or waterway lying within a public right of way or
being adjacent to a dedicated public roadway unless a culvert is first
installed by the Village in the driveway in accordance with the provisions of
this Section.
   (B)   Any person desiring to install a driveway requiring such a culvert
shall first contact the Village Street Superintendent. The Village Street
Superintendent shall estimate the cost of labor and material to the Village for
installing the necessary culvert and shall require the property owner to
deposit with the Village the amount of such estimate.
   (C)   All such culverts shall be installed by the Village using material
furnished by the Village, subject to the Village's right of reimbursement from
the property owner.
   (D)   Following installation of such culvert, the Village shall refund any
excess monies deposited with the Village to the property owner and the property
owner shall pay to the Village any additional monies which are required to
fully reimburse the Village for the cost of labor and material relating to such
installation.
   (E)   All culverts shall be of materials specified by and installed in
accordance with section 511 of the current edition of the "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction of the Illinois Department of
Transportation".
   (F)   All culverts required pursuant to this Section shall have a minimum
diameter of twelve inches (12") or such larger diameter as is required by the
Village Street Superintendent in order to insure adequate drainage through the
ditch or waterway.
   (G)   All culverts required by this Section shall be at least ten feet (10')
longer than the width of the drive served by the culvert; provided, however,
that no such culvert shall be less than twenty two feet (22') in length.
   (H)   The invert elevation of any culvert required by this Section shall be
a minimum of one foot, six inches (1'6") below the edge of any adjacent roadway
and two feet, zero inches (2'0") below the center of any adjacent roadway.
(Ord. 504, 4-24-86)
CHAPTER 8
PUBLIC BENCHES
SECTION:
8-8-1: Purpose Declared
8-8-2: Permit
8-8-3: Time of Permit
8-8-4: Fees
8-8-5: Renewal
8-8-6: Permit Agreements
8-8-7: Denial or Cancellation of Permit
8-8-8: Hearing
8-8-9: Fee Refund
8-8-10: Bench Requirements
8-8-11: Suits; Bonds
8-8-12: Notice of Claim
8-8-13: Renewal of Permit
8-8-1: PURPOSE DECLARED:
For the convenience of the public, it shall hereafter be lawful for individuals
or corporations to install and maintain benches located upon public property of
the Village for the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting
transportation, and to place advertising matter and signs upon said benches,
subject to the following regulations, limitations and qualifications.
8-8-2: PERMIT:
No such bench shall be installed or maintained without a permit obtained from
the Chairman of Street and Alley Committee as hereafter provided. The Chairman
of Street and Alley Committee shall be vested with the administration and
enforcement of this Chapter and with the authority to issue all permits
hereunder, and he shall have power to make reasonable regulations for the
carrying out of the provisions hereof. An applicant for a permit hereunder,
shall submit his application to said Chairman of the Street and Alley
Committee, which application shall give the location of the proposed bench or
benches and such other information as the said Chairman of Street and Alley
Committee may, in his discretion, require. One application may be made for one
or more benches, and one permit may be issued for one or more benches;
provided, however, that a separate fee shall be paid as hereafter stipulated
for each bench. The public property of the Village on or by which such may be
installed shall include public thoroughfares, streets, and sidewalks.
8-8-3: TIME OF PERMIT:
The exclusive right and franchise to receive permits hereunder and to install
and maintain the benches hereunder for a period of five (5) years.
8-8-4: FEES:
Each application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a fee of three
dollars ($3.00) for each bench. Where the permit is to be issued after July 1,
and a fee of three dollars ($3.00) where the permit is to be issued before July
1 in any year.
8-8-5: RENEWAL:
The person securing such permit shall renew the same by paying three dollars
($3.00) on the first day of each subsequent January, or within thirty (30) days
thereafter; provided, that if such permit covers more than one bench, three
dollars ($3.00) shall be paid annually as aforesaid, for each bench covered by
such permit. For failure to pay such sum, the permit may be revoked and the
bench removed, as provided in Section
8-8-6 hereof.
8-8-6: PERMIT AGREEMENTS:
By applying for a permit, the applicant agrees that he will maintain the bench
in safe and sightly condition and that he will post and maintain an
indemnifying bond and public liability insurance policy, as hereafter required.
Upon thirty (30) days written notice of any failing in such undertaking, if
such default be not remedied within such time, the Chairman of Street and Alley
Committee may revoke the permit and may remove and store the bench and he may
charge the cost of such removal and storage against the permittee, who has been
guilty of such default. The permittee may recover the bench if he pays such
cost within sixty (60) days after such removal.
8-8-7: DENIAL OR CANCELLATION OF PERMIT:
The application for a permit shall be denied or the permit canceled during the
following circumstances:
   (A)   If the Chairman of Street and Alley Committee finds either before or
after granting a permit, that the maintenance of a bench at the proposed
location would tend to obstruct passage along a public way, or to create a
hazard to persons traveling thereon, he shall deny the application.
   (B)   If the abutting property owners or owner of property within one
hundred feet (100') of any bench protests in writing that they will be or are
adversely affected by the maintenance of such bench, a Committee consisting of
the members of the Streets and Alley Committee of the Board of Trustees shall
hear their grievances, upon reasonable notice to the person maintaining such
bench. If, upon such hearing, a majority of such Committee find that any
protesting property owner suffers special damages to his property by reason of
the maintenance of such bench, the Chairman of Street and Alley Committee shall
deny the application, or if the application has been approved, the permit to
maintain such bench shall be rescinded and the permittee directed to remove the
same within thirty (30) days.
8-8-8: HEARING:
In any case where an application is submitted, the Chairman of Street and Alley
Committee shall act upon same within twenty (20) days and shall file his
approval or disapproval of the same with the Clerk provided that where it is
necessary to hold a hearing on any such application, the Chairman of Street and
Alley Committee may extend such time. When the application is disapproved, or
where any permits are rescinded, a brief statement for the reasons of such
action shall be filed by the Chairman of Street and Alley Committee with the
Clerk.
8-8-9: FEE REFUND:
If a bench is ordered removed hereunder where the permittee is not at fault,
the Village shall credit the fee by the permittee for such bench, during the
year such removal occurs, against any fees to become due hereunder thereafter
from such permittee to the Village. If an application is denied, the fee
submitted therewith shall be credited to the permittee making such application
upon any future fees to be due to the Village hereunder from such applicant.
8-8-10: BENCH REQUIREMENTS:
All benches placed hereunder shall conform to the following:
   (A)   No bench shall carry any advertisement or sign containing any immoral
picture or profane, vulgar, or obscene words, and only such advertising matter
shall be placed thereon as is ordinarily displayed by other advertising
mediums; nor shall a advertisement or sign on any such bench, or any other word
or words which might mislead or distract traffic.
   (B)   No bench shall be more than forty two inches (42") high, nor more than
two feet six inches (2'6") wide nor more than seven feet (7') long.
   (C)   Not more than two (2) benches may be maintained at any one location
without a special finding by the Chairman of Street and Alley Committee, that
the public convenience requires more than two (2) benches at such location.
Benches shall be located only at bus or street car stops. The permittee shall
inspect each bench periodically.
   (D)   No bench shall be maintained in any alley, nor at any location where
the distance from the face of the curb to the property line is less than ten
feet (10') unless the Chairman of Street and Alley Committee finds in his
written approval of the application that to maintain a bench at such location
is in the public interest.
   (E)   Advertising shall be displayed only on the front and rear surfaces of
the back rest.
   (F)   Creve Coeur merchants shall be given first opportunity to purchase
advertising.
8-8-11: SUITS; BONDS:
The permittee or person obtaining a permit hereunder shall defend at his own
expense, any litigation arising from the installation or maintenance of a bench
for which he has obtained any such permit. The permittee shall file his or its
individual bond to save the Village harmless from any damages or suit for
damages alleged to arise from the installation or maintenance of any bench.
Sureties on such bond are not required by evidence of public liability
insurance in the amounts hereafter stated shall be filed at or prior to the
time of filing application for each permit with the Chairman of Street and
Alley Committee:
 
Public Liability Insurance:
    For death or injury to one person     $15,000.00
    Total limit of liability, personal inj30,000.00
    Property Damage, not less than        1,000.00
 
One bond and one insurance policy may be filed to cover the maintenance of any
number of benches.
8-8-12: NOTICE OF CLAIM:
The Village shall immediately notify the permittee of any claim of which the
Village has notice where such claim arises from the installation or maintenance
of any bench installed hereunder.
8-8-13: RENEWAL OF PERMIT:
A permit once granted may be renewed annually by the permittee or his assigns
upon the payment of the fee herein described unless such permit has been
revoked or cancelled for cause. (Ord. 164, 9-17-47)
CHAPTER 9
TRAFFIC ON STREETS DURING CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
8-9-1: Traffic Diverted
8-9-2: Entering From Private Drive
8-9-3: Violate Signs
8-9-4: Use Prior to Rolling Operations
8-9-1: TRAFFIC DIVERTED:
When any street, alley or highway in the Village is being oiled, tarred,
asphalted, repaired, graded, maintained, or is under construction, all traffic
may be prohibited or restricted on any such street, alley or highway; provided,
however, that any such closing or restriction shall not be effective unless
said street, alley or highway is either:
   (A)   Closed by proper barricades or other signs, placed at the entrances of
other streets, alleys or highways entering the closed portion; or
   (B)   Posted with suitable signs indicating the restriction at all public
entrances; or
   (C)   Controlled by a police officer, watchman or flagman supervising or
directing traffic.
8-9-2: ENTERING FROM PRIVATE DRIVE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle upon, along
or across any street, alley or highway, or to enter the same from a private
drive or entrance, when such street, alley or highway is closed or barricaded,
as heretofore provided.
8-9-3: VIOLATE SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle upon, along
or across any street, alley or highway, in violation of any directional or
regulatory sign, or direction of a policeman, watchman or flagman.
8-9-4: USE PRIOR TO ROLLING OPERATIONS:
No person shall drive or operate any vehicle over, across, along or upon any
street, alley or highway, nor enter the same from a private driveway or other
entrance, when such street, alley or highway has been freshly covered, in whole
or in part, with tar, asphalt or oil, prior to the application of aggregate, or
prior to rolling operations, if rolling or compacting operations are to follow,
while the street, alley or highway is under construction, maintenance or
repair. (Ord. 238, 6-20-56)
CHAPTER 10
PUBLIC PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND PAVILIONS
SECTION:
8-10-1: Public Park, Playground And Pavilion Regulations
8-10-1: PUBLIC PARK, PLAYGROUND AND PAVILION REGULATIONS:
   (A)   All parks, playgrounds and pavilions located upon public property or
dedicated to public use shall be open for the use and enjoyment of the general
public each day from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. until eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to be present on the premises of
any park, playground or pavilion upon public property or dedicated to the
public use between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
unless the hours for use of said facility have been lengthened by the village
board or other appropriate supervising agency and a public notice is posted to
said effect.
   (C)   No person shall have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage
in any park, playground or other public property, except in the original
package and with the seal unbroken; unless the sale of alcoholic beverages at a
public facility has been approved for special events by the village board and a
public notice is posted to said effect.
   (D)   No person shall cause any improved roadways in any park, playground or
pavilion area to be closed, locked or barricaded at any time without prior
approval of the village board of trustees.
   (E)   A person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575-A, 1-23-2002)
   (F)   Pavilion rental fee shall be established by the village board annually
and published in the office of the village clerk.
Beyond the fee, there is also a fully refundable deposit required, above and
beyond the rental fee, to ensure that the pavilion is left in the same
condition in which it was rented. The fully refundable deposit amount shall
also be established by the village board annually and published in the office
of the village clerk.
In the event the pavilion is left in need of cleanup, the full amount of the
deposit shall be charged to the renter and the deposit will be kept. In the
event the renter cleans up after their use of the pavilion, the deposit will be
returned within thirty (30) days of rental. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
CHAPTER 11
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
SECTION:
8-11-1: Purpose And Scope
8-11-2: Definitions
8-11-3: Annual Registration Required
8-11-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
8-11-5: Action On Permit Applications
8-11-6: Effect Of Permit
8-11-7: Revised Permit Drawings
8-11-8: Insurance
8-11-9: Indemnification
8-11-10: Security
8-11-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-11-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
8-11-13: General Construction Standards
8-11-14: Traffic Control
8-11-15: Location Of Facilities
8-11-16: Construction Methods And Materials
8-11-17: Vegetation Control
8-11-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modification Of Utility Facilities
8-11-19: Cleanup And Restoration
8-11-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
8-11-21: Variances
8-11-22: Penalties
8-11-23: Enforcement
8-11-24: Severability
8-11-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole.
   (B)   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
   (C)   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   (D)   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (E)   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (F)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
   (G)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The Village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code section 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
   ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
   APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non- recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE: The Municipal Code of the Village of Creve Coeur.
   CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of- way lines
of a right-of-way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right- of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER: An engineer employed by the Village or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including track
and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, communications and video cables and
wires, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances
thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-
of- way under this chapter, except those owned by the Village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access on highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by an
engineer employed by the Village to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to
the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance
of the environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
101 et seq., as amended from time to time.
   IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ILCC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
   OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of- way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to
sections
8-11-4 and
8-11-5 of this chapter.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, State or Federal level.
   RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway, dedicated or
commonly used for utility purposes, including utility easements in which the
Village has the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the
location of facilities other than those of the Village.
"Right-of-way" shall not include any real or personal Village property that is
not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include
Village buildings, fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless
of whether they are situated in the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
8-11-10 of this chapter.
   SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include wireless telecommunications
as defined in the Illinois Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
Act, 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 635/1 et seq. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC
sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the Village
through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Means any person that installs, owns, operates
or controls facilities in the public right-of-way used or designed to be used
to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VILLAGE: The Village of Creve Coeur.
   WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 814, 4-11-
2018)
8-11-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Village Clerk, providing the utility's name,
address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of one or
more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection with
emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right-of- way and a 24-
hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as
required in section
8-11-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance. A
telecommunications provider that has registered under this section, shall be
deemed to have satisfied the registration requirement under this chapter. (Ord.
814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any Village right-of-way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2)
adds a new facility, 3) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter),
or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the right- of-way,
without first filing an application with the Village Clerk and obtaining a
permit from the Village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and fax numbers and e-
mail address;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone and fax numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and fax numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ILCC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
8-11-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the Security Fund as required in section
8-11-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
 8-11-21 of this chapter); and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village.
   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of new electric power, communications or natural gas
distribution system installation, evidence that any "Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity" has been issued by the ILCC that the applicant is
required by law, or has elected, to obtain;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District (other local or State entities with jurisdiction), have been
satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00). No
application fee is required to be paid by any telecommunications retailer that
is paying the Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to title 3, chapter 20 of this Code or the optional State
telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, or by any
electricity utility that is paying the Municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Village Clerk
and sent to the Mayor and Board of Trustees for consultation with the engineer
hired by the Village as necessary within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Village Clerk shall, on advice and
direction from the Mayor and the Board, reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the Village Clerk in consultation with the
Mayor and Board of Trustees is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this chapter and all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the Village Clerk shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable.
   (B)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village
that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for
the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the Village not less than ten (10) days prior to
the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30)
days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The Village Clerk,
in consultation with the Mayor and Board of Trustees and the engineer hired by
the Village, if necessary, shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon
which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the Village Clerk fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either ten
(10) days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to section
8-11-4 of this chapter the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection (A) of this
section. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way.
   (B)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the Village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with section
8-11-21 of this chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify
the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or
plans therefor. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-8: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
agents, and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed in
subsections (A)1 through (A)4 of this section:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
   (B)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the Village within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
   (D)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village of Creve Coeur of such intent to cancel
or not to renew.
Within ten (10) days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in no
event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection (A) of this section, or the requirements of
subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section. A utility that elects to self-
insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements
required under subsection (A) of this section, such as evidence that the
utility is a "private self-insurer" under the Workers' Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder. (Ord. 814, 4-11-
2018)
8-11-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the Village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-10: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the Village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Mayor and the Board of Trustees after consultation
with an engineer employed by the Village if necessary. The dollar amount may
also include reasonable, directly related costs that the Village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Village may, in
the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount
of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the construction under
the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased construction shall be
equal to the greatest amount that would have been required under the provisions
of this subsection (C) for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The Village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security
Fund, the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in
subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the Village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the Village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 814, 4-11-
2018)
8-11-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The Village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The Village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the Village with evidence that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the Village providing written proof of such
removal to the Village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice
of revocation. The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this subsection.
   (D)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A)
of this section.
   (E)   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, the Village or
its designee may, at the option of the Village:
      1.   Correct the deficiencies;
      2.   Upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove
the subject facilities or equipment; or
      3.   After not less than thirty (30) days' notice to the permittee of
failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the
Village. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all
costs of removal. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the Village no less
than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the Village's right-
of- way.
   (C)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 814, 4-11-
2018)
8-11-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of- way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications:
      1.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      2.   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      3.   Highway Design Manual;
      4.   Highway Standards Manual;
      5.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      6.   Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code section 545);
      7.   Flagger's Handbook; and
      8.   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Village shall determine, in the exercise of sound engineering
judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final. If
requested, the Village shall state which standard or principle will apply to
the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord.
814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The Village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable Federal, State, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior
to beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any
residence, business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident,
business or institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such
work; provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
8-11-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the Village. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face
of the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-
grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   (B)   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ILCC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right- of-
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR 192.707 (1989)).
   (C)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The Village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (D)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The Village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      2.   The Village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (E)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the highway user or impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
   (F)   Above Ground Installation: Above ground facilities may be installed
only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable.
   (G)   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         (a)   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Village
from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no
more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or jacking operations and
backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved shall be bored under or
around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction".
         (a)   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Village.
         (b)   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Village, the utility, at its expense, shall remove any pavement
and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly
compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and
driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Village.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (A)4
is permitted under section
8-11-21 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled as soon as
practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by
the Village.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                           Minimum Cover
Power or communication line (in general)   30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication line installed by the plowed 24 inches (0.6 m)
method
Gas or petroleum products                  30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                                 Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                           protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage   Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                       protection
 
   (B)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         (a)   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code 305 (formerly General Order
160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines", and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
   A. The crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or other
approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation, or
   B. The installation is by the open trench method which is only permitted
prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Waterlines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or Drainage
Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and drainage lines
within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of the current
"Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Village. With the approval of the Village
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free
area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral
color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: All pipe, conduit, wire, poles,
cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way
prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public
or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and
other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval
must be obtained from the Village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Village when emergency work
is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours of construction
are from dawn to dusk daily.
   (E)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the Village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the Village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Utility Facilities Damage Prevention Act 1 .
(Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
8-11-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (B)   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (C)   Chemical Use: Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not
be permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the
satisfaction of Village that such spraying is the only practicable method of
vegetation control. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
Village, a utility shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently
remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility facilities within
the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate Authorities have determined that such
removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights-of-
way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The Village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights-of-way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village
within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the Village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the Village
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the Village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to
the Village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility
or person. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
Upon completion of all construction or maintenance of facilities, the utility
shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain in a timely
manner and to the satisfaction of the Village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Village. Such cleanup and repair may be
required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any
other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project.
(Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Village of the emergency, detail what steps have been taken for protection of
the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs.
If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement
of traffic, the Village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the Village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of- way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-21: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Village Clerk as
a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each provision of
this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons why a variance
should be granted.
   (B)   Authority To Grant Variances: The Village Clerk in consultation with
the Mayor, the Board of Trustees, and, if necessary, an engineer employed by
the Village, shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision
of this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Village may authorize a
variance only if the utility requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Village may require the utility requesting the
variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or may not be
expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the purposes of
this chapter. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the Village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
Village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility who does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
8-11-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 814, 4-11-2018)
TITLE 9
TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Definitions
9-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
   ATV: An "all-terrain vehicle" as defined fully in the Illinois vehicle code.
   ALLEY: A public way within a block generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
   BICYCLES: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is more than twenty inches
(20") in diameter.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory of any city, village or incorporated town
contiguous to and including a highway within any six hundred feet (600') along
such highway there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes,
including, but not limited to, hotels, banks, office buildings, railroad
stations, and public buildings which occupy at least three hundred feet (300')
of frontage on one side or three hundred feet (300') collectively on both sides
of the highway.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of
access to or from the same except at such points only as may be determined by
the public authority having jurisdiction over such street or highway.
   CROSSWALK: That portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of
the sidewalk lines at street intersection.
   DRAG RACING: The act of two (2) or more individuals competing or racing on
any street or highway in this state in a situation in which one of the motor
vehicles is beside or to the rear of a motor vehicle operated by a competing
driver and the one driver attempts to prevent the competing driver from passing
or overtaking him, either by acceleration or maneuver, or against time on any
street or highway in this village.
   DRIVERS: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Police vehicles, vehicles of the fire department,
ambulances, vehicles carrying a state, county or village officer or employee in
response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles of public service
corporations on an emergency call.
   EXPLOSIVE: Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used
or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any
oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by
percussion, or by a detonator or any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructible effects on contiguous objects
or of destroying life or limb.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS: Any liquid which has a flashpoint of seventy degrees
Fahrenheit (70°F) or less, as determined by Tagliabue or equivalent closed cup
test device.
   IMPROVED HIGHWAYS: A roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam or gravel.
   INTERSECTION: (A) The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of
the lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
roadways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
   (B)   Where a highway includes two (2) roadways forty feet (40') or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
   LANED ROADWAY: A street, the roadway of which is divided into two (2) or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles on
converging roadways to permit simultaneous or alternate entry into the junction
thereof, wherein the driver of each vehicle involved is required to adjust his
vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with any other
vehicle.
   METAL TIRES: Every tire the surface of which in contact with the roadway is
wholly or partially of metal or other hard, nonresilient material.
   MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead wires, but not operated
upon rails.
   MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   OFF HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE: An "off highway motorcycle" has the same meaning as
that term has in the Illinois vehicle code.
   PARK: To stand a vehicle, whether occupied or not, for a period of time
greater than is reasonably necessary for the actual loading or unloading of
persons.
   PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
   PNEUMATIC TIRE: Every tire in which compressed air is designed to support
the load.
   POLICE OR POLICE OFFICERS: All members of the regularly constituted police
department, special police, auxiliary police and marshals duly constituted and
appointed by proper authorities of the village.
   PROPERTY LINE: The line marking the boundary between any street and the lots
or property abutting thereon.
   PUBLIC BUILDING: A building used by the village, the county, and park
district, school district, the state of Illinois, or the United States
government.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory of any city, village, or incorporated town
contiguous to and including a highway not comprising a business district when
the property on such highway for a distance of three hundred feet (300') or
more is in the main improved with residences or residences and buildings in use
for business.
   REVERSIBLE LANE: A lane of a two (2) or more laned roadway upon which
traffic may be directed to move in either direction by means of lane control
signals or other devices, in conjunction with official signs.
   RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROAD TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
   SAFETY ZONE: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
   SCHOOL BUS: Every motor vehicle of the second division operated by or for a
public or governmental agency or by or for a private or religious organization
solely for the transportation of pupils in connection with school activities.
   SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed
that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by
another vehicle.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the
adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.
   SOLID TIRE: Every tire of rubber or other resilient material which does not
depend upon compressed air for the support of the load.
   SPEED CHANGE LANE: An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for
the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through
traffic lanes.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT: That portion of any city, village or incorporated town
other than the business and residence districts.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every highway or portion thereof at the entrance to which
vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to stop before
entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in
this title.
   TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other
conveyances whether singly or together while using any highway for the purpose
of travel.
   TRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power designed for carrying passengers
or property and for being drawn by motor vehicle and so constructed that no
part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
   TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load drawn.
   URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses
situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a distance of a
quarter mile or more.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. For the purpose of this
title, motor vehicle as a class shall be divided into two (2) divisions:
   (A)   Those vehicles which are designed for the carrying of not more than
ten (10) persons.
   (B)   Those vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or
the carrying of more than ten (10) persons.
   YIELD RIGHT OF WAY: When required by an official sign, the act of granting
the privilege of the immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic
within the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left,
provided that when the roadway is clear the vehicle may proceed into the
intersection. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968; amd. Ord. 765, 5-14-2014)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
SECTION:
9-2-1: Obedience to Police
9-2-2: Scene of Fire
9-2-3: Sign and Signals
9-2-4: Traffic Control Signals Legend
9-2-5: Flashing Signals
9-2-6: Lane Control Signal
9-2-7: Pedestrian Control Signals
9-2-8: Unauthorized Signs
9-2-9: Interference With Signs or Signals
9-2-10: Advertising Signs
9-2-11: Ambulances, Operation of
9-2-12: Animals or Bicycles
9-2-13: Exemptions
9-2-14: Ambulances, Fees
 
Notes
1 1. For Statute authority regarding the provisions of this Title, see the
  Illinois Uniform Traffic Act as amended.
9-2-1: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE:
Members of the Police Department, special police, auxiliary police and marshals
assigned to traffic duty are hereby authorized to direct all traffic in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, or in emergencies as public
safety or convenience may require, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a
policeman. Except in case of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person not
authorized by law to direct or attempt to direct traffic.
9-2-2: SCENE OF FIRE:
The Fire Department officer in command or any fireman designated by him, may
exercise the powers and authority of a policeman in directing traffic at the
scene of any fire or where the Department has responded to an emergency call
for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene in the absence of or
in assisting the police.
9-2-3: SIGN AND SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to disobey the instructions
of any traffic sign or signal placed in view by authority of the corporate
authorities or in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois, excepting
on direction of police. All signs and signals established by direction of the
governing body shall conform to the Illinois State Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
9-2-4: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS LEGEND:
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting the words
"Go", "Caution", or "Stop" or exhibiting different colored lights successively,
the following colors only shall be used and said terms and lights shall
indicate as follows:
   (A)   Circular Green or the Word "Go":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But
vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      2.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk, unless directed otherwise by a pedestrian
signal.
   (B)   Steady Yellow or the Word "Caution":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter or the related green
movement is being terminated, and shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety, a
vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
      2.   Unless otherwise directed by pedestrian signal, pedestrians facing
such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the
roadway, and no pedestrian shall cross except upon a green light or go sign.
   (C)   Steady Red or the Word "Stop":
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated
by a clearly visible line; if there is no such line then vehicles shall stop
before entering such crosswalk and shall remain standing until the green
indication is shown, unless otherwise directed by a sign or arrow.
      2.   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway, shall
cross until receiving a green light or go sign or unless and until a separate
"Walk" indication is shown.
   (D)   Green Straight Through Arrow (Alone):
      1.   Vehicular traffic facing right or left: Such signal may proceed
straight through, but shall not turn right or left. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection at the time such signal is exhibited.
      2.   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
the appropriately marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed otherwise by a
pedestrian signal.
   (E)   Green Turn Arrow (Alone or With Circular Green, With Steady Yellow,
With Steady Red, or With Green Straight Through Arrow):
Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall comply with the meaning of the
circular green, steady yellow or straight through arrow indication as if it
were shown alone, except that such vehicular traffic may cautiously enter the
intersection to make the movement indicated by the green turn arrow. Vehicular
traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk
and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
   (F)   In the event that an official traffic control signal or flashing red
signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the
provision of this Section and of Section
9-2-5 shall be applicable except as to provision which by their nature can have
no application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking on the pavement
indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any sign or
marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (G)   The motorman of any street car shall obey the above signals applicable
to vehicles.
   (H)   Green Arrow Alone:
Vehicular traffic facing the signal may enter the intersection only to make the
movement or movements indicated by the arrows, but shall not interfere with
other traffic or endanger pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk.
   (I)   In the event an official traffic control signal or flashing red signal
is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provision
of this Section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
9-2-5: FLASHING SIGNALS:
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used, they shall require obedience
by vehicular traffic as follows:
   (A)   Flashing Red (stop signal): When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
intersection and the right to proceed shall be subjected to the rules
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing Yellow (caution): When a yellow lens is illuminated with
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal with caution.
9-2-6: LANE CONTROL SIGNAL:
Whenever lane control signals are used in conjunction with official signs, they
shall have the following meaning:
   (A)   Opaque arrows on green, green arrow on opaque background, or green
alone: Drivers of vehicles facing such signals are permitted to use the lanes
over which the signal is displayed providing that no intersection traffic
control signal gives a stop indication affecting the lane or lanes involved.
   (B)   Opaque "x" on red, red "x" on opaque background, or red alone: Drivers
of vehicles facing such signals are prohibited from using the lane over which
the signal is displayed.
9-2-7: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
Whenever special pedestrian control signal exhibiting the words "Walk" or
"Don't Walk" are in place such signal shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Walk: Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in
the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the driver
of all vehicles.
   (B)   Don't Walk: While the "don't walk" signal is illuminated, either
steady or flashing, no pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal, but any pedestrian who has partly completed his
crossing during the "walk" indication shall proceed to sidewalk or safety
island, if one is provided.
9-2-8: UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS:
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, reflector or device which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
nor shall any person place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street
any other sign which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic
or effectiveness of any traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal,
and no person shall place or maintain nor shall public authority permit upon
any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereupon any commercial
advertising. No tree, bush or foliage of any kind shall be so placed,
maintained, allowed to remain, or displayed upon either public or private
property in such a manner as to hide from view or interfere with the movement
of traffic or the effectiveness of any traffic control device, sign or signal.
All such unauthorized devices are hereby declared to be nuisances and may be
removed by any policeman or under his direction and supervision.
9-2-9: INTERFERENCE WITH SIGNS OR SIGNALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, injure, move or interfere with
any official traffic sign or signal.
9-2-10: ADVERTISING SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful to maintain anywhere in the Village any signal, marking or
device, other than a traffic sign or signal authorized by the Board of Trustees
or the Illinois State Department of Public Works and Buildings, which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or
railroad sign or signal, in view of any street or highway, and it shall be
unlawful to place or maintain any sign which hides from view any lawful traffic
control device.
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate in view of any street or highway
any flashing or rotating beacon of light.
9-2-11: AMBULANCES, OPERATION OF:
No person shall operate any ambulance, which shall include any motor vehicle
primarily designed and used for conveyance of sick or injured person, in a
manner not conforming to a provision of the motor vehicle laws and regulations
of this State or provisions of this Code as such provision applies to motor
vehicles in general, except in compliance with the following conditions:
   (A)   The person operating the ambulance shall be either responding to a
bona fide emergency call or specifically directed by a licensed physician to
disregard traffic laws in operating the ambulance during and for the purpose of
the specific trip or journey that is involved.
   (B)   The ambulance shall be equipped with a siren producing an audible
signal of an intensity of one hundred (100) decibels at a distance of fifty
feet (50') from said siren, and with a lamp emitting an oscillating, rotating
or flashing red beam directed in part toward the front of the vehicle and
containing a power rating of at least one hundred (100) amps.
   (C)   The aforesaid siren and lamp shall be in full operation at all times
during such trip or journey; and
   (D)   Whenever the ambulance is operated at a speed in excess of forty (40)
miles per hour, the ambulance shall be operated in complete compliance with
every other motor vehicle law and regulation of this State and provisions of
this Code in which the ambulance is operated, relating to the operation of
motor vehicles, as such provision applies to motor vehicles in general, except
laws and regulations pertaining to compliance with official traffic control
devices or to vehicular operation upon the right half of the roadway.
9-2-12: ANIMALS OR BICYCLES:
Any person riding a bicycle or an animal, or driving any animal drawing a
vehicle upon any street, shall be subject to the provisions of this Title
applicable to the driver of vehicle, except those provisions which can have no
application to one riding a bicycle or driving or riding an animal. (Ord. 331,
10-16-1968)
9-2-13: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this title regulating the movement or parking of vehicles
shall not apply to the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle when
responding to an emergency call, but such driver when approaching shall slow
down as necessary for safety but may proceed cautiously past a red or stop sign
or signal. At other times, drivers of authorized emergency vehicles shall stop
in obedience to stop sign or signal.
No driver of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special
privileges except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency
call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law.
The provision of this title regulating the movement and parking of vehicles
shall not apply to person, equipment or vehicle while actually engaged in
installing, repairing, or otherwise improving streets or street pavements.
(Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-2-14: AMBULANCES, FEES:
It shall be unlawful for any ambulance or paramedic service or any operator or
owner of any ambulance or paramedic service to charge a fee greater than that
charged by the village volunteer fire-rescue department ambulance service for
unsolicited services provided. This provision shall not apply if ambulance or
paramedic services are requested or solicited by any private or public person
or agency. It shall be the duty of any ambulance provider to contact the
village clerk prior to billing for any unsolicited services in order to
determine the established rate charged by the village volunteer fire-rescue
department for ambulance services. Any attempt to collect excessive fees in
violation of this section shall subject the driver and owner of said ambulance
or paramedic service to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 575-A, 1-
23-2002)
CHAPTER 3
THROUGH, ONE WAY, YIELD AND STOP STREETS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Through Streets
9-3-2: One Way Streets or Alleys
9-3-3: Stop Streets
9-3-4: Yield Right of Way Streets
9-3-5: Posting Signs
9-3-1: THROUGH STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the Village designated by ordinance as
through streets are hereby declared to be through streets. The driver of a
vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and shall yield the
right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection and which
are approaching so close on a through street as to constitute an immediate
hazard unless directed otherwise by the traffic officer or a traffic control
signal.
9-3-2: ONE WAY STREETS OR ALLEYS:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys designated
as one way streets or alleys by ordinance, in any direction other than that so
designated.
9-3-3: STOP STREETS:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at an
intersection where sign is erected pursuant to ordinance, at one or more
entrances thereto, and shall proceed cautiously yielding to the vehicles not so
obliged to stop which are within the intersection or approaching so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled by police officer on duty, in which event the direction of the
police officer shall be complied with.
9-3-4: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY STREETS:
Any street designated by ordinance as a yield right of way street and so posted
is hereby declared to be a yield right of way street.
The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right of way sign shall reduce
the speed of his vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour, and shall
yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the intersecting
street either from the right or left or which are approaching so closely on
such intersection as to constitute a hazard; but said driver having so yielded
may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs.
If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or interferes with
the movement of other vehicle after driving past a yield right of way sign,
such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to
yield right of way.
9-3-5: POSTING SIGNS:
Appropriate signs shall be posted to show all through, stop, and yield right of
way streets; all one way streets and alleys; and all stop intersections. (Ord.
331, 10-16-68)
CHAPTER 4
DRIVING RULES
SECTION:
9-4-1: Turning At Intersections
9-4-2: Starting Parked Vehicle
9-4-3: Driver's Signal
9-4-4: Signals And Turning
9-4-5: Signal Lamps And Signal Devices
9-4-6: Driving From Alleys, Driveways Or Garages
9-4-7: Vehicle Not To Be Driven On Sidewalks Or In Safety Zones
9-4-8: Right-Of-Way
9-4-9: Vehicle Turning Left
9-4-10: "U" Turn
9-4-11: No Left Turn
9-4-12: Fire Department Vehicles; Fires
9-4-13: Driving On Right Side Of Roadway
9-4-14: Passing Vehicles
9-4-15: Overtaking Vehicles
9-4-16: Overtaking Vehicles On The Right
9-4-17: Limitations On Overtaking On The Left
9-4-18: One Way Roadways And Rotary Traffic Islands
9-4-19: Driving On Roadways Laned For Traffic
9-4-20: Authorized Emergency Vehicles
9-4-21: Reckless, Negligent Or Careless Driving
9-4-22: Speed Restrictions
9-4-23: Special Speed Limits While Passing Schools
9-4-24: Traffic Not To Be Obstructed
9-4-25: Bicycles And Motorcycles
9-4-26: Unattended Vehicles
9-4-27: Unattended Animals
9-4-28: Clinging To Vehicles
9-4-29: Toy Vehicles
9-4-30: Riding On Running Boards
9-4-31: Train Signals
9-4-32: Driving Through Funeral Or Other Procession
9-4-33: Drivers In A Procession
9-4-34: Funeral Processions
9-4-35: Backing
9-4-36: Restricted Access
9-4-37: Trucks Prohibited On Certain Streets
9-4-38: Limited Load Streets
9-4-39: School Buses
9-4-40: Following Too Closely
9-4-41: Disregarding Traffic Orders
9-4-42: Refusal To Stop Vehicle
9-4-43: Lights On Motor Vehicles
9-4-44: Disobeying Traffic Control Devices
9-4-45: Opening Door Into Traffic Lane
9-4-46: Drag Racing
9-4-47: Alcoholic Liquor In Motor Vehicles
9-4-48: Seat Safety Belts
9-4-49: Lights On Emergency Vehicles
9-4-50: Wet Striping
9-4-51: Tar Or Oiled Roads
9-4-52: Driver And Passenger Required To Use Safety Belts
9-4-53: Use Of Electronic Communication Devices While Driving Prohibited
9-4-1: TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS:
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do as
follows:
   (A)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as
close as practical to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway; or as
indicated by traffic markers or signs.
   (B)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, and approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall
be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the
roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in
that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection,
or as indicated by traffic or signs.
   (C)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as
to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered,
or as indicated by traffic markers or signs.
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from a private road
or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said
highway. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-2: STARTING PARKED VEHICLE:
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. (Ord. 331, 10-16-
1968)
9-4-3: DRIVER'S SIGNAL:
No driver of a vehicle shall suddenly start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn
without first giving a suitable signal in such a manner as to apprise others
who might be affected by his action.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a highway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety and then only
after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn if any pedestrian
may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate signal in the
manner hereinafter provided in the event any other vehicle may be affected by
such movement.
   (B)   A signal or intention to turn right or left shall be given during not
less than the last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before
turning.
The signal herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm
or by a signal lamp or signal device, but when a vehicle is so constructed or
loaded that a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to front and rear
of such vehicle, then said signals must be given by such a lamp or device.
All signals herein required given by hand and arm shall be given from the left
side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as
follows:
      1.   Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally.
      2.   Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward.
      3.   Stop or decrease of speed: Hand and arm extended downward. (Ord.
331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-4: SIGNALS AND TURNING:
No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in the
lane next to the direction in which the turn is to be made or turn a vehicle to
enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct
course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can
be made with reasonable safety. No person may so turn any vehicle without
giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
A signal of intention to turn right or left when required must be given
continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet (100') travelled by
the vehicle before turning within a business or residence district, and such
signal must be given continuously during not less than the last two hundred
feet (200') traveled by the vehicle before turning outside a business or
residence district.
No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first
giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this title to the driver
of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such a
signal. The electric turn signal device required in this title must be used to
indicate an intention to turn, change lanes or start from a parallel parked
position but must not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled led
vehicle or flashed as a courtesy of "do pass" signal to operators of other
vehicles approaching from the rear. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-5: SIGNAL LAMPS AND SIGNAL DEVICES:
Every vehicle operated in this Village shall be equipped with a stop lamp or
lamps on the rear of the vehicle which shall display a red light visible from a
distance of not less than five hundred feet (500') to the rear in normal
sunlight, and which shall be actuated upon application of the service (foot)
brake, and which may but need not be incorporated with the other rear lamps.
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with an electric turn signal device which
shall indicate the intention of the driver to turn to the right or to the left
in the form of flashing lights located at and showing to the front and rear of
the vehicle on the side of the vehicle toward which the turn is to be made. The
lamps showing to the front shall be mounted on the same level and as widely
spaced laterally as practicable and, when signalling, shall emit a white or
amber light, or any shade of light between white and amber. The lamps showing
to the rear shall be mounted on the same level and as widely, spaced laterally
as practicable and, when signaling, shall emit a red light.
Every trailer and semi-trailer shall be equipped with an electric turn signal
device which indicates the intention of the driver in the power unit to turn to
the right or to the left in the form of flashing red lights located at the rear
of the vehicle on the side toward which the turn is to be made and mounted on
the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable.
Turn signal lamps must be visible from a distance of not less than three
hundred feet (300') in normal sunlight.
9-4-6: DRIVING FROM ALLEYS, DRIVEWAYS OR GARAGES:
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or garage shall stop
such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk, or across a sidewalk
line projected across such alley, and shall exercise extreme care in driving
upon said sidewalk or across such lines.
9-4-7: VEHICLE NOT TO BE DRIVEN ON SIDEWALKS OR IN SAFETY ZONES:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway, nor at any time into or upon any portion of a
roadway marked as a safety zone.
9-4-8: RIGHT OF WAY:
Excepting as otherwise herein provided, the driver of a vehicle approaching an
intersection shall yield the right of way to a vehicle which has entered the
intersection from a different highway; and when two (2) vehicles are entering
an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the
driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle
on the right.
9-4-9: VEHICLE TURNING LEFT:
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left
shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite
direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute
an immediate hazard, but said driver, having so yielded and having given a
signal when and as required, may make such left turn and the drivers of all
other vehicles approaching the intersection from said opposite direction shall
yield the right of way to the vehicle making the left turn.
9-4-10: "U" TURN:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn left or right at
any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. Such prohibition shall
be indicated by appropriate signs. (Ord. 331, 10-16-68)
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to make a "U" turn at the intersection of
Wesley Road and North Main Street, either from Wesley Road or to reverse
movement on the divided highway of North Main Street (Route 29). (Ord. 381, 1-
2-72)
9-4-11: NO LEFT TURN:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn left or right at
any place where such turns are prohibited by ordinance. Such prohibition shall
be indicated by appropriate signs. (Ord. 331, 10-16-68)
9-4-12: FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES; FIRES:
Upon the approach of a Fire Department vehicle, drivers of vehicles shall
comply with the provisions of this Title relating to the approach of authorized
emergency vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official
business, to follow any fire apparatus in response to an emergency call, closer
than one block, or to park any vehicle within the block where Fire Department
apparatus has stopped to answer an emergency call.
It shall be further unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive over an
unprotected hose of the Fire Department without the consent of the Fire Chief
or the assistant in command. (Ord. 331-B, 12-15-82)
9-4-13: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY:
Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right
half of the roadway except as follows:
   (A)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
   (B)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair;
   (C)   Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
   (D)   Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one way traffic;
   (E)   Whenever there is a single track paved road on one side of the public
highway and two (2) vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right of way on such pavement to the other
vehicle.
9-4-14: PASSING VEHICLES:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2)
of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
9-4-15: OVERTAKING VEHICLES:
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to these limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
9-4-16: OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE RIGHT:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of
another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and allowing sufficient
clearance, pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction either upon
the left or upon the right on a roadway with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for four (4) or more lines of moving traffic when such
movement can be made in safety. No person shall drive off the pavement or upon
the shoulder of the roadway in overtaking or passing on the right.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right on a one way street or on any street on which traffic is restricted to
one direction of movement where the roadway is free from obstruction and of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving vehicles.
9-4-17: LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT:
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right hand side of the
roadway before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
   (B)   No vehicle shall in overtaking and passing another vehicle or at any
other time, be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following
conditions:
      1.   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway
where the driver's view is obstructed within sufficient distance as to create a
hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
      2.   When approaching within one hundred feet (100') of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.
      3.   When official signs are in place directing that traffic keep to the
right, or a distinctive line also so directs traffic as declared in the sign
manual adopted by the Illinois State Department of Public Works and Buildings.
      4.   The limitations in subparagraphs 1 and 2 of this subsection shall
not apply upon a one way street, or upon a street with unobstructed pavement of
sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction
when such movement can be made with safety.
9-4-18: ONE WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS:
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one way traffic a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven on
the right of such island.
9-4-19: DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC:
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply:
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes a vehicle shall
not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another
vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of
traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such
center line is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the
direction that the vehicle is proceeding and is sign posted to give notice of
such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing specific traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the direction of such signs.
   (D)   Official traffic control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadways and drivers of vehicles shall obey
such signs.
9-4-20: AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, when the driver
is giving audible sign by siren, or bell, the driver of every other vehicle
shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to the right hand edge or curb of the highway
clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the
authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
This Section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the highway.
9-4-21: RECKLESS, NEGLIGENT OR CARELESS DRIVING:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle in the City in a careless,
reckless, negligent or wanton manner, or carelessly so as to endanger life or
property.
9-4-22: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street not under the
jurisdiction of the Illinois State Department of Public Works and Buildings, or
the County, or in an alley at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any highway outside the urban
district at a speed of more than sixty five (65) miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle of the first division towing another
vehicle, outside of an urban district at more than fifty five (55) miles per
hour, in an urban district at more than thirty (30) miles per hour or fifteen
(15) miles per hour in an alley.
Provided, that if the President and Board of Trustees by ordinance, set other
limits as provided by Statute (625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-601) after
an engineering or traffic survey, then such limits shall govern the rate of
speed on the streets indicated in such ordinance. Appropriate signs shall be
posted showing such speed limits.
The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum
speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions, and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person or vehicle on
or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of
all persons to use due care.
It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle on any street or highway within the
Village under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Public Works and
Buildings, or of the County, at a speed exceeding that lawfully set for such
street. Provided further, that the speed of all vehicles of the second division
as defined by this Title shall be as follows:
   (A)   If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight
and has a gross weight of eight thousand (8,000) pounds or less (including the
weight of the vehicle and maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic tires,
the maximum is fifty five (55) miles per hour outside of an urban district,
thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district and fifteen (15) miles per hour
in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or more solid tires,
the maximum is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and in all locations.
   (B)   If the vehicle is designed and used for pulling or carrying freight
and has a gross weight of more than eight thousand (8,000) pounds (including
the weight of the vehicle and maximum load), and is equipped with pneumatic
tires, the maximum is fifty (50) miles per hour outside of an urban district,
thirty (30) miles per hour in an urban district and fifteen (15) miles per hour
in an alley; but if such vehicle is equipped with two (2) or more solid tires,
the maximum is ten (10) miles per hour at all times and in all locations.
   (C)   If the vehicle is designed and used for carrying more than ten (10)
passengers, and is equipped with pneumatic tires, the maximum is sixty (60)
miles per hour.
9-4-23: SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS WHILE PASSING SCHOOLS:
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty (20) miles
per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during
school days when school children are present. Appropriate signs shall be posted
to indicate this restriction.
9-4-24: TRAFFIC NOT TO BE OBSTRUCTED:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon the street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon.
9-4-25: BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES:
It shall be unlawful for more than one person to ride upon any bicycle
propelled by human power upon any street, or for any person to ride upon any
motorcycle other than a seat permanently attached to said vehicle to the right
or rear of the operator.
9-4-26: UNATTENDED VEHICLES:
No vehicle shall be left unattended while the motor of such vehicle is running;
and no vehicle shall be left without a driver on any hill or incline unless the
vehicle is secured against moving.
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any bridge or
causeway or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
9-4-27: UNATTENDED ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to leave any horse or other draft animal unattended in any
street without having such animal securely fastened.
9-4-28: CLINGING TO VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person on any street riding a bicycle, motorcycle,
sled, or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or his vehicle to any
moving motor vehicle or wagon.
9-4-29: TOY VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon skates, a coaster, sled or other toy
vehicle, to go upon any roadway other than at a crosswalk.
9-4-30: RIDING ON RUNNING BOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board,
bumpers, top or outside step of any vehicle.
9-4-31: TRAIN SIGNALS:
The driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing when a signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train, shall stop within
fifty feet (50') but not less than ten feet (10') from the nearest track of
such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at and not traverse such grade crossing when
a crossing gate is lowered or when a flagman, or automatic signal warns of the
approach of a train.
The driver of any motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or any school bus
carrying any school children, or any vehicle carrying explosives or flammable
liquid as cargo shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet (50') but not less
than ten feet (10') from the nearest rail of the tracks and shall listen and
look in both directions along such tracks at a grade crossing. Provided that no
such stop need be made at any such crossing where a police officer or a traffic
control signal directs traffic to proceed.
9-4-32: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or
other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are
conspicuously designated as required in this Title.
9-4-33: DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION:
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right
hand side of the roadway as close as practical and shall follow the vehicle
ahead as close as practical and safe.
9-4-34: FUNERAL PROCESSIONS:
Funeral processions have the right of way at intersections when vehicles
comprising such procession have their headlights lighted, subject to the
following conditions and exceptions:
   (A)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right of
way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an audible or
visible signal.
   (B)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the right of
way when directed to do so by a traffic officer.
   (C)   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall
comply with stop signs and traffic control signals but when the leading vehicle
has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with such signal or after
stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in such procession may
proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal and the leading
vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
   (D)   The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not
drive his vehicle in the funeral procession except when authorized to do so by
a traffic officer or when such vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle
giving audible or visible signal.
   (E)   Operators of vehicles not a part of funeral procession may not form a
procession or convoy and have their headlights lighted for the purpose of
securing the right of way granted by the Title to funeral processions.
   (F)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and
pass the vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and passing can be
accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with such
procession.
   (G)   The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a
flashing amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used as a lead
vehicle in such procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may
utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers to identify the
individual vehicles in such a procession.
9-4-35: BACKING:
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interference with other traffic.
9-4-36: RESTRICTED ACCESS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled or limited
controlled access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established
by public authority.
9-4-37: TRUCKS PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful to operate a truck upon any street where truck operation
is prohibited by ordinance and where such signs of prohibition are posted,
except that a truck may be driven on such street for not more than the minimum
distance necessary for the purpose of making deliveries or picking up loads.
(Ord. 331, 10-16-68)
9-4-38: LIMITED LOAD STREETS:
   (A)   There is hereby established as the maximum weight of any vehicle which
shall be driven or operated upon the streets within the village a load limit of
fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds.
Exceptions are allowed for school buses and garbage trucks.
The street currently known as Wesley Road, from the village boundary line
closest to the intersection of Wesley Road and Illinois Route 29 to a point
four hundred feet (400') north of that intersection, and from that point four
hundred feet (400') north of that intersection to a point 0.76 miles further
north shall have a truck class load limit of at least eighty thousand (80,000)
pounds. Said portions of Wesley Road, shall be known and designated as an
eighty thousand (80,000) pound truck class route and the village shall properly
sign such route, and portion of Wesley Road, in accordance with the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices".
   (B)   Operation of a vehicle on said streets which is in excess of the
weight set forth herein shall be deemed a violation and shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). In the event of a second or subsequent violation by
the same offender occurring within one calendar year, said fines shall be in
the amount of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
It shall be an affirmative defense to any such violation, that the offending
vehicle was being operated for the ingress or egress of equipment required to
improve property, transport materials or personal property, including
excavations and fill material. (Ord. 766, 5-14-2014)
9-4-39: SCHOOL BUSES:
The driver of a vehicle on any street or highway upon meeting or overtaking
from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the
purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle
before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on the bus a visual
signal directing that a stop be made; provided that the driver of a vehicle
upon a street or highway of which the roadways for traffic moving in opposite
directions are separated by a strip of ground at least four feet (4') wide
which is not surfaced or suitable for vehicle traffic, or on a controlled
access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross, need not stop his
vehicle upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on the opposite roadway.
(Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-40: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the street.
   (B)   The driver of any motor vehicle of the second division or motor
vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a street outside of a
business or residence district shall not follow within three hundred feet
(300') of another motor vehicle of the second division or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to
prevent overtaking and passing nor shall the same apply upon any lane
specifically designated for use by motor vehicles of the second division.
   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any street outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other
vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such
vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter
and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral
processions. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-41: DISREGARDING TRAFFIC ORDERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to comply with
any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law with
authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-42: REFUSAL TO STOP VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any motor vehicle who having
been given visual or audible signal by a police officer directing such driver
or operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, to wilfully fail or refuse to obey
such direction, to increase his speed, to extinguish his lights or otherwise
flee or attempt to evade the police officer. The signal given by the police
officer may be by hand, voice, siren, red or blue light and the officer giving
such signal shall be in a police uniform, and, if driving a vehicle, such
vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official police vehicle. (Ord. 331,
10-16-1968)
9-4-43: LIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES:
During the period from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility
is so limited as to require the use of lights for safety, every motorcycle
shall carry and exhibit one lighted lamp commonly known as a driving light and
every other motor vehicle two (2) such lighted driving lamps showing white
lights, or lights of a yellow or amber tint, visible at least five hundred feet
(500') in the direction toward which each motorcycle or motor vehicle is
proceeding. Parking lamps may be used in addition to, but not in lieu of, any
such driving lamps. Each motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer shall also
exhibit at least two (2) lighted lamps which shall be mounted on the left rear
and right rear of the vehicle so as to throw a red light visible for at least
five hundred feet (500') in the reverse direction, except that a motorcycle
need be equipped with only one such lamp.
Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to
illuminate with a white light a rear registration plate when required and
render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet (50') to the rear. Any
tail lamp or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp or lamps for
illuminating a rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. (Ord. 331, 10-
16-1968)
Whenever the driver of any vehicle is within three hundred feet (300') of
another vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, the driver shall dim
or drop such lamps and shall extinguish all auxiliary lamps.
No vehicle shall have the lighting system modified to allow more than two (2)
electric driving lamps to be lighted while operating in the dimmed or dropped
position.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of auxiliary driving lamps,
commonly referred to as "fog" lamps, when used in conjunction with headlamps,
if such auxiliary driving lamps are adjusted and so aimed that the glaring rays
are not projected into the eyes of drivers of oncoming vehicles. (Ord. 331F,
12-9-1998)
9-4-44: DISOBEYING TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official traffic
control device unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across
private property to avoid a traffic control device. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-45: OPENING DOOR INTO TRAFFIC LANE:
It shall be unlawful to open any door of a motor vehicle on the side available
to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be
done without interfering with the movement of other traffic nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-46: DRAG RACING:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to be a participant
in drag racing. For the purpose of this section, "drag racing" means the act of
two (2) or more individuals competing or racing on any street or highway or
public place in this municipality in a situation in which one of the motor
vehicles is beside, or relatively so, or to the rear of a motor vehicle
operated by a competing driver and the one driver attempts to prevent the
competing driver from passing or overtaking him, either by acceleration or
maneuver, or one or more individuals competing in a race against time on any
street, highway or public place in this municipality. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968;
amd. Ord. 368, 8-19-1970)
9-4-47: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR IN MOTOR VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any
alcoholic liquor in, upon or about any motor vehicle except in the original
package and with the seal unbroken. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-48: SEAT SAFETY BELTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any 1961 or later model motor
vehicle of the first division that is titled or licensed by the secretary of
state unless the front seat of such motor vehicle is equipped with two (2) sets
of seat safety belts. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-49: LIGHTS ON EMERGENCY VEHICLES:
Oscillating, rotating or flashing lights are permitted on any motor vehicle
except as follows:
   (A)   Red oscillating, rotating or flashing lights are permitted only on:
      1.   Local law enforcement vehicles and police vehicles of the state or
federal governments;
      2.   Vehicles of local fire departments and firefighting vehicles of the
state or federal government; and
      3.   Vehicles which are designed as ambulances and while responding to an
emergency call for the purpose of conveying sick or injured persons.
   (B)   Amber oscillating, rotating or flashing lights are permitted only on:
      1.   Second division vehicles designed for towing or hoisting disabled
vehicles while actually being used for such purposes;
      2.   Motor vehicles or equipment of the state, local authorities and
contractors while engaged in maintenance or construction operations within the
limits of construction projects;
      3.   Vehicles or equipment used by engineering or survey crews while
actually engaged in work on a highway;
      4.   Vehicles of public utilities and municipal departments while engaged
in maintenance or construction operations within the limits of construction
projects;
      5.   Oversized vehicle or load moving under permit issued by the
department of public works and buildings of the state;
      6.   The front and rear of motorized equipment owned and operated by the
state or any political subdivision thereof, which is designed and used for
removal of snow and ice from highways; and
      7.   Such other vehicles as may be authorized by local authorities.
   (C)   Blue oscillating, rotating or flashing lights are permitted only on:
      1.   The front of any motor vehicle owned or fully operated by a
volunteer fireman, paid fireman, part paid fireman or call fireman while
responding to a fire call; and
      2.   Police department vehicles in cities having a population of five
hundred thousand (500,000) or more inhabitants. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-50: WET STRIPING:
It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any motor vehicle to drive
over, across or upon any wet paint or striping on any street or highway. (Ord.
331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-51: TAR OR OILED ROADS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any motor vehicle to drive
over, across or upon any wet or freshly tarred or oiled street, road or highway
under repair or construction or being resurfaced. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-4-52: DRIVER AND PASSENGER REQUIRED TO USE SAFETY BELTS:
   (A)   Definitions: The following words and phrases when used in this section
shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed
to them in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/101 et seq.: "driver", "motor
vehicle", "passenger car", "motorcycle", "operator" or "roadway". (Ord. 568, 3-
11-1998)
   (B)   Violations, Exceptions, Penalties, Applicability:
      1.   Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on
a street or highway roadway in this state shall wear a properly adjusted and
fastened seat safety belt; except that, a child less than six (6) years of age
shall be protected as required pursuant to the child passenger protection act 1
. Each driver under the age of eighteen (18) years and each of the driver's
passengers under the age of eighteen (18) years of a motor vehicle operated on
a street or highway in this state shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened
seat safety belt. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child six (6)
years of age or more, but less than sixteen (16) years of age, in the front
seat of the motor vehicle shall secure the child in their properly adjusted and
fastened seat safety belt. (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
      2.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the
vehicle for roadway maintenance or roadway construction, if the speed of the
vehicle between stops does not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour.
         (b)   A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a
physician that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons to wear a
safety belt.
         (c)   A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or
license endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in another state or county
indicating that the driver or passenger is unable for medical, physical, or
other valid reasons to wear a safety belt.
         (d)   A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse.
         (e)   A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965.
         (f)   A motorcycle.
         (g)   A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety
belts under Federal law. (Ord. 568, 3-11-1998)
      3.   A violation of this section shall be a petty offense and subject to
a fine not to exceed twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
      4.   Failure to wear a seat belt in violation of this section shall not
be considered evidence of negligence, shall not limit the liability of an
insurer, and shall not diminish any recovery for damages arising out of the
ownership, maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle. (Ord. 568, 3-11-1998)
      5.   Any Village police officer may not stop any motor vehicle, or driver
or passenger of such vehicle solely on the basis of a violation or suspected
violation of this section while such motor vehicle is being operated on any
roadway within this jurisdiction. Any Village police officer may issue a
violation of the seat belt ordinance as a companion ticket. (Ord. 568-B, 5-9-
2001)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.
9-4-53: USE OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED 1 :
   (A)   Definition: Electronic communications device means an electronic
device, including but not limited to a hand-held wireless telephone, hand-held
personal digital assistant, or a portable or mobile computer, but does not
include a global positioning system or navigation system or a device that is
physically or electronically integrated into the motor vehicle.
   (B)   Prohibited: A person may not operate a motor vehicle on a roadway
while using an electronic communication device.
   (C)   Penalties: A person who violates this section shall be fined a maximum
of seventy five dollars ($75.00) for a first offense, one hundred dollars
($100.00) for a second offense, one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) for a
third offense and one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a fourth or
subsequent offense.
   (D)   Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
      1.   A law enforcement officer or operator of an emergency vehicle while
performing his or her official duties;
      2.   A driver using an electronic communication device for the sole
purpose of reporting an emergency situation and continued communication with
emergency personnel during the emergency situation;
      3.   A driver using an electronic communication device in the hands-free
or voice-operated mode, which may include the use of a headset;
      4.   A driver of a commercial motor vehicle reading a message displayed
on a permanently installed communication device designed for a commercial motor
vehicle with a screen that does not exceed ten inches (10") tall by ten inches
(10") wide in size;
      5.   A driver using an electronic communication device while parked on
the shoulder of a roadway;
      6.   A driver using an electronic communication device when the vehicle
is stopped due to normal traffic being obstructed and the driver has the motor
vehicle transmission in neutral or park;
      7.   A driver using two-way or citizens band radio services;
      8.   A driver using two-way mobile radio transmitters or receivers for
licensees of the Federal Communications Commission in the amateur radio
service;
      9.   A driver using an electronic communication device by pressing a
single button to initiate or terminate a voice communication; or
      10.   A driver using an electronic communication device capable of
performing multiple functions, other than a hand-held wireless telephone or
hand-held personal digital assistant (for example, a fleet management system,
dispatching device, citizens band radio, or music player) for a purpose that is
not otherwise prohibited by this section. (Ord. 855, 5-9-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/12-610.2.
CHAPTER 5
PEDESTRIANS
SECTION:
9-5-1: Right of Way
9-5-2: Pedestrians Crossing Roadway
9-5-3: Signals
9-5-4: Standing on Sidewalk
9-5-5: Pedestrian Crossing
9-5-6: Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways
9-5-7: Blind Pedestrians; Right of Way
9-5-8: Walking on Highways
9-5-1: RIGHT OF WAY:
Where traffic control signals or pedestrian control signals provided for in
Chapter 2 of this Title are not in place or in operation, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping, if need be, to
a pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or
within any unmarked crosswalk.
Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection
or a marked crosswalk between intersections the pedestrian shall have the right
of way over drivers of vehicles; and at such marked places drivers of vehicles
shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any pedestrian within or
entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right of
way over any vehicle so stopped.
The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for the
purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.
9-5-2: PEDESTRIANS CROSSING ROADWAY:
No pedestrian shall cross any street except at designated and marked
crosswalks. No person shall stand or loiter in such street or roadway other
than in a safety zone.
9-5-3: SIGNALS:
At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or by a stop and go
signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than
with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful movement of
traffic.
9-5-4: STANDING ON SIDEWALK:
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand upon any sidewalk except as near
as reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such standing
interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians.
9-5-5: PEDESTRIAN CROSSING:
Every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon any street or roadway and shall give warning by sounding the
horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a street or roadway.
9-5-6: PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS:
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway or its shoulder facing traffic, and upon meeting a vehicle shall step
off to the left.
   (C)   No person shall solicit a ride from the driver of any motor vehicle.
9-5-7: BLIND PEDESTRIANS; RIGHT OF WAY:
Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or
walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being
guided by a dog, shall have the right of way in crossing any street or highway,
whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic
signals, anything in this Title to the contrary notwithstanding. The driver of
every vehicle approaching the place where a blind person, so carrying such a
cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or highway shall
bring his vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding, shall take such
precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The
provisions of this Section shall not apply to a blind person who is not
carrying such a cane or walking stick or is not guided by a dog, but the other
provisions of this Chapter relating to pedestrians shall be applicable to such
person. However, the failure of a blind person to so use or carry such a cane
or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets,
highways or sidewalks, shall not be considered evidence of contributory
negligence.
9-5-8: WALKING ON HIGHWAYS:
Any person walking along and upon improved highways shall keep on the left of
the paved portion, or on the left shoulder thereof, and upon meeting a vehicle
when walking on such paved portion shall step off to the left.
Where sidewalks are provided it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along
and upon an adjacent roadway except at a crosswalk.
It is unlawful for any pedestrian who is under the influence of intoxicating
liquors to be upon any street or roadway of this City. (Ord. 331, 10-16-68)
CHAPTER 6
PARKING
SECTION:
9-6-1: No Parking Places
9-6-2: Snow Removal
9-6-3: Time Limit Parking
9-6-4: Towing Cars Away
9-6-5: Parking At Curb
9-6-6: Vehicles For Sale
9-6-7: Loading Zone
9-6-8: All Night Parking
9-6-9: Alleys
9-6-10: Cab Stands; Bus Stands
9-6-11: Parking Motor Vehicles On Private Property
9-6-12: Signs
9-6-13: Parallel Parking Required In Business District
9-6-14: U-Turns
9-6-15: Emergency Vehicles; Disabled Vehicles
9-6-16: Violations; Fines
9-6-17: Handicapped Parking Places
9-6-18: Storage Or Parking Of Recreational Vehicles And Trailers
9-6-1: NO PARKING PLACES:
It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand at any time in any of the
following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic control device:
   (A)   In any intersection.
   (B)   In a crosswalk.
   (C)   Upon any bridge or viaduct, or any subway or tunnel or the approach
thereto.
   (D)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet
(30') of a point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
   (E)   Within thirty feet (30') of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the
approaching side.
   (F)   Within twenty feet (20') of any intersection or crosswalk.
   (G)   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant.
   (H)   At any place where the vehicle would block the use of a driveway.
   (I)   Within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a railroad grade
crossing.
   (J)   Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance to any fire
department station and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any
such station within seventy five feet (75') of such entrance when properly
signposted.
   (K)   On any sidewalk or parkway.
   (L)   At any place where the mayor, with the approval of the trustees, shall
designate as a no parking zone. In selecting, changing, or abandoning no
parking zones, the mayor shall consider such factors as the usable width of the
roadway for moving traffic, traffic conditions, and the safety and convenience
of those using village streets.
   At any place where the mayor, with the approval of the trustees, has
designated a no parking zone, official signs shall be posted to provide
appropriate notice that parking is prohibited in such areas. Unless otherwise
specifically designated by the Mayor, streets shall have the following
designated parking restrictions based upon width:
 
STREET TYPE / PERMITTED PARKING WIDTH
Two-way - parking both sides    34 feet or wider
Two-way - parking on one side   26 feet to 33 feet
Two-way - no parking            25 feet or less
One-way - parking both sides    28 feet or wider
One-way - parking one side      18 feet to 27 feet
One-way - no parking            17 feet or less
 
   The Mayor has specifically designated the entirety of Main Street / Route 29
as a no parking zone.
   (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995; Ord. 926, 4-24-2021)
9-6-2: SNOW REMOVAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or remain parked on any village
street after a snowfall with an accumulation of one inch (1") or more or after
freezing rain or ice with an accumulation of one-quarter inch (1/4") or more,
and such prohibition shall last for a period of twelve (12) hours following the
end of the snowfall, freezing rain or ice or until the streets are cleared,
whichever occurs first.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined pursuant to
section
9-6-16 of this chapter provided, however, the fine for a first offense shall be
not less than seventy five dollars ($75.00), and the fine for a second or
subsequent offense shall be not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
In addition to said fine, the Superintendent of Public Works or the Chief of
Police may cause any vehicle in violation of this section to be towed and the
owner and/or the operator of said vehicle shall pay any costs or charges
connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle as a result of the
removal of the same pursuant to this section. (Ord. 653, 4-9-2008; amd. Ord.
920, 12-9-2020)
9-6-3: TIME LIMIT PARKING:
At any place where the mayor, with the approval of the trustees, shall limit
time on prime parking spaces in the business district during normal business
hours. By earlier ordinance, the following streets have been posted one hour
time limit from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Mondays
through Saturdays:
   Park Street from Main Street to Thorncrest
   Poplar Street from Main Street to Thorncrest
   Wagner Drive from Main Street to Thorncrest
At any place where the mayor, with the approval of the trustees, has designated
as a time limit parking zone, official signs shall be posted to provide
appropriate notice that parking time is limited in such areas. (Ord. 463-E, 7-
26-1995; Ord. 936, 6-9-2021)
9-6-4: TOWING CARS AWAY:
The police department and all members thereof assigned to traffic duty are
hereby authorized to remove and tow away by commercial towing service, any car
or other vehicle illegally parked in any place where such parked vehicle
creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, blocks the use of a fire hydrant or
obstructs or may obstruct the movement of any emergency vehicle; or any vehicle
which has been parked in any public street or other public place for a period
of forty eight (48) consecutive hours. Cars so towed away shall be stored on
any village property or in a public garage or parking lot and shall be restored
to the owner or operator thereof after payment of the expense incurred by the
village in removing and storing such vehicles. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-5: PARKING AT CURB:
No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the curb,
except on one-way streets, and it shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2)
right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly
established curb line; provided, however, upon those streets that have been
marked for angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb
indicated by such marks. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-6: VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle upon any street from which
vehicle merchandise is peddled or sold. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-7: LOADING ZONE:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle to stand a passenger vehicle
for a period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers, in any place designated by the village board as a loading zone and
marked as such, or in any of the following designated places:
   (A)   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb
before the entrance to any hospital or hotel at any time.
   (B)   At any place not to exceed seventy five feet (75') along the curb line
before the entrance to a public building between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. except on Sunday.
   (C)   Directly in front of the entrance to any theater at any time that the
theater is open. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-8: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
No person shall park any vehicle weighing over ten thousand (10,000) pounds
between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any
day on any streets in the village. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-9: ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except for the purpose of
loading and unloading merchandise and then in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-10: CAB STANDS; BUS STANDS:
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated
by ordinance as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in
a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-11: PARKING MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property without
the consent of the owner of the property. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-12: SIGNS:
Appropriate signs shall be posted in all areas where parking is limited. (Ord.
463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-13: PARALLEL PARKING REQUIRED IN BUSINESS DISTRICT:
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to be parked other than parallel
with the curbing or pavement edge in the village within the central business
district of the village when any part of said motor vehicle is upon public
property. The mayor, with the approval of the trustees, may except certain
designated areas or zones from the parallel parking requirements. (Ord. 463-E,
7-26-1995)
9-6-14: "U" TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to make a "U" turn at the intersection of
Wesley Road and North Main Street, either from Wesley Road or to reverse
movement on the divided highway of North Main Street (Route 29). (Ord. 463-E,
7-26-1995)
9-6-15: EMERGENCY VEHICLES; DISABLED VEHICLES:
Nothing herein shall apply to emergency vehicles nor to the official
performance of traffic control, nor to vehicles temporarily disabled or broken
down, other than such temporary conditions awaiting removal of such disabled
vehicle, if promptly removed. (Ord. 463-E, 7-26-1995)
9-6-16: VIOLATIONS; FINES:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter, or any firm or corporation
who violates or permits the violation hereof, shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been
committed for each and every day that such violation continues, and a fine
assessed accordingly.
The police department or street department is hereby authorized to cause said
vehicle in violation hereof to be removed and, in addition to the fine above
provided, the owner or person responsible for or in apparent charge of said
vehicle shall pay all towing and storage for any removal, to be recovered at
the time of obtaining the vehicle, and a lien is accordingly placed upon such
vehicle. (Ord. 653, 4-9-2008)
9-6-17: HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACES:
   (A)   Handicapped Persons, Parking Privileges: Vehicles displaying
handicapped identification issued by the secretary of state are subject to all
other laws and ordinances of the village. Any motor vehicle bearing such
identification may park, in addition to any other lawful place, in any parking
place specifically reserved by posting of an official sign for such vehicles.
Parking privileges granted by this section are strictly limited to the person
to whom the special identification was issued and to qualified operators acting
under his express direction while a disabled person is present.
No person shall use any area for the parking of any motor vehicle pursuant to
this section or where an official sign controlling such area expressly
prohibits parking at any time or during certain hours.
   (B)   Handicapped Parking Places, Unauthorized Use Of: It shall be
prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not displaying identification
pursuant to this section in any parking space specifically reserved by the
posting of an official sign for handicapped parking.
   (C)   Removal Of Unauthorized Vehicles: When any police officer of the
village finds a vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of this section,
such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver
or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle.
   (D)   Handicapped Parking Violation, Penalty: Any person violating the
provision of this section shall be fined pursuant to section 9-6-16 of this
chapter provided, however, the fine shall be not less than two hundred dollars
($200.00) for each offense under this section. In addition to said fine, any
person violating the provisions of this section shall pay any costs or charges
connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle as a result of the
removal of same pursuant to this section.
   (E)   Effective Date: This ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days
after publication thereof. (Ord. 463-F, 6-26-1996)
9-6-18: STORAGE OR PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND TRAILERS:
   (A)   Definitions:
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any vehicular portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation
uses and having a body width not exceeding eight feet (8'), being of any
length, provided its gross weight does not exceed four thousand five hundred
(4,500) pounds, or being of any weight provided its body length does not exceed
twenty nine feet (29'). Recreational vehicle types include the motor home
(class A, B, B+, and C), travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, toy hauler, pop
up trailer, and slide in camper (which fits in the bed of a pickup truck).
   TRAILER: An unpowered vehicle designed to be pulled by a powered vehicle. A
trailer can be covered, open, fully or partially enclosed, is available in all
shapes and sizes and is typically used to pull equipment, cars, snowmobiles,
all- terrain vehicles, or goods.
   (B)   Parking And Storage Regulations: Any owner of recreational vehicles or
trailers may park or store their own recreational vehicles or trailers on their
own property, in a residential district (specifically not in an O-1, B-1 or B-
2 zoning classification) subject to the following conditions:
      1.   All recreational vehicles and/or trailers must be properly licensed
and registered with current stickers as required by law.
      2.   At no time shall recreational vehicles or trailers be occupied or
used for dining, sleeping or housekeeping purposes while parked or stored in a
residential district except for a period of not to exceed fourteen (14) days in
one calendar year, provided, however, that such recreational vehicle or travel
trailer, pickup coach, motor home or camping trailer may be used only for
sleeping purposes during such fourteen (14) day period.
      3.   A recreational vehicle or trailer parked or stored outside of a
garage, may be parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of the
principal structure on the lot; however, such recreational vehicle or trailer
may be parked anywhere on the premises for loading or unloading purposes for a
period not to exceed twenty four (24) hours per episode.
      4.   Recreational vehicles or trailers must be parked a minimum of five
feet (5') from a side or rear yard lot line.
      5.   If parked to the front of the front building line of the principal
structure on the property, recreational vehicles and trailers must be on either
a hard surface or CA6 or equivalent rock and cannot be parked in the street.
         (a)   Recreational vehicles and trailers parked in the front of the
front building line may not impede traffic on the streets or alleys by causing
a visibility issue. As a rule of thumb, a vehicle may not be parked in the
front of the front building line if it is not at least twenty five feet (25')
from the street, curb, or alley at the vehicle's back bumper. (Ord. 810, 7-27-
2016)
CHAPTER 7
VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-7-1: Clear Vision
9-7-2: Gas And Smoke
9-7-3: Unnecessary Noise
9-7-4: Driving Unsafe Vehicles Prohibited
9-7-5: Spilling Loads
9-7-6: Brakes
9-7-7: Horn
9-7-8: Lamps On Vehicles Owned By Firemen
9-7-9: Lights
9-7-10: Muffler
9-7-11: Nonskid Devices
9-7-12: Width, Length And Height; Projecting Loads
9-7-13: Tires
9-7-14: Weight
9-7-15: Bicycles; Lamps Required
9-7-16: Motorcycles; Trailers; Lights Required
9-7-17: Operation Of ATVs And Off Highway Motorcycles
9-7-1: CLEAR VISION:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which is so loaded or in such a
condition that the operator does not have a clear vision of all parts of the
roadway essential to the safe operation of the vehicle. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-2: GAS AND SMOKE:
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle which emits dense smoke or such an
amount of smoke or fumes as to be dangerous to the health of persons or as to
endanger the drivers of other vehicles. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-3: UNNECESSARY NOISE:
It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle which makes unusually loud or
unnecessary noise. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-4: DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
It is unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or
knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle which is in
such unsafe condition as to endanger any person or property, or which is in
violation of any provisions of this title or any laws of the state of Illinois.
(Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-5: SPILLING LOADS:
No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on any
street or alley in the village. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-6: BRAKES:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle upon a street unless such
vehicle is equipped with good and sufficient brakes in good working condition,
as required by the state traffic law, or to operate any vehicle which is so
loaded that the operator does not have ready access to the mechanics operating
the brakes of such vehicles. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-7: HORN:
Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a good and sufficient audible
signaling device in efficient working condition. Such signaling device shall be
sounded when necessary to give timely warning of the approach of a vehicle, but
such horn or other signaling device shall not be sounded for any purpose other
than as a warning of impending danger.
No motor vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a siren
or gong signaling device. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-8: LAMPS ON VEHICLES OWNED BY FIREMEN:
Any motor vehicle owned or fully operated by a fireman may be equipped with not
to exceed two (2) lamps which shall emit a blue light without glare, which
lights shall only be used when actually going to a fire. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-9: LIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful to operate or park on any street any vehicle not equipped
with adequate lights conforming to the requirements of the state law, provided
that vehicles may be parked at nighttime without lights on any street or
portion thereof, designated by ordinance as a place where vehicles may be so
parked at nighttime. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-10: MUFFLER:
No motor vehicle shall be operated on any street unless such vehicle is
provided with a muffler in efficient actual working condition; and the use of a
cutout is prohibited. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-11: NONSKID DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped with
any nonskid device so constructed that any rigid or nonflexible portion thereof
comes into contact with the pavement, or roadway. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-12: WIDTH, LENGTH AND HEIGHT; PROJECTING LOADS:
The maximum width, length and height of any vehicle and its load shall not
exceed the limits expressed in the uniform act regulating traffic on highways.
No first division vehicle shall be operated on the streets with a load
extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor
extending more than six inches (6") beyond the line of the fenders on the right
side thereof.
No combination of vehicles of the second division coupled together shall
consist of more than two (2) units, but such limitation shall not apply to
vehicles operated in daytime when transporting pipes, poles, machinery and
other objects which cannot be readily dismembered, nor to such vehicles
operated at nighttime by a public utility when engaged in emergency repair
work; but such loads carried at night shall be clearly marked with sufficient
lights to show the full dimensions of the load.
No part of the load of a vehicle shall extend more than three feet (3') in
front of the extreme front portion of the vehicle. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-13: TIRES:
It shall be unlawful to operate on any street any motor vehicle which is not
equipped with tires conforming to the requirements of the uniform act
regulating traffic on highways. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-14: WEIGHT:
It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a weight,
including load, in excess of that permitted by the uniform act regulating
traffic on highways for driving on improved highways, or with weight
distributed in a manner not conforming to such law, or in violation of special
weight limits provided for by ordinance and signposted. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-15: BICYCLES; LAMPS REQUIRED:
During the period from sunset to sunrise or at any other time when visibility
is so limited as to require the use of lights for safety, every bicycle
operating on any street or other public place in the village shall carry and
exhibit one lighted lamp exhibiting a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred feet (500') to the front of the bicycle and with either: (i)
at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a red light visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the rear; or (ii) a red reflector of a type
approved by the Department of Transportation which shall be visible from all
distances from one hundred feet (100') to six hundred feet (600') to the rear
when directly in front of a lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 331, 10-16-1968; Ord. 938, 6-9-2021)
9-7-16: MOTORCYCLES; TRAILERS; LIGHTS REQUIRED:
During the period from sunset to sunrise, or at any other time when visibility
is so limited as to require the use of lights for safety, every motorcycle
operated on any street or other public place in the village shall carry and
exhibit one lighted lamp commonly known as a driving light and every motor
vehicle shall carry and exhibit two (2) such lighted lamps showing white
lights, or lights of a yellow or amber tint, visible at least five hundred feet
(500') in the direction toward which each motorcycle or motor vehicle is
proceeding, and each motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer shall also exhibit
at least one lighted lamp which shall be so situated as to throw a red light
visible for at least five hundred feet (500') in the reverse direction. Every
trailer having a gross weight of three thousand (3,000) pounds or less
including the weight of the trailer and maximum load shall be equipped with two
(2) lighted lamps, one on each side of the rear of such trailer which shall be
so situated as to throw a red light visible for at least five hundred feet
(500') in the reverse direction. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
9-7-17: OPERATION OF ATVs AND OFF HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES:
   (A)   No Use On Public Streets Or Highways: No person shall drive or operate
any ATV or off highway motorcycle upon any street or highway unless the ATV or
off highway motorcycle is crossing the street or highway subject to the
following restrictions:
      1.   The vehicle must cross the street or highway at an angle of
approximately ninety degrees (90°) to the direction of the street or highway;
      2.   The vehicle must come to a full and complete stop before attempting
to cross a street or highway;
      3.   The vehicle must yield the right of way to pedestrians and other
automobile traffic; and
      4.   If a divided highway is crossed, the crossing may only be made at an
intersection of the highway with another public street or highway.
   (B)   No Careless Or Reckless Operation: Careless and/or reckless operation
of an ATV or off highway motorcycle is prohibited. All drivers must operate
their vehicles so that they do not endanger others' lives or property, so that
they have the ability to stop to avoid accidents.
   (C)   Other Areas Where Use Is Prohibited: Operation of an ATV and/or off
highway motorcycle is prohibited in nature preserves, on railroad tracks, in
tree nurseries or other plantings, on publicly owned lands, and on frozen
surfaces of public waters. ATVs and off highway motorcycles may only be used on
private property with the written or verbal consent of the owner or lessee of
the property.
   (D)   Prohibition Within One Hundred Feet Of Dwellings:   ATVs and off
highway motorcycles shall not be operated within one hundred feet (100') of any
dwelling unless permission to operate the ATV or off highway motorcycle within
one hundred feet (100') of the dwelling was given by the owner of the dwelling.
   (E)   Exceptions To The Prohibitions Placed On ATV And Off Highway
Motorcycle Use As Listed In This Section: It shall not be a violation of
subsections (A), (C), and (D) of this section if an ATV or off highway
motorcycle is used:
      1.   For the purposes of loading or unloading such vehicle onto another
vehicle or transporting the vehicle from one place of storage to another;
provided that when loading, unloading or transporting any such vehicle, the
lowest rate of speed which will allow movement of the vehicle shall be used; or
      2.   As a utility vehicle for purposes which include, but are not limited
to, the maintenance of lawns and gardens, snow removal, agriculture, towing of
other vehicles during parades or inspection of public works in remote areas; or
      3.   By law enforcement officers for law enforcement purposes; or
      4.   In the event of an emergency.
   (F)   Penalties: Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall
be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first offense, five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second offense, and seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each additional offense. Each separate occurrence shall
be deemed as a new offense. (Ord. 765, 5-14-2014)
CHAPTER 8
DRIVERS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Alcohol Or Drugs
9-8-2: Accidents
9-8-3: Unlawful Use Of License, Permit Or Illinois Identification Card
9-8-4: Operation Of Uninsured Motor Vehicle
9-8-1: ALCOHOL OR DRUGS:
   (A)   No person shall drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle
within the village while:
      1.   The alcohol concentration in such person's blood or breath is eight
one-hundredths (0.08) or more based on the definition of blood and breath units
as defined herein or in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.2; or
      2.   Under the influence of alcohol; or
      3.   Under the influence of any intoxicating compound or combination of
intoxicating compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of driving
safely; or
      4.   Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a
degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving; or
      5.   Under the combined influence of alcohol and any other drug or drugs
to a degree which renders such person incapable of safely driving; or
      6.   There is any amount of a drug, substance, or compound in the
person's breath, blood, or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption
of cannabis listed in the cannabis control act, a controlled substance listed
in the Illinois controlled substances act, or an intoxicating compound listed
in the use of intoxicating compounds act.
   (B)   The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has
been legally entitled to use alcohol, or other drugs, or any combination of
both, shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this
section.
   (C)   Every person convicted of violating this section shall be penalized
according to the standards listed in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501(c-
h).
In addition to any other penalties and liabilities, a person who is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to violating this section, including any person
placed on court supervision for violating this section, shall be subject to
additional administrative sanctions as outlined in Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (D)   Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising
out of the arrest for an offense as defined in this section, evidence of the
concentration of alcohol, or other drug or other combination thereof in a
person's blood or breath at the time alleged, as determined by the analysis of
the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance, shall be
admissible. Such tests shall be admissible if administered in compliance with
the guidelines set forth in Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (E)   Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising
out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in
actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, the
concentration of alcohol in the person's blood or breath at the time alleged as
shown by analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath or other bodily
substance shall give rise to the following presumptions:
      1.   If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of four-
hundredths (0.04) or less, it shall be presumed that the person was not under
the influence of alcohol.
      2.   If there was at that time an alcohol concentration in excess of
four-hundredths (0.04) but less than eight-hundredths (0.08), such facts shall
not give rise to any presumption that the person was or was not under the
influence of alcohol, but such fact may be considered with other competent
evidence in determining whether the person was under the influence of alcohol.
      3.   If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of eight-
hundredths (0.08) or more, it shall be presumed that the person was under the
influence of alcohol.
      4.   The foregoing provisions of this section shall not be construed as
limiting the introduction of any other relevant evidence bearing upon the
question whether the person was under the influence of alcohol.
   (F)   If a person under arrest refuses to submit to a chemical test under
the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.1, evidence of
refusal shall be admissible to any civil or criminal action or proceeding
arising out of the acts alleged to have been committed while the person under
the influence of alcohol, or other drugs, or combination of both was driving or
in actual physical control of a motor vehicle, including hearings conducted on
the issue of the suspension of the person's driver's license pursuant to 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501.1. (Ord. 737, 2-13-2013)
9-8-2: ACCIDENTS 1 :
The driver of a vehicle which has collided with, or been in an accident with
any vehicle, person, or property, in such a manner as to cause injury or
damage, shall stop immediately, and render such assistance as may be possible,
and give his true name and residence to the injured person or any other person
requesting the same on behalf of the injured person, or the owner of the
property damaged, and to a policeman, if one is present. The driver of each
vehicle concerned in any such accident shall report to the nearest police
authority promptly after such accident. (Ord. 331, 10-16-1968)
 
Notes
1 1. 625 ILCS 5/11-401 - 5/11-415.
9-8-3: UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE, PERMIT OR ILLINOIS IDENTIFICATION CARD:
It is a violation for any person within the village to:
   (A)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his possession
any canceled, revoked, suspended, fictitious, or fraudulently altered license,
permit or Illinois identification card;
   (B)   Lend his license, permit or Illinois identification card to any other
person or knowingly allow the use thereof by another;
   (C)   Display or represent as his own any license, permit or Illinois
identification card not issued to him;
   (D)   Fail or refuse to surrender to the secretary of state, upon his lawful
demand, any license, permit or Illinois identification card, which has been
suspended, revoked or canceled;
   (E)   Permit any unlawful use of a license, permit or Illinois
identification card issued to him;
   (F)   Submit to an examination or obtain the services of another person to
submit to an examination for the purpose of obtaining a driver's license,
permit or Illinois identification card for some other person;
   (G)   Do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required under the
Illinois motor vehicle act unless such violation is declared to be a felony by
the Illinois motor vehicle act or any other law of this state;
   (H)   Possess or sell any blank license, permit or Illinois identification
card; or
   (I)   Display, or cause or permit to be displayed or represent or cause to
represent any document which purports to be an official driver's license,
permit or Illinois identification card which is not issued by the secretary or
other official driver's license agency in another jurisdiction. (Ord. 331-D, 6-
27-1990)
Any person in violation of this section regarding use of license, permit, or
Illinois identification card shall be guilty of a class A misdemeanor as
defined in the Illinois Compiled Statutes and shall be subject to punishment as
provided in the Illinois Compiled Statutes for violation of a class A
misdemeanor. (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
9-8-4: OPERATION OF UNINSURED MOTOR VEHICLE:
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle unless the motor vehicle is
covered by a liability insurance policy in accordance with section 7-601 of the
Illinois vehicle code.
   (B)   Any person who fails to comply with a request by a law enforcement
officer for display of evidences of insurance, as required under section 7-602
of the Illinois vehicle code, shall be deemed to be operating an uninsured
motor vehicle.
   (C)   Any operator of a motor vehicle subject to registration under the
Illinois vehicle code who is convicted of violating this section is guilty of a
business offense and shall be required to pay a fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00). However, no person charged with violating this section shall be
convicted if such person produces in court satisfactory evidence that at the
time of the arrest the motor vehicle was covered by a liability insurance
policy in accordance with section 7-601 of the Illinois vehicle code. The chief
judge of each circuit may designate an officer of the court to review the
documentation that at the time of arrest the motor vehicle was covered by a
liability insurance policy in accordance with section 7-601 of the Illinois
vehicle code. (Ord. 571, 8-12-1998)
CHAPTER 9
PENALTY AND CONVICTION FEES
SECTION:
9-9-1: Arrests
9-9-2: Prima Facie Proof
9-9-3: Conviction Fees
9-9-1: ARRESTS:
Any person arrested for a violation of any provision of this Title shall be
released upon proper bail being furnished as required by law.
9-9-2: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile which is illegally parked is registered in the name
of a person shall be considered prima facie proof that such person was in
control of the automobile at the time of such violation.
9-9-3: CONVICTION FEES:
The prosecuting Village Attorney shall be entitled to the following fees:
   (A)   A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each conviction of any
violation of any section of Title 9 of the Village Code.
   (B)   All conviction fees required by this Section shall be paid by the
person convicted, in addition to the fine and penalty imposed by the section or
chapter of the specified offense for which he was convicted. (Ord. 481, 3-17-
82)
CHAPTER 10
SCHOOL BUSES
SECTION:
9-10-1: Passing School Bus
9-10-2: School Bus to be Marked
9-10-1: PASSING SCHOOL BUS:
The driver of a vehicle upon any street or highway within the Village, upon
meeting or overtaking, from either direction, any school bus which has stopped
on such street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any
school children, shall stop the vehicle before reaching any such school bus
when there is in operation on said school bus a visible signal as specified by
the State Statutes, and said driver of such vehicle shall not proceed until
such school bus resumes motion, or is signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed, or the visual signals are no longer actuated.
The driver of a vehicle upon any street or highway of which the roadways for
traffic moving in opposite directions are separated by a strip of ground which
is not surfaced or suitable for vehicular traffic need not stop his vehicle
upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on the opposite roadway, and need
not stop his vehicle when driving on a controlled access highway when a school
bus is stopped in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of
the controlled access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross such
controlled access highway.
9-10-2: SCHOOL BUS TO BE MARKED:
No person shall drive or operate any bus upon any street or highway within the
Village when such bus is designated as a "school bus", using visual signals
unless such bus is being used for the transportation of school children, or
necessary delivery of a school bus, or to carry out the immediate function for
which it was designed, nor shall such bus be so designated while carrying other
than school children. (Ord. 232, 12-21-55)
CHAPTER 11
MOTOR VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT AND FEES
SECTION:
9-11-1: Impoundment Of Motor Vehicles Used In Connection With Illegal
Activities
9-11-2: General Regulations
9-11-3: Probable Cause And Notice
9-11-4: Hearing
9-11-5: Administrative Review
9-11-6: Administrative Fee; Disposal Of Vehicles
9-11-7: Vehicle Possession
9-11-1: IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN CONNECTION WITH ILLEGAL
ACTIVITIES:
   (A)   Impoundment: A motor vehicle, operated with the express or implied
permission of the owner of record, that is used in connection with any of the
following violations, or which may jeopardize the public's safety and safe
vehicular movement and in furtherance of public safety or in the exercise by
the Police Department of its community caretaker functions, may be subject to
tow and impoundment by the Village, and the owner of record of said vehicle
shall be liable to the Village for an administrative and processing fee of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any towing and storage fees.
   (B)   Violations:
      1.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission or attempted
commission of any offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and forfeited
pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq.; or
      2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or
intoxicating compounds, in violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501
or a similar provision of this Code; or
      3.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of a felony or in violation of the
provisions of the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes
550/1 et seq.; or
      4.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of any offense in violation of the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100, et seq.; or
      5.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of an offense in violation of unlawful use
of a weapon in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1; aggravated
discharge of a firearm in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1.5;
and unlawful possession of a firearm and firearm ammunition in violation of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-3.1; or
      6.   Driving while driver's license, permit or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, the violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-303; except that vehicles shall not be subject to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving), or
due to failure to comply with emission testing; or
      7.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license
in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, where the period of expiration is greater than one
year; or
      8.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued
a driver's license or permit in violation of section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101, or operating a motor
vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license or permit due to a
person's age; or
      9.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated the offenses of: driving while license is
revoked or suspended, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-303; operating a motor
vehicle without a valid driver's license, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
101; and/or driving under the influence of alcohol, other drugs, intoxicating
compound(s), or a combination thereof, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-501;
or
      10.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in connection with the
commission or attempted commission of any other misdemeanor or felony offense
defined under chapter 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes; or
      11.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing,
or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as
defined by the Cannabis Control Act or the Illinois Controlled Substances Act,
provided, however, that no vehicle shall be subject to impound or forfeiture
solely for the possession of cannabis or cannabis paraphernalia by persons
twenty-one (21) years of age or older in accordance with the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.) or by a registered qualifying
patient or registered designated caregiver as authorized by the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.); or
      12.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense of theft, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/16-1, or retail theft, in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/16-25; or
      13.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in violation of Illinois
Vehicle Code 11-503 (reckless driving), while the vehicle is part of a funeral
procession; or in a manner that interferes with a funeral procession. (Ord.
682A, 1-9-2019; amd. Ord. 898, 1-22-2020)
9-11-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   (A)   This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing
State or Federal laws or Village ordinances.
   (B)   The owner shall be subject to all fees set forth in this chapter in
addition to any penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the
underlying violations.
   (C)   This chapter shall not apply to a vehicle which was stolen at the time
of impoundment so long as the theft was reported to appropriate police
authorities within twenty four (24) hours of its discovery.
   (D)   Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle under this chapter shall be
those approved by the Chief of Police and shall be uniform for all similarly
situated vehicles.
   (E)   Vehicles shall not be impounded where applicable law does not
specifically provide for the forfeiture and towing of the vehicle and an
authorized, lawful and unimpaired driver is available to promptly remove the
vehicle from the location of an arrest. (Ord. 682A, 1-9-2019)
9-11-3: PROBABLE CAUSE AND NOTICE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to tow and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the officer shall
provide for the towing of the vehicle by a wrecker licensed as authorized by
this Code. Prior to towing, the officer shall notify any person identifying
himself as the owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control
of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation and who is physically
present at the scene of the alleged violation that the vehicle will be towed
and impounded. The officer shall inform any present owner and/or person in
control of the vehicle of that person's right to request a hearing to be
conducted under section
9-11-4 of this chapter. An owner may secure release of an impounded vehicle
pending completion of the hearings provided for in section
9-11-4 of this chapter by posting a bond of cash, money order, certified check,
or approved credit card payment service with the Police Department in the
amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and accrued towing and storage
charges. The Police Department shall hold the cash bond, and accrued towing and
storage charges in escrow until such time as a request for hearing would be
untimely, or if a hearing has been timely requested, until the hearing is
completed in conformance with section
9-11-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 682A, 1-9-2019)
9-11-4: HEARING:
Within forty eight (48) hours after a vehicle is towed/impounded pursuant to
this chapter, a representative of the Village shall notify the owner of record
by certified mail, return receipt requested at the address of the owner as it
appears in the records of the Secretary of State, of his or her right to
request a hearing before a Hearing Officer to determine whether the subject
vehicle is eligible for impoundment pursuant to this section. The notice shall
state the penalties that may be imposed if no hearing is requested, including
that a vehicle that is not released by payment of the penalty and fees may be
sold or disposed of by the Village in accordance with applicable law. The owner
of record seeking a hearing must file a written request for a hearing with the
Village no later than fifteen (15) days after the notice was mailed.
Upon receiving a written request for a hearing, the Chief of Police shall
review the file and determine whether the facts of the situation are such that
the Village should dismiss the impoundment charge. If the Chief of Police
determines not to dismiss the impoundment charge upon his or her review, the
hearing shall be conducted by the Hearing Officer appointed by the Mayor under
authority of this Code.
The hearing shall be scheduled and held, unless continued by order of the
Hearing Officer, no later than forty five (45) days after the request for a
hearing has been filed. No less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the
Hearing Officer will notify the owner of record, by mail, of the date, time and
location of the hearing. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity
to be heard at the reconvened hearing. At any time prior to the hearing the
Hearing Officer may, at the request of the Village or the owner, direct
witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of
evidence will not apply during the hearing, but hearsay evidence shall be
admissible only if it is of the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after considering evidence
received during the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance
of the evidence that the vehicle was used in connection with the commission of
an offense set forth in section
9-11-1 of this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the
owner of the vehicle civilly liable to the Village of an administrative and
processing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00). If bond has been posted in
accordance with section
 9-11-6 of this chapter, all sums due the Village and the tow operator for
towing and impoundment fees shall be distributed to the Village and tow
operator, as the case may be. If the Hearing Officer enters an order finding
the owner of record liable to the Village for the administrative fee, any
vehicle still impounded shall continue to be impounded until the owner pays the
administrative fee to the Village plus all applicable towing and storage
charges to the tow operator.
If the Hearing Officer finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the
vehicle was not used in connection with the commission of an offense set forth
in section
9-11-1 of this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall order the immediate return of
the owner's vehicle and of any cash bond and may order a return of towing and
impoundment fees (if said fees were paid in advance of the hearing).
If the owner of record fails to timely request a hearing the Hearing Officer
shall enter a default order in favor of the Village. (Ord. 682A, 1-9-2019)
9-11-5: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A final order entered by a Hearing Officer under section
9-11-4 of this chapter is subject to review under the Administrative Review Act
found at 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (Ord. 682A, 1-9-2019)
9-11-6: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE; DISPOSAL OF VEHICLES:
The administrative fee as imposed pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a
debt due and owing the Village. The debt may be satisfied by the bond posted
pursuant to this chapter or where no bond is posted, by cash, money order,
certified check or approved credit card payment service. If the administrative
penalty and applicable towing and impoundment fees are not paid within thirty
(30) days after the expiration of time for administrative review of the Hearing
Officer's determination or within thirty (30) days after an action seeking
administrative review has been resolved and in favor of the Village, whichever
is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of
in the manner provided for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles under the
Illinois Vehicle Code. (Ord. 682A, 1-9-2019)
9-11-7: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
Except as otherwise provided by law, no owner, lien holder or other person
shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle impounded under this
chapter until the bond and towing and impoundment fees are paid or the
administrative penalty and fees applicable under this chapter have been paid.
Whenever a person with a lien of record against an impounded vehicle has
commenced proceedings to repossess the vehicle, possession of the vehicle shall
be given to that person if she or he agrees in writing to pay to the Village
from proceeds of the sale of the vehicle the administrative fee, plus
applicable towing and storage charges. (Ord. 682A, 1-9-2019)
CHAPTER 12
GOLF CARTS AND OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES
SECTION:
9-12-1: Definitions
9-12-2: Permitted Off-Highway Vehicles
9-12-3: Limitations On Operation
9-12-4: Mandatory Insurance
9-12-5: Safety Equipment
9-12-6: Permit
9-12-7: Additional Regulations
9-12-8: Violations
9-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter the following words or terms are used, they shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
 
                                     A vehicle specifically designed and
                                     intended for the purposes of transporting
                                     one or more persons and their golf clubs
                                     or maintenance equipment while engaged in
GOLF CART:                           the playing of golf, supervising the play
                                     of golf or maintaining the condition of
                                     the grounds of a public or private golf
                                     course (see Section 1-123.9 of the
                                     Illinois Vehicle Code, as amended from
                                     time to time).
NON-HIGHWAY or OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES: A motor vehicle not specifically designed
                                     for use on public roadways and highways.
                                     Any non-highway vehicle other than a golf
                                     cart and a utility task vehicle, including
                                     an all-terrain vehicle ("ATV") (as defined
NON-QUALIFIED OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES:  in Section 1-101.8 of the Illinois Vehicle
                                     Code) and an off-highway motorcycle (as
                                     defined in Section 1-153.1 of the Illinois
                                     Vehicle Code).
                                     Either a golf cart or a utility task
                                     vehicle, as those terms are defined
QUALIFIED OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE:       herein, but shall not include any other
                                     non-highway vehicle or any non-qualified
                                     off-highway vehicle.
                                     Any motorized off-highway device designed
                                     to travel primarily off-highway, 64 inches
                                     or less in width, having a manufacturer's
                                     dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less,
                                     traveling on four (4) or more non-highway
UTILITY TASK VEHICLE:                tires, and designed with a non-straddle
                                     seat, seat belts for use by each occupant,
                                     a steering wheel for steering control, a
                                     tail light, a break light, two headlights,
                                     except equipment such as lawnmowers. (Ord.
                                     893, 10-23-2019)
 
9-12-2: PERMITTED OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES:
Use of qualified off-highway vehicles, being golf carts and utility task
vehicles, shall be permitted on streets and highways under the jurisdiction of
the village and within its corporate boundaries as set forth in this chapter.
Non-qualified off-highway vehicles are specifically excluded from this
provision and are not permitted on streets under the jurisdiction of the
village and within its corporate boundaries. (Ord. 893, 10-23-2019)
9-12-3: LIMITATIONS ON OPERATION:
Subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter, any person with a valid
driver's license may operate a qualified off-highway vehicle on any street or
highway under the jurisdiction of the village where the posted speed limit is
35 miles per hour or less. This section shall not be construed as granting
permission for any person operating a qualified off-highway vehicle to drive
upon any street or highway under the jurisdiction of Groveland Township or
Tazewell County, or to drive upon any street or highway under the jurisdiction
of the Illinois Department of Transportation including, without limitation,
Illinois Route 29.
Notwithstanding the foregoing limitations, a qualified off-highway vehicle
shall be allowed to cross a State highway, municipal street, county highway, or
township road district highway at an intersection controlled by a traffic
control signal, if the operator of the qualified off-highway vehicle makes a
direct crossing at such intersection in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 11 of the Illinois Vehicle Code concerning the Rules of the Road, as
may be amended from time to time, including, but not limited to, making a
complete stop and yielding the right of way to all pedestrians and vehicular
traffic. (Ord. 893, 10-23-2019)
9-12-4: MANDATORY INSURANCE:
Any person who operates a qualified off-highway vehicle under as permitted by
this chapter shall be subject to the mandatory insurance requirements
established under Article VI of Chapter 7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, as may
be amended from time to time. (Ord. 893, 10-23-2019)
9-12-5: SAFETY EQUIPMENT:
No qualified off-highway vehicle may be operated on a street or highway under
the jurisdiction of the village unless, at a minimum, it has the following
safety equipment:
   (A)   Brakes;
   (B)   Steering apparatus;
   (C)   Tires;
   (D)   Rearview mirror;
   (E)   Red reflectorized warning devices on the front and rear;
   (F)   Red or yellow reflectorized warning devices on both sides;
   (G)   A slow moving emblem (as required of other vehicles pursuant to
Section 12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code);
   (H)   A headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of at
least 500 feet (500') to the front;
   (I)   A tail lamp that emits a red light visible from a distance of at least
one hundred feet (100') from the rear;
   (J)   Brake lights;
   (K)   Turn signals;
   (L)   A horn that emits an audible warning signal from a distance of at
least 200 feet (200');
   (M)   A windshield; and
   (N)   A seat belt at each space designated as a seating position for each
occupant. (Ord. 893, 10-23-2019)
9-12-6: PERMIT:
No person shall operate a qualified off-highway vehicle on any street or
highway under the jurisdiction of the village unless a permit has been issued
by the Chief of Police with respect to such vehicle in the manner provided by
this section; provided, however, that a golf cart may be operated without a
permit as part of a special event upon approval of the Village Board. Any
person seeking a permit to operate a qualified off-highway vehicle within the
village shall submit a signed application to the Chief of Police on a form
provided by the village together with a Forty dollar ($40.00) permit
application fee. Such form shall, at a minimum, require the following
information:
   (A)   The name and address of the owner and any operator of the qualified
off-highway vehicle;
   (B)   A copy of a valid driver's license of the owner and any operator of
the qualified off-highway vehicle;
   (C)   The serial number, make, model and description of the qualified off-
highway vehicle;
   (D)   A certificate of insurance verifying that the qualified off-highway
vehicle and any operator is covered by insurance as provided in this chapter;
and
   (E)   A signed waiver of liability to be provided by the village to the
applicant.
Upon receipt of an application for a permit to operate a qualified off-highway
vehicle within the village, the Chief of Police or his designee shall inspect
the qualified off-highway vehicle to determine that the qualified off-highway
vehicle is equipped as required by this chapter and that all such required
equipment is in operational condition. Upon verification that a qualified off-
highway vehicle contains operational safety equipment as required by this
chapter, the Chief of Police shall issue a permit sticker authorizing the
operation of the qualified off-highway vehicle on streets or highways under the
jurisdiction of the village. The driver of any qualified off-highway vehicle
being operated on a street or highway within the jurisdiction of the village
shall affix and maintain the permit sticker issued in accordance with this
chapter on the front windshield of the qualified off-highway vehicle at all
times when it is so operated.
A permit issued under the authority of this section shall expire on December 31
each year, when a change in ownership of the qualified off-highway vehicle
occurs, or upon revocation by the Chief of Police for non-compliance with this
chapter. Permits issued under this chapter shall not be transferrable in the
event of a change of ownership. Permits may be renewed annually in the same
manner as the original permit, including payment of the Forty dollar ($40.00)
permit application fee. (Ord. 893, 10-23-2019)
9-12-7: ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS:
When on a street or highway under the jurisdiction of the village, a qualified
off-highway vehicle shall be operated in accordance with the following
regulations:
   (A)   Any person operating a qualified off-highway vehicle as authorized in
this chapter shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age or older, and possess
a valid driver's license.
   (B)   Passengers or occupants of a qualified off-highway vehicle being
operated as authorized in this chapter that are twelve (12) years of age or
younger, shall be accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult at least
twenty-one (21) years of age or older at all times.
   (C)   The qualified off-highway vehicle shall have its headlights and tail
lamps lighted at all times.
   (D)   Any person operating a qualified off-highway vehicle as authorized in
this chapter shall travel on the street or highway in the same direction as
traffic and as near to the right side of the roadway as possible.
   (E)   All operators, and passengers or occupants of a qualified off-highway
vehicle being operated as authorized in this chapter shall wear a properly
adjusted and fastened seat safety belt at all times; provided, however, that
wearing such seat belt shall not be required under any of the following
circumstances:
      1.   When the operator of a qualified off-highway vehicle makes frequent
stops and leaves the vehicle or delivers property from the vehicle, provided
that the speed of said vehicle shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour
between stops.
      2.   The operator or passenger of a qualified off-highway vehicle
possesses a written statement from a physician that he or she is unable, for
medical or physical reasons, to wear a seat safety belt.
      3.   The operator or passenger of a qualified off-highway vehicle
possesses an official certificate or license endorsement issued by the
appropriate agency in another state or county indicating that he or she is
unable, for medical, physical, or other valid reasons, to wear a seat safety
belt.
      4.   The operator of the qualified off-highway vehicles is operating the
vehicle in reverse.
   (F)   No qualified off-highway vehicle shall be operated on any village
sidewalks.
   (G)   No person shall operate a qualified-off highway vehicle in a careless
or heedless manner so as to be grossly indifferent to the person or property of
other persons, or at a rate of speed greater than will permit him in the
exercise of reasonable care to bring the qualified off-highway vehicle to a
stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
   (H)   No person shall operate a qualified-off highway vehicle on private
property, without the written or verbal consent of the owner or lessee thereof.
Any person operating a qualified-off highway vehicle upon the lands of another
shall stop and identify himself upon the request of the landowner or his duly
authorized representative, and, if requested to do so by the landowner shall
promptly remove the qualified-off highway vehicle from the premises.
   (I)   No person shall operate a qualified-off highway vehicle on village
owned lands, other than village streets or highways under its jurisdiction,
unless such land has been designated for use by qualified-off highway vehicles
following a public hearing conducted by the Village.
   (J)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person operating a
qualified off-highway vehicle on streets or highways under the jurisdiction of
the village shall obey any and all traffic regulations set forth in Title 9 of
the Village Code and Sections 11-1426.1 and 11-1427 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 893, 10-23-2019)
9-12-8: VIOLATIONS:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each day on which a violation occurs or continues. Each separate
occurrence shall be deemed a new offense.
A permit issued under this chapter shall be subject to revocation for at least
one (1) year by the Chief of Police in the event of a violation of the
requirements of Section 11-1426.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Section 11-1427
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, or any of the provisions of this chapter, as the
same may be amended from time to time. A revocation of such permit shall be
made in writing and shall set forth the provision(s) of the state statute or
this chapter that has been violated. No refund of the permit fee is allowed in
the event of the revocation of said permit. The Chief of Police shall determine
if the permit will be reinstated after the one-year revocation. If the Chief of
Police denies reinstatement, the applicant may appeal the decision to the
Village Board. The Village Board's decision on reinstatement is final.
In the event a permit issued under this chapter is revoked due to a failure to
maintain the required liability insurance or the failure of the condition of
the vehicle in compliance with the state statute or this chapter, including,
but not limited to, maintaining the required safety equipment, the Chief of
police or his designee, in his discretion, may reinstate the permit upon
documentation of reinstatement of the required insurance coverage or of the
repair or modification of the vehicle to cure any safety equipment
deficiencies, as applicable. (Ord. 893, 10-23-2019)
TITLE 10
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Short Title
10-1-2: Definitions
10-1-1: SHORT TITLE:
This Title shall be known and may be cited as "The Village of Creve Coeur,
Illinois, Zoning Ordinance 1 ."
 
Notes
1 1. For statute authority re the provisions of this Title see S.H.A. 65 ILCS
  5/11-13-1.
10-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Title, certain words, or terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
All words used in the present tense shall include the future; all words in the
singular number shall include the plural number and all words in the plural
number include the singular number; and the word "building" includes the word
"structure" and "dwelling" includes "residence"; the word "person" includes
"corporation", "copartnership", "association", as well as an "individual"; the
word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive; the word "lot"
includes the words "plat" or "parcel"; the words "used" or "occupied" include
the words "intended", "designed" or "arranged to be used or occupied".
Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or structure on the same lot with
a main building, or portion of the main building occupied or devoted
exclusively to an accessory use. Where an accessory building is attached to the
main building in a substantial manner by a wall or roof, such accessory
building shall be considered part of the main building.
   ACCESSORY USE: A use of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to
the main use of the premises.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, adult-use cannabis craft grower, adult-use cannabis processing
organization, adult-use cannabis infuser organization, adult-use cannabis
dispensing organization, or adult-use cannabis transporting organization.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure, and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport, and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-
1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia, or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et
seq.as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION or INFUSER: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product pursuant to the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION or PROCESSOR: A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product pursuant to the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from
time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION or TRANSPORTER: An organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   ALLEY: Any dedicated or conveyed or other public way affording a secondary
means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic
circulation.
   ALTERATION: Any change, addition, or modification to a structure or type of
occupancy; any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls,
or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be
referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed".
   APARTMENTS: The dwelling units in a multiple dwelling as defined herein:
   (A)   Efficiency Apartment: A dwelling unit of less than three hundred (300)
square feet of floor area consisting of not more than one room in addition to
kitchen and sanitary facilities.
   (B)   One Bedroom Unit: A dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of
at least four hundred (400) square feet consisting of not more than three (3)
rooms in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
   (C)   Two Bedroom Unit: A dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of
at least five hundred (500) square feet, consisting of not more than four (4)
rooms in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
   (D)   Three or More Bedroom Units: A dwelling unit wherein for each room in
addition to the four (4) rooms permitted in a two (2) bedroom unit, there shall
be provided an additional area of one hundred (100) square feet to the minimum
floor area of five hundred (500) square feet in addition to kitchen and
necessary sanitary facilities.
   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE: A place where, along with the normal activities of
a gasoline service station, the following activities may be carried out:
Vehicle body repair, engine rebuilding or repair, undercoating, painting, tire
recapping, upholstery work, and auto glass work.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any premises used for the sale of gasoline and
lubricants; the sale of and fitting of tires, batteries and automobile
supplies; the washing of automobiles; but, not including automobile repairs
requiring machine shop and not including automobile body and/or fender repairs.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a building that is partly or wholly below grade
but so located that the vertical distance from average grade to the floor is
greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A
basement shall not be counted as a story.
   BILLBOARD: Any structure or portion thereof upon which a sign or
advertisement used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything
known to the general public is affixed. This definition does not include any
bulletin boards used to display official court, public official notice, or
church bulletin boards.
   BOARDING HOUSE: A building other than a hotel where, for compensation, meals
and lodging are provided for three (3) but not more than twelve (12) persons.
   BUILDING: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which occasions
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground. When a building is divided into separate parts by
unpierced walls, each part shall be deemed a separate building.
   BUILDING AREA: The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main
grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings exclusive of
uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
   BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is situated.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance measured from the established
grade of the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the
roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the
average height between eaves and ridges of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs; and
to the average height between the lowest point to the highest point on a shed
roof.
   BUILDING FRONT LINE: The vertical face of the building nearest the front
line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and covered porches, whether
enclosed or unenclosed, but does not include steps.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT or ZONE: Any one of the B-1 or B-2 Districts.
   CLUB: An organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of social, fraternal, sports, arts, science, literature, politics,
or the like, but not for profit.
   COURT: An open unoccupied space, other than a yard, and bounded on at least
two (2) sides by a building. A court extending to the front yard or front lot
line or to the rear yard or rear lot line is an "outer court". Any other court
is an "inner court".
   COVERAGE: The percentage of the lot area covered by the building area.
   CRTA: The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1 et seq.), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb front of the building measured
at the center of such front. Where no curb has been established, the Village
Engineer shall establish such curb or its equivalent for the purpose of this
Title.
   DISTRICT: An area or section of the village in which the regulations
regarding use of buildings and premises, height of buildings, and the yard
space about structures are uniform and set apart and distinct from other areas
or sections having different regulations and all of which areas or sections are
designated by different delineations upon the "district map" which is made a
part of this title and is attested and on file in the office of the clerk.
   DISTRICT MAP: A delineation of the boundaries of areas or divisions of the
village for the purpose of regulating, limiting and determining the height and
bulk of buildings, the intensity of the use of lot areas, the areas of open
spaces within and surrounding buildings for the purpose of classifying,
regulating and restricting the location of trades and industries, and buildings
designed for specified industrial, business, and residential uses, and which
map is attested and is on file in the office of the village board.
   DRIVE-IN: A business establishment so developed that its retail or service
character is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for
motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than
within a building or structure.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS: Any establishment where food, frozen dessert, and/or
beverages are sold to customers for the consumption in an automobile parked
upon the premises, or where other facilities located outside a building are
provided for the use of customers for the purpose of consumption of food,
frozen dessert, and/or beverages on the premises outside the building.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE: A building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for
occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other.
      Apartment Building: A residential structure containing three (3) or more
dwelling units, but not a row house or terrace.
      Row House: A two-story row of three (3) or more attached one- family
dwellings, not more than two (2) rooms deep, each unit of which extends from
the foundation or basement to the roof.
      Terrace: A one- or two-story row of three (3) or more attached one-family
dwellings, not more than two (2) rooms deep, and having the total dwelling
space on one floor.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for and occupied
exclusively by one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two
(2) families, living independently of each other.
   DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms, including a kitchen or kitchenette,
located within a residence providing complete living facilities for one family
and containing facilities and equipment for living, sleeping, cooking and
eating.
   EQUIPMENT SALES, LEASING, OR RENTAL: The sale, servicing, repair, and rental
of personal property, tools, equipment, and vehicles, for activities including
residential, agricultural, construction, industrial, maintenance, municipal,
and warehouse uses.
Equipment sales, leasing, or rental does not include the sale, leasing, or
rental, of any vehicles that are required to be registered as a motor vehicle
with the state of Illinois; any motorized motor home, mini-motor home, or truck
camper; and the sale of new or used vehicles that require a license from the
state of Illinois.
Equipment sales, leasing, or rental also does not include the rental, sale, or
leasing, of semitrailers, storage or shipping containers, portable storage
containers, garbage and trash receptacles, or recycling bins or containers.
   ERECTED: Includes built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or
any physical operations on the premises required for the construction.
Excavation, fill, drainage, installation of utilities, and the like, shall be
considered a part of erection.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance
by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface or
overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel, or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories
in connection therewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for
the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or Municipal departments
for the general public health, safety or welfare.
   FAMILY: A "family" shall consist of a group of persons living in a single
dwelling who maintain a common household and a single housekeeping unit. In
families where children are present, a family shall be limited to two (2)
adults (excluding domestic help) and their direct lineal descendants which
include adopted and foster children. Where no children are present, a family
shall be limited to four (4) related adults.
   FARM: An area which is used for the growing of the usual farm products such
as vegetables, fruit, trees, and grain, and their storage on the area, as well
as for the raising thereon the usual farm poultry and farm animals for the use
or consumption of the person or persons operating the farm. The term "farming"
includes the operating of the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing
the produce; providing, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses
shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities, and providing
further, that farming does not include the feeding of garbage or offal to swine
or other animals.
   FILLING STATION: Any premises used for the sale of gasoline and lubricants;
the sale of and fitting of tires, batteries, and automobile supplies; the
washing of automobiles; but, not including automobile repairs requiring machine
shop and not including automobile body and/or fender repairs.
   FLOOR AREA: For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in
a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of
the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls.
The floor area measurement is breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches.
   FLOOR AREA RATIO: The ratio of the floor area of a building to its lot area.
For example, when a floor area ratio of four-tenths (0.4) is specified, the
floor area of a building constructed on a lot of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in area is limited to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) square feet. The
number of stories being optional, the building area may be four thousand
(4,000) square feet for one story; two thousand (2,000) square feet for each of
two (2) stories, and so forth. The purpose of this ratio is to control the bulk
of buildings.
   FLOOR AREA, USABLE: For the purposes of computing parking, the area is that
area used for, or intended to be used for, the sale of merchandise or services
or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is
used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of
merchandise, or for utilities, shall be excluded from this computation of
"usable floor area". Measurement of floor area shall be the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the building measured from the interior faces of the
exterior walls. For the purposes of computing parking for those uses not
enclosed within a building, the area used for the sale of merchandise, display
of merchandise, and/or area used to serve patrons or clients shall be measured
to determine necessary parking spaces.
   FRONTAGE: All property on one side of a street or place between two (2)
intersecting streets or places, crossing or terminating, measured along the
line of the street or place; if the street or place is dead-ended, then all of
the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street or place and
the dead end of the street or place.
   GRADE: The average of the elevations of the surface of the ground measured
at all of the corners of a building.
   GREENBELT: A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the
planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip
in carrying out the requirements of this title.
   HOME OCCUPATION: An occupation or profession where goods or services are
provided to the general public from property within a residential district. A
home occupation permit shall be required for any occupation where goods or
services are provided to customers from property within a residential district.
All home occupations, regardless of whether a permit is required, must comply
with all regulations set forth under the special uses for residential
districts.
   HOTEL: A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of
individuals, who are lodged with or without meals, and in which there are more
than fifteen (15) sleeping rooms usually occupied singly and no provision is
made for cooking in any individual room or apartment.
   INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT OR ZONE: Any one or all of the I-1 and I-2 districts.
   INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a nonprofit
organization for public use.
   JUNKYARD: An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought
and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including,
but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and
bottles. A "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area
of more than two hundred (200) square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment
of junk, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed
buildings.
   KENNEL, COMMERCIAL: Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs or
cats are either permanently or temporarily kept or boarded for commercial
purposes. A commercial kennel must be located in zoning districts permitting
such a use.
   LOADING SPACE: An off street space on the same lot with a building, or a
group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading
and unloading merchandise or materials.
   LODGING HOUSE: A building or place where lodging is provided or which is
equipped regularly to provide lodging by prearrangement for a definite period,
for compensation, for three (3) or more but not exceeding twelve (12)
individuals, not open to transient guests, in contradistinction to hotels open
to transients.
   LOT: The lot, when used alone, shall mean a zoning lot unless the context of
this title clearly indicates otherwise.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE: The arterial street which is intended to serve as a
large volume trafficway for both the immediate village area and the region
beyond, and may be designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway,
expressway, or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic
structure of the street plan.
   MASTER PLAN: The comprehensive plan including graphic and written proposals
indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings
and all physical development of the village and includes any unit or part of
such plan or parts thereof. Such plan may or may not be adopted by the plan
commission and/or the village board.
   MEZZANINE: An intermediate floor in any story occupying an area not to
exceed one-third (1/3) of the floor area of such story.
   MOBILE HOME: Any structure used for living, sleeping, business or storage
purposes, equipped with a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation which has been or could be
equipped with wheels or other devices for transporting the structure from place
to place whether by motive power or other means.
   MOBILE HOME PARK: Any plot of ground upon which twenty five (25) or more
trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located.
   MODULAR DWELLING: A building assembly or system of building subassemblies
designated for habitation as a dwelling for one or more persons for residential
purposes including the necessary electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating,
and other service systems, which is of closed or open construction and which is
made or assembled by a manufacturer on or off the building site, for
installation, or assembly and installation on the building site with a
permanent foundation.
   MOTEL: A series of attached, semidetached, or detached rental units
containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide overnight
lodging and are offered to the public for compensation and shall cater
primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. The term "motel" includes
buildings designed as auto courts, tourist courts, motor hotels, motor lodges
and similar terms.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING: A building or portion thereof, existing at the
effective date of this title, or amendments thereto, that does not conform to
the provisions of this title nor to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located.
   NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME: A structure with sleeping rooms where persons
are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire.
   OCCUPIED: Includes the meaning of "intent", designed or arranged for
occupancy.
   OFF STREET PARKING LOT: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along
with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering so as to provide access for
entrance and exit for the parking of more than two (2) automobiles.
   OPEN FRONT STORE: A business establishment, other than a drive-in or
gasoline service station, so developed that service to the patron may be
extended beyond the walls of the building, not requiring the patron to enter
said building.
   PARKING SPACE: An area of definite length and width and shall be exclusive
of drives, driveways, aisles or entrances giving access thereto and shall be
fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board
or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or
municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal,
communication, telegraph, transportation or water.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicular type portable structure (marine or
terrain) without a permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven,
and that is primarily designed for recreational, camping, and travel use,
including, but not limited to: camping trailers, motor homes, mini-motor homes,
travel trailers, truck campers, van campers, stock cars, boats, snowmobiles,
all-terrain vehicles, golf carts, or other such item used primarily for
recreational purposes. "Recreational vehicle" also includes trailers designed
to transport materials other than people, including, but not limited to, boats,
vehicles, snowmobiles and other forms of cargo. When recreational vehicles are
affixed to a trailer, the vehicles and trailer shall be considered one
recreational vehicle.
   SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS: Shops wherein the major activities are the repair
and maintenance of wearing apparel, sporting goods, and articles for the use in
the home including household appliances.
   SETBACK: The distance required to obtain front, side or rear yard open space
provisions of this title.
   SIGN: The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or
trademarks by which anything is made known (other than billboards) such as are
used to show an individual firm, profession or business and are visible to the
general public.
   SPECIAL USES: This zoning title is based upon the division of the village
into districts within which districts the use of land and buildings and the
location of structures in relation to the land are substantially uniform. It is
recognized, however, that there are special uses which, because of their unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified in any particular district
without consideration in each case, of the effect such uses will have on
neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at a particular
location. Such special uses fall into two (2) general categories:
   (A)   Uses either municipally operated, or operated by publicly regulating
utilities or uses traditionally affected with a public interest.
   (B)   Uses entirely private in character but of such an unusual nature that
their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their effect
upon neighboring properties or public facilities.
   STABLE: A building accommodating one or more horses.
   STORY: That part of a building (except a "mezzanine" as defined herein)
included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or
if there is no floor above, then the ceiling when more than fifty percent (50%)
by cubic content is below the height level of the adjoining ground.
   STORY, HALF: An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, the floor area
of which, at a height of four feet (4') above the floor, does not exceed one-
half (1/2) of the floor area in the story directly below, and the height above
at least two hundred (200) square feet of floor space is seven feet six inches
(7'6").
   STREET: All property dedicated or intended for public or private street,
highway, freeway or roadway purposes or subject to easements therefor.
   STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
   STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, that use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground, including, but without limiting, the generality of the
foregoing, advertising signs, billboard backstops for tennis courts and
pergolas.
   TEMPORARY BUILDING OR USE: A structure or use permitted by the board of
appeals to exist during periods of construction of the main building or use, or
for special events.
   USE: The purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged or
intended to be used, or for which land or building is or may be occupied.
   USE, MAIN: The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the
principal purpose for which the premises exist.
   VEHICLE: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported.
   VEHICLE SALES AND RENTAL: The sale, rental, or display of vehicles, boats,
trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, or farm equipment, not including
salvage operations or scrap operations.
   WALL (FENCE): An obscuring structure of definite height and location to
serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this title.
   YARD: An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining
the width of a side yard, or the depth of a rear yard, the mean horizontal
distance between the lot line and main building shall be used.
   YARD, FRONT: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot
lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and
the main building or any projection thereto other than the projection of the
usual steps.
   YARD, REAR: A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between the
side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and rear of the main building or any projections other than steps. On
corner lots, the rear yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon
which the lot has its least dimension. On both corner lots and interior, the
rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front
yard.
   YARD, SIDE: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot
and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line.
   ZONING EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES:
      Exception: A use permitted only after review of an application by the
zoning board or the village board; such review being necessary because the
provisions of this title covering conditions, precedent or subsequent, are not
precise enough to all applications without interpretation, and such review is
required by this title.
      Variance: A modification of the literal provisions of this zoning title
granted when strict enforcement of this zoning title would cause undue hardship
owing to circumstances unique in the individual property on which the variance
is granted.
The crucial points of variance are: undue hardship and unique circumstances
applying to the property. A variance is not a justification unless these
elements are present in the case.
The "exception" differs from the "variance" in several respects. An exception
does not require "undue hardship" in order to be allowable. The exceptions that
are found in this title appear as "special uses" on review by the village board
or zoning board. These land uses could not be conveniently allocated to one
zone or another, or the effects of such uses could not be definitely foreseen
as of a given time. The general characteristics of these uses include one or
more of the following:
   (A)   They require large areas.
   (B)   They are infrequent.
   (C)   They sometimes create an unusual amount of traffic. (Ord. 482, 4-7-
1982; amd. Ord. 550-C, 5-10-1995; Ord. 482-T, 2-26-1997; Ord. 482X, 7-9-1997;
Ord. 646, 8-8-2007; Ord. 740, 3-13-2013; Ord. 758, 12-11-2013; Ord. 880, 7-10-
2019 ; Ord. 895, 11-13-2019 )
CHAPTER 2
DISTRICTS; MAP
SECTION:
10-2-1: Districts
10-2-2: Boundaries
10-2-3: Zoning of Vacated Areas
10-2-4: Zoning of Annexed Areas
10-2-5: District Requirements
10-2-1: DISTRICTS:
For the purpose of this Title, the Village is hereby divided into the following
districts:
A-1  Agriculture District
R-1  One-Family Residential District
R-2  One-Family Residential District
R-3  One-Family Residential District
R-4  One-Family Residential District
R-T  One-Family Mobile Home Park Residential District
RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District
RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District
O-1  Office Building District
B-1  Local Business District
B-2  Central Business District
1-1  Light Industrial District
1-2  Heavy Industrial District
P-1  Vehicular Parking District
C    Conservation District
 
10-2-2: BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the Zoning
Map, Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois, Zoning Title, referred to herein, and
which Map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon
shall be as much a part of this Title as if fully described herein.
   (A)   Unless shown otherwise, the boundaries of the districts are lot lines,
the center lines of streets, alleys, roads, or such lines extended, and the
corporate limits of the Village. Where the corporate line extends to the center
of the Illinois River, the zoning districts adjacent to the River shall be
deemed to extend to the center.
   (B)   Where unzoned property may exist, or where, due to the scale, lack of
detail, or illegibility of the Zoning Map referred to herein, there is any
uncertainty, or contradiction, or conflict as to the intended location of any
district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location
of district boundary lines shall be determined, upon written application by the
Zoning Board or upon its own motion.
10-2-3: ZONING OF VACATED AREAS:
Whenever any street, alley or other public way, within the Village, shall be
vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof shall
automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which
it attaches.
10-2-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED AREAS:
All territory which may be hereafter annexed to the Village from the
unincorporated area of the County shall automatically be classified in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
Classification in County Classification in Village
Agricultural District    A-1 Agricultural District
Conservation District    C Conservation District
Residential District     R-1 One-Family Residential District
Commercial District      B-2 General Business District
Industrial District      I-2 Heavy Industrial District
 
The Zoning Map shall be automatically amended to include such annexed land in
the district as outlined above.
10-2-5: DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings and uses in any district shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 13, "General Exceptions" and Chapter 14, "General Provisions". (Ord.
482, 4-7-82)
CHAPTER 3
A-1 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-3-1: Uses Permitted
10-3-2: Area And Bulk Requirements
10-3-3: Special Setbacks For Certain Permitted Uses
10-3-4: Special Uses Permitted
10-3-1: USES PERMITTED:
   (A)   Intentionally deleted, see Section
10-3-4 of this Chapter.
   (B)   Intentionally deleted, see Section
10-3-4 of this Chapter.
   (C)   Intentionally deleted, see Section
10-3-4 of this Chapter. (Ord. 558, 8-27-1997)
   (D)   Gardening, including truck farming, subject to the requirements of
Section
10-3-3 of this Chapter.
   (E)   Greenhouses.
   (F)   Nurseries, subject to the requirements of Section
10-3-3 of this Chapter.
   (G)   Orchards, subject to the requirements of Section
10-3-3 of this Chapter.
   (H)   Roadside stands for sale of only those farm products produced on the
premises on which the stand is located; provided, that a parking area for not
less than six (6) customers' vehicles shall be provided on the private property
within parking area and access drives surfaced with compact crushed stone or
superior surfacing. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
   (I)   One-family detached dwellings of not less than one thousand five
hundred twenty (1,520) square feet. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982; amd. Ord. 550, 5-10-
1995)
   (J)   Uses similar and/or accessory to the above permitted uses.
   (K)   Parks and recreation areas owned or operated by a unit of government.
(Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-3-2: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See Section 10-12-3 of this Title, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height
and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and
maximum density permitted. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-3-3: SPECIAL SETBACKS FOR CERTAIN PERMITTED USES:
The following setbacks shall be observed from a specified use hereafter
established or relocated:
   (A)   Apiaries shall be at least one hundred feet (100') from any property
line.
   (B)   Any crop requiring aerial spraying more than three feet (3') above the
ground shall be located at least two hundred feet (200') from the side or rear
lot lines and one hundred fifty feet (150') from any front lot line. (Ord. 482,
4-7-1982)
10-3-4: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be subject to review of and approval of the conditions
herein imposed and subject to review of and approval of the site plans and the
use by the Village Board after a hearing and recommendation is received from
the Zoning Board for each use:
   (A)   Apiaries, subject to the requirements of Section
10-3-3 of this Chapter.
   (B)   Aviaries.
   (C)   Cattle, horses, sheep, or poultry raising, but not including the
raising of hogs, nor any confinement feeding operation. (Ord. 558, 8-27-1997)
CHAPTER 3A
C CONSERVATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-3A-1: Preamble
10-3A-2: Principal Uses Permitted
10-3A-3: Special Uses Permitted
10-3A-4: Standards for C Conservation District Special Uses
10-3A-1: PREAMBLE:
The C Conservation District is designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health.
   (B)   Minimize public and private property damage.
   (C)   Protect individuals from buying lands and structures which are
unsuited for intended purposes because of flood hazards.
   (D)   Minimize surface and ground-water.
   (E)   Control development which will, when acting alone or in combination
with similar developments, create an unjustified demand for public investment
in flood-control works by requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including
public facilities which serve such uses, shall be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction.
   (F)   Control development which will, when acting alone or in combination
with similar development, cause flood losses if public streets, sewer, water
and other utilities must be extended below the flood level to serve the
development.
   (G)   Control development which will, when acting alone or in combination
with similar development, create an additional burden to the public to pay the
costs of rescue, relief, emergency preparedness measures, sandbagging, pumping
and temporary dikes or levees.
   (H)   Control development which will, when acting alone or in combination
with similar development, create an additional burden to the public for
business interruptions, factory closings, disruption of transportation routes,
interference with utility services, and other factors that will result in loss
of wages, sales, production and tax write-offs.
   (I)   Provide for public awareness of the flooding potential.
   (J)   Help maintain a stable tax base by the preservation or enhancement of
property values for future flood-plain development. In addition, development of
future flood-blight areas on flood plains will be minimized and property values
and the tax base adjacent to the flood plain will be preserved.
10-3A-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In a C Conservation District no building or land shall be used and no building
shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless
otherwise provided in this Ordinance, provided that no filling, diking,
leveeing shall be permitted, nor the erection of any building for the housing
of persons, animals or chattel are located below elevation four hundred sixty
feet (460') above mean sea level USGS datum of the ground as it exists on the
date of the passage of this amendment:
   (A)   The growing of field crops, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture,
viticulture, truck farming, pasture, grazing, forestry, sod farming and wild
crop harvesting.
   (B)   Private and public recreational uses, such as golf courses, driving
ranges, archery ranges, tennis courts, picnic grounds, boat landing ramps,
marinas.
   (C)   Private and public parks, wildlife and native preserves.
   (D)   Navigational aids, other than channel markers, which markers are
deemed to be exempt from these zoning regulations.
10-3A-3: SPECIAL USES PERMITTED:
The following uses may be permitted, subject to the conditions herein imposed
and subject to review of and approval of the site plans and the use by the
Village Board after a hearing and recommendation is received from the Zoning
Board for each use:
   (A)   Any of the uses enumerated in Section
 10-3A-2, if the use involves a building below elevation four hundred sixty
feet (460') USGS datum.
   (B)   Any of the uses enumerated in Section
 10-3A-2, if the use involves any filling, diking or leveeing of lands below
elevation four hundred sixty feet (460') USGS datum.
10-3A-4: STANDARDS FOR C CONSERVATION DISTRICT SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   All uses:
No structure (temporary or permanent), fill (including fill for roads and
levees) deposit, obstruction, storage of materials or equipment, or other use
may be allowed as a special-exception use which, acting alone or in combination
with existing or future uses, unduly affects the capacity of the floodway or
unduly increases flood heights. Consideration of the effects of a proposed use
shall be based on a reasonable assumption that there will be an equal degree of
encroachment extending for a significant reach on both sides of the river.
   (B)   Fill:
      1.   Any fill proposed to be deposited must be shown to have some
beneficial purpose and the amount thereof not greater than is necessary to
achieve that purpose, as demonstrated by a plan submitted by the owner showing
the uses to which the filled land will be put and the final dimensions of the
proposed fill or other materials.
      2.   Such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion by
riprap, vegetation cover, or bulkheading.
   (C)   Structures (temporary or permanent):
      1.   Structures shall not be designed for human habitation.
      2.   Structures shall have a low flood damage potential.
      3.   The structure or structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and
placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow
of flood water.
         (a)   Whenever possible, structure shall be constructed with the
longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and
         (b)   So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately
on the same flood-flow lines as those of adjoining structures.
      4.   Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may
result in damage to other structures, restriction of bridge openings and other
narrow sections of the river; and
      5.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
constructed at or above the regulatory flood-protection elevation for the
particular area, or floodproofed.
   (D)   Storage of Material and Equipment:
      1.   The storage and processing of materials, that are in time of
flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal
or plant life is prohibited.
      2.   Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject
to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if
readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warnings.
(Ord. 482, 4-7-82)
CHAPTER 4
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-4-1: Purpose
10-4-2: Principal Uses Permitted
10-4-3: Special Uses
10-4-4: Area And Bulk Requirements
10-4-5: R-4 One-Family Residential Districts
10-4-6: Fencing
10-4-1: PURPOSE:
These residence districts are designed to provide for one- family dwelling
sites and residentially related uses in keeping with the density character of
the village. The preservation of the natural terrain and the standards under
which the community has had its development take place is reflected in the
controls set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-4-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In a one-family residential district (R-1 through R-4) no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this title:
One-family detached dwellings with not less than a 4/12 pitch roof for the
dwelling and accessory buildings, and of not less than one thousand two hundred
fifty (1,250) square feet for R-1 through R-3 districts, and of not less than
nine hundred twelve (912) square feet for R-4 districts.
Publicly owned and operated parks and parkways.
Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the above
permitted uses. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982; amd. Ord. 550, 5-10-1995; Ord. 550E, 6-9-
1999)
10-4-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted, subject to the conditions herein imposed
and subject to the review of and approval of the site plan and the use by the
village board after a hearing and recommendation is received from the zoning
board for each use:
   (A)   Utility and public service facilities and uses (without storage yards)
when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said facilities within
the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity.
   (B)   Golf courses, country clubs, private recreational areas, and
institutional recreation centers all subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Any use developed herein and requiring a structure shall have said
structure so located on the site as not to be closer than one hundred feet
(100') from the lot line of any adjacent residential land.
      2.   All ingress and egress from said site shall be directly onto a major
thoroughfare.
      3.   The off street parking and general site layout and its relationship
to all adjacent lot lines shall be reviewed by the village board and zoning
board who may impose any reasonable restrictions or requirements so as to
ensure that adjacent residential areas will be adequately protected.
   (C)   Swimming pool clubs when incorporated as a nonprofit club or
organization maintaining and operating a swimming pool with specified
limitation of members, either by subdivision, or other specified area or the
exclusive use of members and their guests, all subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Front, side and rear yards shall be at least eighty feet (80') wide,
except on those sides adjacent to nonresidential districts, and shall be
landscaped in trees, shrubs, grass and terrace areas. All such landscaping
shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or
structures permitted in these yards, except for required entrance drives and
those walls and/or fences used to obscure the use from abutting residential
districts.
      2.   Buildings erected on the premises shall not exceed two (2) stories
in height.
      3.   All lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so
arranged as to direct the light away from all residential lands which adjoin
the site and abutting streets.
      4.   Whenever the parking plan is so laid out as to beam automobile
headlights toward any residential land, an obscuring wall or fence, at least
four feet six inches (4'6") in height, shall be provided along that entire side
of the parking area.
      5.   Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this title, said pool
area shall be provided with an approved protective fence, six feet (6') or more
in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate.
      6.   Off street parking shall be provided in the ratio of one parking
space for at least one-half (1/2) of the total member families or individual
members living outside a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') of the club
property. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
   (D)   Group occupancy of more than two (2) unrelated or four (4) related
adults shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   A group of more than four (4) adults, the composition of which does
not constitute a "family" as defined by this title, shall not be approved
unless the written consent is first obtained from the adjoining property
owners.
      2.   There is sufficient off street parking to accommodate not to exceed
three (3) vehicles.
      3.   The proposed group occupancy is not within six hundred feet (600')
of another existing group occupancy which requires a special use permit.
      4.   The proposed use will not require or include structural alterations
as that term is defined in the BOCA basic building code or other building code
adopted by the village.
      5.   The structure meets the requirements of the village's housing,
building and fire codes, as set forth in this code or the codes adopted by
references herein.
      6.   There shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) square feet of
bedroom space for every two (2) occupants.
      7.   A group occupancy permit may be revoked in the event the building
inspector determines that it has not been operated in conformity with the above
standards or other requirements of this title. An appeal of any such revocation
shall be heard by the zoning board of appeals of the village. (Ord. 482-U, 2-
26-1997)
   (E)   Home occupations when such use is not in conflict with the overall
residential character of the area, and subject to the following:
      1.   No persons outside of residents of the dwelling unit shall be
employed therein.
      2.   There shall be no exterior display other than one nonilluminated
nameplate, not more than one square foot in area.
      3.   The occupation shall not require the use of a vehicle requiring a
commercial license.
      4.   Off street parking requirements of section
10-14-5 of this title shall be provided.
      5.   No more than fifty percent (50%) of the first floor area of the
dwelling or an equivalent area of the ground floor shall be so used. (Ord. 482-
A, 3-2-1983)
      6.   Prior to the establishment of such home occupation, application
shall be made to the zoning board, setting forth the exact nature, type, and
character of the proposed home occupation, together with any and all plans for
preparing the dwelling for such use, and shall, in addition, register such
proposed type of home occupation. Thereupon the zoning board shall investigate
or cause to be investigated the circumstances and attitudes of the neighborhood
prior to granting approval of or the rejection of the application.
The application and/or registration for permission to conduct such business
shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be established annually by the
village board and published in the office of the village clerk. A home business
must be registered and the fee must be paid annually. No registry nor right or
privilege shall be transferable, nor shall such home occupation be permitted to
be conducted by anyone other than the original applicant. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
      7.   The building inspector may revoke a home occupation permit upon
giving the owner and any interested persons who applied for the use at least
ten (10) days' written notice of the grounds for revocation and the opportunity
for an appeal before the zoning board of appeals at which time they may present
evidence bearing upon the question and cross examination of witnesses. The
grounds for which a permit may be revoked are:
         (a)   The owner or interested person applying for the use has
knowingly furnished false or misleading information or withheld relevant
information on any application for any use or knowingly suffered or caused
another to furnish or withhold such information on his or her behalf;
         (b)   The owner, his/her agent, employee, officer, tenant, licensee or
occupant has violated any of the provisions of the zoning ordinance or the
standards required to obtain the permit, or that the property no longer
complies with the standards necessary to obtain a permit; provided, however,
that the building inspector shall give at least seven (7) days' prior written
notice to the owner of the alleged violation or manner in which the property no
longer complies with the standards with the opportunity to correct the problem
during said time.
Appeals from any decision of the building inspector concerning the granting or
revocation of a use with administrative approval shall be to the zoning board
of appeals. Filing of an appeal from the decision of the building inspector to
revoke a permit will stay his/her decision pending the decision of the zoning
board of appeals.
      8.   The home occupation permit shall expire when:
         (a)   There is a change in the home occupation;
         (b)   There is a change in ownership of the residence;
         (c)   The person performing the occupation or profession no longer
resides in the residence;
         (d)   The home occupation ceases for one year or longer; or
         (e)   The annual registration fee has not been paid. (Ord. 482-S, 9-
11-1996)
   (F)   Funeral homes subject to the following conditions:
      1.   Signs when lighted shall be shielded from abutting residences.
      2.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area.
      3.   All yard setback requirements for residences in the district in
which such use is located shall be complied with.
      4.   Off street parking as required in section
10-14-5 of this title shall be provided.
      5.   Service areas shall be screened from abutting residences by means of
walls, fences or planting.
   (G)   Two-family dwellings in the R-3 district only, provided the lot shall
have the area at least six thousand seven hundred twenty (6,720) square feet
and a lot width of at least seventy feet (70').
   (H)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above
permitted uses.
   (I)   Churches.
   (J)   Municipal buildings and uses. Public, parochial and other private
elementary, intermediate and/or high schools offering courses in general
education and not operated for profit.
   (K)   Cemeteries. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
   (L)   Modular dwellings on any lot with less than eighty feet (80')
frontage. (Ord. 550, 5-10-1995)
10-4-4: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See section 10-12-3, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use,
and maximum density permitted. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-4-5: R-4 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Single-family residences and their accessory buildings only shall be permitted
in this area. Modular dwellings shall be permitted in this area as a special
use. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982; amd. Ord. 550, 5-10-1995)
10-4-6: FENCING:
This section is intended to provide for fences in residential areas in an
attractive, safe and functional manner. All fencing requires a building permit.
The following general conditions shall apply:
   (A)   Fence Construction: Fences shall be constructed such that vertical
and/or horizontal supports and cross members are facing the interior of the
lot. The decorative side of one-sided decorative fencing shall face away from
the property.
   (B)   Fencing Materials: Fence materials shall allow for all of the standard
fencing options, including standard wood fencing material, decorative metal,
chain link, vinyl and composite. Any other materials will require Zoning Board
approval. All fencing materials for a property will remain consistent, uniform
appearance for the entire fence, except for shared fencing.
   (C)   Walls Used as Fences or Enclosures: Any wall used as a fence or
enclosure shall require a building permit and shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the residential building code. It shall be a general requirement
for development or construction of any such wall that a site plan be presented
to the Zoning Board prior to the issuance of a building permit. The site plan
shall conform to the applicable requirements of and shall be reviewed pursuant
to the requirements of subsection
10-9-1(C) of this title.
   (D)   Fencing Placing and Setbacks:
      1.   Fencing parallel to a street without a sidewalk must be 10 feet from
the curbing or edge of the road.
      2.   Fencing parallel to a street with a sidewalk must be 3 feet from the
sidewalk.
      3.   Fencing parallel to an alley must be 4 feet from the edge of the
alley.
      4.   Fencing along the property line dividing one lot from another lot
can be placed directly on the property line.
      5.   Any placement, including those listed above, that causes traffic
visibility issues will not be allowed.
      6.   If adjacent properties each want their own fence along the same
property line, there must be a mowers width (30 inches) between fences to allow
for maintenance. If the first fence is installed directly on the property line,
the second fence will need to be a mowers width away to allow for maintenance.
      7.   Any other placement will require Zoning Board approval.
   (E)   Fencing Type and Height and Yard Descriptions: Unless a variance is
granted by the Zoning Board, the following apply:
      1.   A front yard is a yard extending across the front of a lot between
the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
street line and the main building or any projection thereto other than the
projection of the usual steps. The height of a front yard fence shall not
exceed four feet (4') and shall be at least thirty percent (30%) open in
design. For example, chain linked fencing is seventy percent (70%) to ninety
percent (90%) open in design, and picket fencing is thirty percent (30%) to
fifty percent (50%) open in design.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1147f5e2e9733f6b2c310ca34bc981edbce4a658/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2469.png]
      2.   A side yard is a yard between the main building and the side line of
the lot and extending from the front yard line to the rear yard line. A side
yard fence shall not exceed four feet (4') in height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1147f5e2e9733f6b2c310ca34bc981edbce4a658/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2471.png]
      3.   A rear yard is defined as a yard extending across the rear of a lot,
measured between the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance
between the rear lot line and rear of the main building or any projections
other than steps. A rear yard fence may not exceed six feet (6') in height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1147f5e2e9733f6b2c310ca34bc981edbce4a658/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2473.png]
   (F)   Securing of Access to Swimming Pools: Every person in control of land
on which there is situated a swimming pool, which contains up to twelve inches
(12") of water in depth at any point shall at no time leave the same unattended
while containing such water. Upon the occurrence of the pool being no longer
attended, the same shall be emptied, and the pool container shall be turned
upside down.
   Every person in control of land on which there is situated a swimming pool
which contains more than twelve inches (12") but less than three feet (3') of
water in depth at any point shall maintain a secure cover of such strength as
to prevent the access by any person, animal or thing in and to the interior of
said swimming pool, and shall be of a sufficient strength to hold a weight of
not less than seventy five (75) pounds.
   Every person in control of land on which there is situated a swimming pool
which contains three feet (3') or more of water in depth at any point shall
erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure either surrounding their
property or pool area, sufficient to make such body of water inaccessible to
persons. If the enclosure is to surround all or part of the land on which the
pool is situated, the enclosure, including gates therein, shall be constructed
to a height of six feet (6') above the underlying ground. If the enclosure is
to be constructed on a deck or walkway surrounding an aboveground pool, the
enclosure, including gates therein, shall be constructed to a height of four
feet (4') above the underlying deck or walkway surrounding the aboveground
pool, provided that any such enclosure of an aboveground pool shall not exceed
eight feet (8') in height above the underlying ground. All gates shall be self-
closing, lockable, and self-latching, which latches shall be placed four feet
(4') above the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the
outside to small children. Such enclosure shall include all opportunities to
access the pool.
   These requirements shall apply to all swimming pools existing on the date
that this subsection becomes law, as well as swimming pools which are placed on
any property within the village subsequent to this subsection becoming law;
provided that all swimming pools existing or under construction prior to the
enactment of this subsection shall be enclosed within six (6) months after the
effective date of this subsection, and swimming pools located on land annexed
to the village shall be enclosed within three (3) months after annexation.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of land, or person in control of land or
swimming pool thereon to fail to comply with the requirements hereof. Each day
of noncompliance shall constitute and be a separate offense, upon conviction
for which such individual shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (G)   Standards for the Granting of a Variation of Fence Height or Setback
Requirements: A variance may be granted only after the following findings have
been made:
      1.   That the proposed fence, considering its placement, height and
construction, is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and does not
deprive neighboring property of its full use and enjoyment; and
      2.   That there exist special circumstances unique to the lot in question
or use thereof which would make the variation necessary for the full enjoyment
of the lot by the owners or occupiers.
   (H)   Revocation: In any case where a fence allowed by a variation of these
regulations has not been maintained for six (6) continuous months after
granting thereof, then without further action it shall be null and void.
   (I)   Term of Approval and Issuance of Permits:
      1.   A building permit is required before the installation of a fence.
      2.   The fence permit application must be completed and processed as
follows:
         a.   A site plan must be submitted to the building inspector showing
property lot lines, structures and fence placement.
         b.   Fence lines must be staked with string to show the exact location
of the proposed fence.
         c.   The building inspector will inspect the marked area for any
issues as it relates to the village ordinances and building codes.
         d.   The owner of property that is adjacent on the fence side of the
applicant's property will be required to sign off showing agreement to the
marked fence lines on the application.
         e. If any adjacent property owner refuses to sign off on the
application, then a survey showing the applicant's property lines will be
required before any permit will be issued.
      3.   Where an approved fence has not been established within six (6)
months after the granting of the fence approval, then without further action by
the city, said permit shall be null and void.
      4.   If a fence permit pursuant to this section has been discontinued for
a period of six (6) months or more, it shall not be reestablished without
obtaining new approval.
      5.   Any repair, replacement or change to a fence must be in accordance
with standards specified.
   (J)   Barbed Wire Fences; Electric Fences: Barbed wire and electric fences
are prohibited within residential zoning districts in the village. For purposes
hereof, an "electric fence" shall mean any physical barrier that is energized
so as to cause an electric shock to animals and humans who come into physical
contact with the energized physical barrier. Invisible fencing used for common
household domestic pets shall be allowed.
   (K)   Nonresidential Areas: Fences located within nonresidential areas may
not exceed six feet (6') in height. (Ord. 861A, 4-24-2019; amd. Ord. 879, 7-10-
2019; Ord. 879A, 9-23-2020)
CHAPTER 5
R-T ONE-FAMILY MOBILE HOME PARK RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-5-1: Principal Uses Permitted
10-5-2: Area and Bulk Requirements
10-5-3: Special Use
10-5-1: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In a One-Family Mobile Home Park Residential District, no building or land
shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the
following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this Title.
   (A)   All principal uses permitted and all special uses as regulated in the
One-Family Residential Districts.
   (B)   Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incidental to any of the
above uses.
10-5-2: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See Chapter 12, "Schedule of Regulations", limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and maximum density
permitted.
10-5-3: SPECIAL USE:
The following use may be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed and
subject to the review and approval of the site plan and the use by the Village
Board, after a hearing and recommendation is received from the Zoning Board:
Mobile home parks, subject to the following requirements and conditions:
   (A)   The land parcel being proposed for mobile home parks shall be of such
land area as to provide for a minimum of at least twenty five (25) mobile home
sites.
   (B)   Eighty percent (80%) of the mobile home sites shall contain a minimum
area of at least three thousand (3,000) square feet and twenty percent (20%)
shall contain a minimum of at least two thousand four hundred (2,400) square
feet. All such site areas shall be computed exclusive of service drives,
facilities and recreation space.
   (C)   All mobile home parks shall have access to major thoroughfares within
the Village by directly abutting thereon. Frontage on said thoroughfare shall
be equal to at least three hundred feet (300') in width.
   (D)   A wall or fence four feet six inches (4'6") in height shall be
provided on all sides of the mobile home park, with the exception of that
portion providing ingress and egress to the site.
   (E)   All mobile home park developments shall further comply with all codes
and ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82)
CHAPTER 6
MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
10-6-1: Purpose
10-6-2: Principal Uses Permitted
10-6-3: Special Uses
10-6-4: Area And Bulk Requirements
10-6-5: Site Plan Review
10-6-1: PURPOSE:
The RM-1 and RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential Districts are designed to provide
sites for multiple dwelling structures which will generally serve as zones of
transition between the nonresidential districts and lower density single-family
districts. The multiple dwelling is further provided to serve the limited needs
for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise single-family residential
community. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-6-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
In a Multiple-Family District, no building or land shall be used and no
building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified
uses, unless otherwise provided in this Title: (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
   (A)   All principal uses permitted and as regulated in the R-1 through R-
4 Residential Districts with the lot area, yards and floor area requirements
equal to the requirements of the immediately abutting residential district.
(Ord. 482-O, 8-14-1996)
   (B)   Multiple-family dwellings.
      Row Houses
      Terraces
      Apartments
   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above
permitted uses. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-6-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed
and subject to the review and approval of the site plan and the use by the
Village Board after a hearing and recommendation is received from the Zoning
Board for each use:
   (A)   Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child care centers (not including
dormitories); provided that for each child so cared for there is provided and
maintained a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area.
Such play space shall have a total minimum area of at least one thousand
(1,000) square feet, and shall be screened from adjoining residential land with
an obscuring wall or fence six feet (6') in height. Any use permitted shall not
be permitted in the interior of any residential block.
   (B)   General hospitals, except those for criminals and those solely for the
treatment of persons who are mentally ill or have a contagious disease, when
the following conditions are met:
      1.   A site plan layout showing the hospital site with building location,
drives, service areas, parking, landscape screening, and other physical
features shall be submitted for review.
      2.   All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at
least two (2) acres in area.
      3.   The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a
major thoroughfare.
      4.   The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from
bordering lot lines or streets shall be at least fifty feet (50') for front,
rear, and side yards for all two (2) story structures. Where a street borders a
yard, one-half (1/2) the street width may be used in computing the yard setback
bordering such street; however, in no instance shall a yard setback of less
than thirty feet (30') be provided. For every story above two (2) the minimum
yard distance shall be increased by at least five feet (5') for each additional
story.
      5.   Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential
view with an obscuring wall or fence six feet (6') in height. Ingress and
egress to the site shall be directly from a major thoroughfare.
      6.   All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area, for guests,
employees, staff, as well as any other uses of the facilities, shall be
directly from a major thoroughfare.
   (C)   Housing for the elderly, when the following conditions are met:
      1.   All housing for the elderly shall be provided as a planned
development and shall provide for the following:
         (a)   Cottage type dwellings and/or apartment type dwelling units.
         (b)   Common services containing, but not limited to, central dining
rooms, recreational rooms, central lounge, and workshops.
      2.   All dwellings shall consist of at least two hundred fifty (250)
square feet per unit.
      3.   The minimum requirements of the "Schedule of Regulations 1 " for the
district in which such use is located shall control lot coverage, yard
setbacks, and other site aspects.
   (D)   Convalescent homes when the following conditions are met:
      1.   The site shall consist of at least one acre.
      2.   The maximum coverage shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) for
all buildings including principal structures and those incident to the
principal structure.
      3.   The minimum requirements of the "Schedule of Regulations 2 " for the
district in which such use is located shall control lot coverage, yard setbacks
and other site aspects.
   (E)   Multiple-family dwellings exceeding two and one-half (21/2) stories or
twenty five feet (25') in height in the RM-2 District only, when the following
conditions are met:
      1.   The building will meet the fire safety requirements of the fire
protection code and life safety code.
      2.   The Creve Coeur Fire Department, after reviewing the plans,
certifies to the Village Board that it can provide a reasonable level of fire
fighting and rescue capability, considering the location, construction and
height of structure.
      3.   Village sewer and water facilities at the proposed location are
adequate to meet the needs of existing uses served by those facilities as well
as the needs generated by the proposed high-rise structure.
   (F)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above
uses.
   (G)   Modular dwellings. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82; amd. Ord. 550, 5-10-95; Ord.
955, 2-23-2022)
 
Notes
1 1. See Section 10-12-3 of this Title.
2 2. See Section 10-12-3 of this Title.
10-6-4: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See Section 10-12-3 of this Title, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height
and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the
maximum density permitted. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82)
10-6-5: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
All principal uses permitted and involving more than one building on a parcel
to be developed and all special uses in this Chapter shall be permitted only
after review and approval of the site plans for such uses by the Zoning Board.
Subsequent development of the site shall comply with the approved site plan.
Such review of the site plan is required in order to minimize the possibility
of adverse effects upon adjacent property; and furthermore to develop proper
relationships between development features as they relate to traffic, safety,
driveways, and parking areas, and also to properly relate principal buildings,
accessory buildings and uses, and open spaces to one another, and to the
traffic pattern within and surrounding such development. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82)
CHAPTER 7
O-1 OFFICE BUILDING DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Purpose
10-7-2: Uses Permitted
10-7-3: Area and Bulk Requirements
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
The O-1 Office Building District is designed to accommodate office buildings
and uses necessary to the servicing of the office district.
10-7-2: USES PERMITTED:
No land, building or premises within such district shall be used for other than
the following specified purposes:
   (A)   All principal uses permitted and all special uses as regulated in the
Multiple Family Residential Districts.
   (B)   Office buildings for any of the following occupations: Executive;
administrative; professional; accounting; writing; clerical; stenographic;
drafting; and sales.
   (C)   Medical and dental offices, including clinics.
   (D)   Banks and savings and loan offices.
   (E)   Business schools or private schools, which may be operated for profit
and which are directed toward the education of those occupations specified in
subsection (A) above, of these permitted uses.
   (F)   Funeral homes.
   (G)   Churches, church schools, and allied church buildings.
   (H)   Private clubs and lodge halls.
   (I)   Publicly owned buildings and public utility offices.
   (J)   Any other uses similar to the above uses.
   (K)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above
permitted uses.
10-7-3: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See Chapter 12, "Schedule of Regulations", limiting the height and bulk of
buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the maximum
density permitted. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82)
CHAPTER 8
B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-8-1: Purpose
10-8-2: Principal Uses Permitted
10-8-3: Required Conditions
10-8-4: Special Uses
10-8-5: Area and Bulk Requirements
10-8-1: PURPOSE:
The B-1 Local Business District is designed solely for the convenient shopping
of persons residing in adjacent residential areas, to permit only such uses as
are necessary to satisfy those limited basic shopping and/or service needs
which by their very nature are not related to the shopping pattern of the
General Business District.
10-8-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
   (A)   Any use permitted and as regulated in the O-1 Office Building District
except new one and two (2) family dwellings.
   (B)   Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on
the premises for persons residing in adjacent residential areas such as:
Groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods,
and notions or hardware.
   (C)   Any personal service establishment which performs services on the
premises for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as: Shoe
repair, dry cleaning shops, tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, banks
and savings and loan offices, or any service establishment of an office-
showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor,
shoe maker, baker, printer, upholsterer, or an establishment doing radio,
television or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar
establishments that require a retail adjunct and of no more objectionable
character than the aforementioned subject to the provisions: That no more than
five (5) persons shall be employed at any time in the fabrication, repair, and
other processing of goods.
   (D)   Restaurants, or other places serving food except those having the
character of a "drive-in" so called.
   (E)   Professional offices of doctors, lawyers, dentists, chiropractors,
osteopaths, architects, engineers and similar or allied professions.
   (F)   Other uses similar to the above and subject to the following
restrictions:
      1.   All business establishments shall be retail or service
establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the
premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced.
      2.   All business, servicing or processing except off-street parking or
loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings.
   (G)   Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incident to the above
permitted uses and subject to all requirements of this Title.
   (H)   Multiple-family dwellings, provided the dwelling units are only
located on an upper floor of a building utilized for commercial purposes
permitted in this District. For purposes hereof, a building will be considered
to be utilized for commercial purposes if the building (1) includes an active
commercial operation, (2) is actively under renovation with construction being
diligently pursued, or (3) is ready for commercial occupancy and is being
actively marketed by listing with a commercial realtor. In the event that a
building with residential units on the upper floors ceases to be utilized for
commercial purposes, the owner of the subject premises shall not enter into any
new residential lease until the building is again utilized for commercial
purposes. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82; amd. Ord. 940, 9-8-21)
10-8-3: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
Since this District is for the convenience shopping of persons residing in
adjacent residential areas, permitted uses shall not include business in the
character of a drive-in or open front stores nor shall it include one and two
(2) family dwellings, except existing dwellings so used; provided further,
however, that dwelling units shall be permitted on upper floors of buildings
utilized for commercial purposes permitted in this District. For purposes
hereof, a building will be considered to be utilized for commercial purposes if
the building (1) includes an active commercial operation, (2) is actively under
renovation with construction being diligently pursued, or (3) is ready for
commercial occupancy and is being actively marketed by listing with a
commercial realtor. In the event that a building with residential units on the
upper floors ceases to be utilized for commercial purposes, the owner of the
subject premises shall not enter into any new residential lease until the
building is again utilized for commercial purposes. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82; amd.
Ord. 940, 9-8-21)
10-8-4: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed
and subject to the review and approval of the site plan and the use by the
Village Board after a hearing and recommendation is received from the Zoning
Board for each use:
   (A)   Vehicle service station for sale of gasoline, oil, accessories or the
repair of vehicles, and subject to the following:
      1.   The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not
be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the
streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than twenty
five feet (25') from a street intersection (measured from the roadway) or from
adjacent residential property and subject to other provisions of this Code.
      2.   The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and
so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required
to wait.
      3.   There shall be provided, on those sides abutting or adjacent to a
residential district, a four foot six inch (4'6") completely obscuring wall or
fence. The height of the wall or fence shall be measured from the surface of
the ground.
      4.   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts
and from abutting streets.
      5.   All mechanical and body repair, steam cleaning and undercoating when
conducted on the site shall be within a completely enclosed building. The
storage of wrecked automobiles shall be within enclosed buildings and shall not
be allowed as open storage.
      6.   All restroom doors shall be shielded from adjoining residential
property.
   (B)   Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange
buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator
stations with service yards but without storage yards, water and sewage pumping
stations.
   (C)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above
uses.
   (D)   Modular dwellings or other modular construction.
   (E)    Warehousing and storage of equipment, materials, goods, or supplies
utilized in relation to a commercial establishment operated on the premises,
where such commercial establishment is permitted in this District and provided
such storage is within a building or is enclosed as not to be visible to the
public from a street or thoroughfare. Warehousing and storage of materials and
goods to be sold at retail from a location outside the Village is not
permitted. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82; amd. Ord. 482-1A, 12-8-93; Ord. 550, 5-10-95;
Ord. 942, 9-8-2021)
10-8-5: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See Section 10-12-3 of this Title, Schedule of Regulations, limiting the height
and bulk of buildings, and the minimum size of lot by permitted land use. (Ord.
482, 4-7-82)
CHAPTER 9
B-2 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-9-1: Purpose and General Requirements
10-9-2: Principal Uses Permitted
10-9-3: Special Uses
10-9-4: Area and Bulk Requirements
10-9-5: Conditional Uses
10-9-1: PURPOSE AND GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   The B-2 General Business District is designed to provide the wide
range of office, retail business and services and related activities fulfilling
the needs of the entire Village area as well as a substantial area of needs of
the traveling public.
   (B)   It shall be a general requirement of all development or construction
in the B-2 General Business District that a site plan be prepared and submitted
to the Zoning Board prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   (C)   There shall be a site plan review conducted in the following manner:
      1.   A preliminary site plan review submission for the proposed
development of such property shall be presented to the Zoning Board, showing
the following with appropriate dimensions when necessary:
         (a)   Traffic circulation patterns.
         (b)   Parking areas and loading areas and individual berths.
         (c)   Engineering study on sewage system capacity and water systems
levels.
         (d)   Placement of exterior lighting.
         (e)   Layout map of all buildings and structures on one inch to fifty
foot (1" = 50') scale.
         (f)   Map of general region on a one inch to two hundred foot (1" =
200') scale, for site and that area within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius
of subject site.
         (g)   Topography map at two foot (2') contour intervals.
         (h)   Estimated timetable on construction phases.
         (i)   Erosion control measures.
         (j)   Estimates of environmental and business impact on community and
surrounding neighborhoods.
      2.   Action pursuant to submission of the preliminary site plan shall be
completed no longer than forty five (45) days after submission by the Zoning
Board. The Zoning Board shall determine whether the plan complies with all the
requirements of this Chapter and on such basis shall do the following:
         (a)   Recommend approval of the preliminary site plan and direct the
applicant to proceed with a final site plan; or
         (b)   Inform the applicant in writing how the plan must be amended to
comply with the standards and regulations set forth herein. Pursuant to this
directive, the applicant has sixty (60) days to amend the application for the
approval of the Zoning Board. The Zoning Board may recommend approval or
disapproval of the amended preliminary site plan. In the event the Zoning Board
recommends disapproval of the amended preliminary site plan, or no amended site
plan is provided within sixty (60) days, the original preliminary site plan
shall be considered inadequate.
      3.   After approval of the preliminary site plan, the applicant shall
submit to the Zoning Board a final site plan of the entire development project
which shall include the following:
         (a)   Scale drawings of all structures with appropriate dimensions.
         (b)   All information required by this Chapter for a preliminary plan.
         (c)   Final architectural drawings for all buildings (principal and
accessory) included in the final site plan.
         (d)   Any additional information required by the zoning board at the
time of the preliminary site plan review.
      4.   The procedure for final site plan action shall follow that procedure
outlined in subsection (C)2 of this section for preliminary site plan action,
except upon approval the applicant shall be directed to obtain proper building
permits. (Ord. 482-A, 10-11-1989)
10-9-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
Any generally recognized retail business or service establishment which
supplies commodities or performs services on the premises within a completely
enclosed building, including restaurants and taverns where patrons are served
while seated within the building and wherein said establishment does not extend
as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service or a drive-in or
open-front store, which drive-in or open-front store facilities are permitted
and regulated as a special use under section
10-9-3 of this chapter.
Any retail business or service establishment permitted in a B-1 local business
district.
Automobile car wash, when completely enclosed in buildings.
Bowling alleys.
Bus passenger stations.
Business schools or private schools operated for profit.
Clinics.
Equipment sales, leasing, or rental.
Executive, administrative or professional offices, banks and banks with drive-
in facilities, when said drive-in facilities are incidental to the principal
function.
Governmental offices or other governmental uses, public utility offices,
exchanges, transformer stations, pump stations and service yards, but not
including outdoor storage.
Multiple-family dwellings, provided the dwelling units are only located on an
upper floor of a building utilized for commercial purposes permitted in this
District. For purposes hereof, a building will be considered to be utilized for
commercial purposes if the building (1) includes an active commercial
operation, (2) is actively under renovation with construction being diligently
pursued, or (3) is ready for commercial occupancy and is being actively
marketed by listing with a commercial realtor. In the event that a building
with residential units on the upper floors ceases to be utilized for commercial
purposes, the owner of the subject premises shall not enter into any new
residential lease until the building is again utilized for commercial purposes.
New and used automobile sales or showroom.
Newspaper office or printing plant.
Pool or billiard parlor or club.
Private clubs or lodge halls.
Retail cold storage establishments.
Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments.
Theaters when completely enclosed.
Veterinary hospitals when completely enclosed in buildings.
Warehousing and storage of materials or goods to be sold at retail from the
premises upon which such materials or goods are stored, provided such storage
is within a building or is enclosed as not to be visible to the public from a
street or thoroughfare. Warehousing and storage of materials and goods to be
sold at retail from a location outside the Village is not permitted.
Other uses which are similar to the above uses.
Accessory structures customarily incident to the above permitted uses. (Ord.
482, 4-7-1982; amd. Ord. 740, 3-13-2013; Ord. 940, 9-8-2021; Ord. 942, 9-8-
2021)
10-9-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed
and subject to the review and approval of the site plan and the use by the
village board after a hearing and recommendation is received from the zoning
board for each use.
   (A)   Used car lots may be permitted only with a special use permit granted
under this section subject to the following rules:
      1.   Definitions:
   USED CAR: Any used, preowned, or secondhand motor vehicle to which a
certificate or title and license plates have been issued and which motor
vehicle must be registered for use on the highways by a consumer or a dealer,
before it is driven or used on state roads pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the Illinois secretary of state. "Used car" also includes any
used, preowned, and/or secondhand vehicle, defined as any vehicle required to
be titled before operated on Illinois roads pursuant to the rules of the
Illinois secretary of state.
   USED CAR DEALER OR A USED CAR BUSINESS: A person or company who brokers,
deals, or engages in the purchase, sale, lease, or exchange of five (5) or more
used cars within a twelve (12) month period or four (4) or more used cars at
any one point in time.
   USED CAR LOT: Any place where used cars are displayed and offered for
purchase, sale, lease, or exchange in the open by a used car dealer or used car
business.
      2.   Requirements For Used Car Lots (Both Those Already In Operation And
Those Seeking New Special Use Permits): To obtain or retain a special use
permit under this section, each used car lot must have:
         (a)   A lot that is lighted to illuminate the premises at night. Said
lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts and from
abutting streets.
         (b)   A six foot (6') obscuring wall or fence that shields the lot
from abutting or adjacent districts that are zoned for residential use.
         (c)   A permanent structure to be used as a business or sales office.
(Any structure must conform to the village's building codes.)
         (d)   A paved lot for vehicles that are part of the inventory that
meets the following specifications:
            (1)   Requirements for paving:
               A. The lot shall contain a gravel base of not less than four
inches (4") covered by a minimum of three inches (3") of asphalt or concrete.
               B. The finished grade of such improved grounds shall be not less
than twelve inches (12") or more than thirty six inches (36") above the grade
of the street adjoining said premises.
               C. The lot must meet the requirements for erosion sediment and
stormwater control as required by section
10-14-15 of this title.
               D. Under no circumstances may cars for sale be parked on grass.
            (2)   If the lot is not already paved when this subsection (A) is
enacted, it must be paved within two (2) years of the effective date hereof.
Further, the unpaved lot must be maintained with crushed white rock. (Under no
circumstances can cars be parked on grass.)
            (3)   For all lots parking spaces for inventory shall be not less
than nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') for each used car.
         (e)   An interior garage area complying with the service station
requirements listed in subsection
10-8-4(A) of this title if any major repair or major refinishing shall be done
to vehicles for sale. In other words, no major repair or refinishing shall be
done on the outdoor lot.
      3.   Requirements In Operation Of A Used Car Lot To Maintain A Special
Use Permit:
         (a)   The premises must be kept in a neat and clean condition with
surrounding landscaping kept trimmed, the lawn areas mowed, and the cars washed
off occasionally so that dust does not accumulate on the cars.
         (b)   No loud or boisterous noises may emanate from the business,
either by persons congregating there or by the playing of recording
instruments, radios, or other sound producing equipment or video equipment.
         (c)   Inoperable motor vehicles as defined in title 6, chapter 7 of
this code may not be kept on the lot.
      4.   Initial Special Use Permit Requirements And Procedure For Obtaining
An Initial Special Use Permit:
         (a)   No person, firm, or corporation shall operate as a used car
dealer or engage in a used car business within the village without first
obtaining a special use permit as herein provided.
         (b)   A separate special use permit for the operation of a used car
lot shall be required for each separate location of a used car lot within the
village regardless of the owner or operator.
         (c)   The village clerk is hereby authorized to issue an initial
special use permit for a used car lot only upon approval by the village board
of such a permit. Approval can only happen in the following manner:
            (1)   The applicant must submit an application for a special use
permit on a form to be provided by the village clerk with the applicable fee
paid (the amount of the fee for an initial special use permit is to be
published annually on the schedule of fees approved by the village board and
kept by the village clerk), to the zoning board of appeals.
               A. The applicant must prove ownership of the property and/or
right to use the property as a used car lot through a valid lease.
               B. The applicant must produce a site plan that conforms to the
requirements of a used car lot as listed above. The site plan is a written
detailed plan showing measurements and the layout of the land to be used, the
portion thereof to be improved as required herein, the method proposed for
improvement, drainage, driveways for ingress and egress, space for parking of
vehicles (both customers' vehicles and inventory vehicles) and buildings to be
built or existing buildings to be used in the operation. The site plan should
include contact information for all contractors who will be used in
transforming the site to an operational used car lot (if any will be used).
               C. The applicant must attend the public hearing scheduled at a
regularly scheduled meeting of the zoning board of appeals.
            (2)   The zoning board of appeals will publish notice of the
application for a special use permit and notice of the required public hearing
regarding the approval of the permit as required by law. The zoning board of
appeals may only recommend approval to the village board if the special use can
be granted without disruption to the surrounding community, if all requirements
above are followed, and if the business will provide a benefit to the citizens
of the village of Creve Coeur.
            (3)   If the requirements of subsection (A)2 of this section are
met, the zoning board of appeals shall recommend that a special use permit be
granted by the village board at a regularly scheduled board meeting by
ordinance. The final decision to grant a special use permit rests with the
village board.
            (4)   If the village board grants the initial special use permit,
the clerk shall issue the permit. The continued validity of the permit is
subject to the used car dealer or business producing his/her dealer's license
required by the secretary of the state of Illinois and following all
restrictions as listed in the special use permit, including the payment of all
building permit fees and successful passage of building and fire inspections
prior to any sales on the lot.
      5.   Special Use Permit Duration And Renewal:
         (a)   Initial special use permits for used car sales shall be for a
period of one year expiring on April 30 of each year. The village clerk is
hereby authorized to issue a renewal special use permit upon expiration of the
initial license upon written application on forms to be provided by the village
clerk accompanied by the required renewal fee (to be on the posted fee schedule
determined by the village board from time to time and posted in the office of
the village clerk) and a determination by the village clerk that the applicant
is complying with all the provisions of the initial special use permit and this
subsection (A).
         (b)   In the event the village receives a complaint that the used car
lot is not in compliance with the terms of its initial special use permit and/
or the terms in this subsection (A), the police department shall request that
the code enforcement officer inspect the premises. If violations of the terms
of the special use permit or this subsection (A) are found, the code
enforcement officer shall issue ordinance violation citation(s). If the used
car lot pleads guilty or is found guilty of the violations, the village clerk
shall withhold the renewal of the special use permit until the property is
brought into compliance.
      6.   No Transference To New Owners Or Operators: No special use permit
issued under this subsection (A) may be transferred. Each new owner/operator
must apply for a new special use permit specific to their business operation.
      7.   Revocation Of Special Use Permit:
         (a)   Any special use permit issued under this subsection (A) shall be
automatically revoked upon termination, suspension, revocation, or failure to
renew the licensee's state of Illinois used vehicle dealer's license or upon
proof, by competent legal evidence, that the licensee has made a false
statement in any application for a village special use permit under this
subsection (A).
         (b)   Any special use permit may be revoked by the village board in
their discretion upon proof of conviction of the licensee for a violation of
this subsection (A).
      8.   Penalties:
         (a)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any provisions of this
subsection (A), and/or anyone who allows continued violations (such as a
landowner in the case of a lessor of property for a car lot) shall be fined not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
         (b)   Any used car dealer/business who keeps inoperable motor vehicles
as defined in title 6, chapter 7 of this code shall be cited immediately
(without the requirement of written notice to abate as required in subsection
6-7-2(B) of this code). Each day said inoperable motor vehicle remains on the
lot is a separate offense. If inoperable motor vehicles remain on the lot seven
(7) days after a citation is issued and personally served on the owner of the
used car dealership/business, the village may, at its option, cause the
inoperable motor vehicles to be towed by the same method of disposal of
abandoned vehicles provided in section
6-7-3 of this code. (Ord. 779, 12-10-2014)
   (B)   Motel, subject to the following:
      1.   Provided that it can be demonstrated that ingress and egress do not
conflict with adjacent business uses or general traffic flow.
      2.   A six foot (6') obscuring wall or fence must be provided where
abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for residential use.
      3.   No kitchen or cooking facilities within living units are to be
provided, with the exception of units for the use of the manager or caretaker.
      4.   Each unit shall contain not less than two hundred (200) square feet
of floor area.
   (C)   Business in the character of a drive-in, so called, or so called open
front store, subject to the following:
      1.   A building setback of at least sixty feet (60') from the right of
way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained.
      2.   Ingress and egress points shall be located at least sixty feet (60')
from the intersection of any two (2) streets.
      3.   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts
and from abutting streets.
      4.   A six foot (6') completely obscuring wall or fence must be provided
where abutting or adjacent to a residential district. The height of the wall
shall be measured from the surface of the ground.
   (D)   Commercially used outdoor recreational space for children's amusement
parks, miniature golf courses, subject to the following:
      1.   Children's amusement park must be fenced on all sides with a six
foot (6') wall or fence.
      2.   Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right of way and
shall be fenced with a six foot (6') wall or fence where adjacent to the use.
(Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
   (E)   Vehicle service station for sale of gasoline, oil accessories or the
repair of vehicles, and subject to the following: (Ord. 482-1A, 12-8-1993)
      1.   The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not
be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the
streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than twenty
five feet (25') from a street intersection (measured from the roadway) or from
adjacent residential property and subject to other provisions of this code.
      2.   The minimum lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, and
so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required
to wait.
      3.   There shall be provided, on those sides abutting or adjacent to a
residential district, a six foot (6') completely obscuring wall or fence. The
height of the wall or fence shall be measured from the surface of the ground.
      4.   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts
and from abutting streets. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
      5.   All mechanical and body repair, steam cleaning and undercoating when
conducted on the site shall be within a completely enclosed building. The
storage of wrecked automobiles shall be within enclosed buildings and shall not
be allowed as open storage. (Ord. 482-1A, 12-8-1993)
      6.   All restroom doors shall be shielded from adjoining property.
   (F)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the uses
listed herein. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
   (G)   Modular dwellings or other modular construction. (Ord. 550, 5-10-1995)
   (H)   Outdoor storage or display for equipment sales, leasing, or rental
subject to the following:
      1.   The outdoor storage or display of merchandise, materials, or
inventory shall not encroach into areas of required parking. All areas
necessary for required parking must be paved with concrete or asphalt.
      2.   The outdoor storage or display of materials, merchandise, or
inventory shall not be located in required yard areas within the lot.
      3.   The storage or display of outdoor materials, merchandise, or
inventory shall not include the use of banners, pennants, or strings of
pennants.
      4.   Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least
twenty five feet (25') from the intersection of any two (2) streets.
      5.   A six foot (6') obscuring wall or fence must be provided when
abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for residential use.
      6.   All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts
and abutting streets.
      7.   Outdoor storage areas located behind the main building shall be
fenced on all sides with a six foot (6') fence.
      8.   All tools, equipment, property, and vehicles stored outside shall be
operable and maintained in good condition. Inoperable and junked equipment or
vehicles, scrap parts and junk shall not be stored outside.
      9.   Truck trailers, storage and cargo containers, or sheds shall not be
located on the property or used for storage of parts or equipment.
      10.   No major repair or refinishing shall be done on the lot.
   (I)   Warehousing and storage of equipment, materials, goods, or supplies
utilized in relation to a commercial establishment operated on the premises,
subject to the following:
      1.   The commercial establishment is a permitted use in this District.
      2.   The storage must be ancillary to the operation of the commercial
establishment and not the principal use of the premises. For purposes hereof,
warehousing and storage will not be considered the principal use of the
premises so long as such storage occupies less than one-half of the total
usable square footage of the improvements on the subject premises.
      3.   The warehousing and storage must be completely within a building or
otherwise enclosed so as not to be visible to the public from a street or
thoroughfare.
      4.   Warehousing and storage of materials and goods to be sold at retail
from a location outside the Village is not permitted. (Ord. 740, 3-13-2013;
amd. Ord. 942, 9-8-2021)
10-9-4: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See section
10-12-3, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the height and bulk
of buildings and minimum size of lot by permitted land use. (Ord. 482, 4-7-
1982)
10-9-5: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by conditional use permit upon application to
and approval by the Board of Trustees:
   Adult-use cannabis business establishments (excluding adult-use cannabis
craft grower and adult-use cannabis cultivation center), subject to Title 10,
Chapter 20 ("Recreational Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments") and
Section
10-15-6 ("Special Uses"). (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
CHAPTER 10
I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-10-1: Purpose
10-10-2: Principal Uses Permitted
10-10-3: Special Uses
10-10-4: Required Conditions
10-10-5: Area and Bulk Requirements
10-10-6: Site Plan Required
10-10-7: Conditional Uses
10-10-1: PURPOSE:
The I-1 Industrial District is designed so as to primarily accommodate
wholesale activities, warehouses and light industrial operations whose
external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the District and in no
manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. (Ord. 482,
4-7-82)
10-10-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
   (A)   Uses permitted in the B-2 General Business District shall be subject
to the regulations applicable to such uses.
   (B)   Any of the following uses when conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building, or within a designated area enclosed on all sides with a six
foot (6') fence or solid wall. Said fence or wall shall be completely obscuring
on those sides where abutting or adjacent to districts zoned for residential
use.
      1.   Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities.
      2.   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of
such products as, but not limited to: bakery goods, candy, cosmetics,
pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery; tool, die,
gauge, and machine shops.
      3.   The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles
or merchandise from previously prepared materials such as, but not limited to:
bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair,
horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones,
sheet metal (excluding large stampings such as automobile fenders or bodies),
shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood, (excluding saw and planing mills),
and yarns.
      4.   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas.
      5.   Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or
rubber stamps, or other small molded rubber products.
      6.   Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic
instruments and devices, radios and phonographs.
      7.   Laboratories - experimental, film or testing.
      8.   Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, sheet metal
products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the
like.
   (C)   Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings
and yards. Water supply and sewage disposal plants. Water and gas tank holders.
Railroad transfer storage tracks. Heating and electric power generating plants,
and all necessary uses. Railroad rights of way.
   (D)   Manufacture of building products, batching plans for concrete, ready-
mix concrete plants, storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel,
stone, lumber, open storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided
such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on
those sides abutting all residential, business or office districts, and on any
front yard abutting a public thoroughfare. In any "I-1" District the extent of
such fence or wall may be determined by the Board of Appeals on the basis of
usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than five feet (5') in height, and
may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet (8') in height. A
chain link type fence, with heavy shrubbery inside of such fence, shall be
considered to be an obscuring fence.
   (E)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted uses.
   (F)   Other uses of a similar character subject to such conditions,
requirements, and safeguards as set forth in sections
10-10-4 and
10-10-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-10-3: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed
and subject to the review and approval of the site plan and the use by the
village board after a hearing and recommendation is received from the zoning
board for each use:
Commercial kennel, provided that it is located no less than four hundred (400)
yards from a residential use.
Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed with a wall or fence and when
located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the
exterior boundary of the I-1 district to a district of a higher classification.
Metal plating, buffing, and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to
control the type of process to prevent noxious effects and/or nuisances.
Self-storage, ministorage and/or miniwarehousing subject to the following
facility requirements and restrictions:
   (A)   Outdoor bay type access to individual units that face a street is
prohibited. The exterior loading access points shall be designed in such a way
as to minimize sightlines from adjacent roads.
   (B)   No building shall exceed forty eight feet (48') in height.
   (C)   Activities not related to the rental or lease of units shall not be
conducted within the property area.
   (D)   No business or activity (including personal hobbies, arts and crafts)
other than storage shall be conducted from any unit in the facility. (For
example, no servicing or repair of vehicles, or boats, or RVs or construction
of furniture, cabinets or woodworking is allowed in the facility.)
   (E)   There shall be no electricity in the facilities unless electricity is
specifically approved in the site plan for specific and limited purposes.
   (F)   The use or storage of any hazardous materials is prohibited.
   (G)   An on site manager shall be employed at the facility from at least
nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. daily for at least five
(5) days in a seven (7) day week.
   (H)   A facility cannot be located within a radius of one thousand feet
(1,000') of another existing similar facility.
Undercoating shops when completely enclosed.
Other uses of a similar character to the above uses, and subject to the
requirements set forth in sections
10-10-4 and
10-10-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 809, 3-23-2016)
10-10-4: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
Any use established in the I-1 district after the effective date of this title
shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standards set forth
hereinafter in chapter 14, "General Provisions", of this title. (Ord. 482, 4-7-
1982)
10-10-5: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See section 10-12-3, "Schedule Of Regulations", of this title, limiting the
height and bulk of buildings and the minimum size of lot by permitted land use.
(Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-10-6: SITE PLAN REQUIRED:
It shall be a general requirement for a development or construction in the I-
1 industrial district that a site plan be issued and presented to the zoning
board prior to the issuance of a building permit. The site plan shall conform
to the requirements and shall be reviewed pursuant to the requirements of
subsection
10-9-1(C) of this title. (Ord. 482-I, 9-22-1993)
10-10-7: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by conditional use permit upon application to
and approval by the Board of Trustees:
   Adult-use cannabis business establishments, subject to Title 10, Chapter 20
("Recreational Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments") and Section
10-15-6 ("Special Uses"). (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
CHAPTER 11
I-2 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
10-11-1: Purpose
10-11-2: Principal Uses Permitted
10-11-3: Area And Bulk Requirements
10-11-4: Site Plan Required
10-11-5: Special Uses
10-11-6: Conditional Uses
10-11-1: PURPOSE:
The I-2 industrial district is designed primarily for manufacturing,
assembling, and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized
industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some
degree by surrounding districts. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-11-2: PRINCIPAL USES PERMITTED:
Any principal use first permitted in an I-1 district.
Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, or storage of
materials, goods, or products which shall conform with the performance
standards set forth in chapter 14 of this title, and which shall not be
injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the
emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate
matter, toxic and noxious materials or odors, fire or explosive hazards, or
glare or heat.
Incineration of refuse subject to all controls of chapter 14 of this title.
(Ord. 482, 4-7-1982; amd. Ord. 281-B, 3-26-1997; Ord. 570, 4-8-1998)
10-11-3: AREA AND BULK REQUIREMENTS:
See chapter 12 of this title, limiting the height and bulk of buildings. (Ord.
482, 4-7-1982)
10-11-4: SITE PLAN REQUIRED:
It shall be a general requirement for a development or construction in the I-
2 industrial district that a site plan be issued and presented to the zoning
board prior to the issuance of a building permit. The site plan shall conform
to the requirements and shall be reviewed pursuant to the requirements of
subsection
10-9-1(C) of this title. (Ord. 482-J, 10-13-1993)
10-11-5: SPECIAL USES:
The following uses may be permitted subject to the conditions herein imposed
and subject to the review and approval of the site plan and the use by the
village board after a hearing and recommendation is received from the zoning
board for each use:
An "adult use", as enumerated in section
3-18-2 of this code; provided such use is within the I-2 zoning classification
located to the north of Wesley Road and U.S. Route 29.
Commercial kennel, provided that it is located no less than four hundred (400)
yards from a residential use.
Incineration of refuse subject to all controls of chapter 14 of this title.
(Ord. 570, 4-8-1998; amd. Ord. 646, 8-8-2007)
10-11-6: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following uses may be allowed by conditional use permit upon application to
and approval by the Board of Trustees:
   Adult-use cannabis business establishments, subject to Title 10, Chapter 20
("Recreational Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments") and Section
10-15-6 ("Special Uses"). (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
CHAPTER 12
GENERAL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-12-1: Subdivision Open Space Plan
10-12-2: Average Lot Sizes
10-12-3: Schedule of Regulations
10-12-1: SUBDIVISION OPEN SPACE PLAN:
The intent of this Chapter is to permit one family residential subdivisions to
be planned as a comprehensive unit allowing, therefore, certain modifications
to the standards as outlined in the "Schedule of Regulations" to be made in R-
1, R-2, and R-3 One Family Residential Districts when the following conditions
are met:
   (A)   The lot area in all R-1, R-2, and R-3 One Family Residential Districts
may be reduced to the size of the smallest lot size allowed as indicated in
Section 10-12-3 herein, provided that the population density shall be no
greater than if the land area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum
average square foot lot areas as required under R-1, R-2, and R-3. All
calculations shall be predicated upon the One Family Districts having the
following number of dwelling units per acre:
      R-1 - 2.2 dwelling units per acre
      R-2 - 3.9 dwelling units per acre
      R-3 - 4.5 dwelling units per acre
   (B)   Lot widths may be reduced to not less than eighty five feet (85') in
an R-1 District and sixty feet (60') in an R-2 District. The required least
side yard indicated in Section 10-12-3 shall be provided for each lot. The
total of two (2) side yards indicated in Section 10-12-3 may be reduced by ten
percent (10%).
   (C)   For each foot of land gained, under the provisions of subsection (A)
above of this Section, within a residential subdivision, through the reduction
of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in the "Schedule of
Regulations", equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to common use of the lot
owners in the subdivision in a manner approved by the Village.
   (D)   The area to be dedicated for the common use of the subdivision shall
in no instance be less than two (2) acres and shall be in a location and shape
approved by the Village.
   (E)   Access shall be provided to areas dedicated for the common use of the
subdivision for those lots not bordering on such dedicated areas by means of
streets or pedestrian access-ways.
   (F)   In approving the application of the "Subdivision Open Space Plan"
technique, the Zoning Board shall be cognizant of the following objectives:
      1.   To provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the
natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, lakes, hills, and
similar natural assets;
      2.   To encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the
development of residential areas;
      3.   To encourage a more efficient and desirable use of open area while
recognizing a reduction in development costs, and by allowing the developer to
by-pass natural obstacles in the site;
      4.   To encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance
to all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage the
development of recreational facilities.
   (G)   This plan for reduced lot sizes shall only be permitted if it is
mutually agreeable to the Village Board and the subdivider or developer.
   (H)   Under this planned unit approach, the developer or subdivider shall
dedicate the total park area (see subsection (B) of this Section) at the time
of filing of the final plat on all or any portion of the plat.
10-12-2: AVERAGE LOT SIZES:
The intent of this Section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary his
lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as
required in Section 12-12-3, Schedule of Regulations, for each One Family
Residential District. If this option is selected, the following conditions
shall be met:
   (A)   In meeting the average minimum lot size the subdivision shall be so
designed as not to create lots of widths of less than eighty five feet (85') in
an R-1 District, sixty feet (60') in an R-2 District.
   (B)   All computations showing lot area and the average area resulting
through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat.
   (C)   The combining of the features of Sections
10-12-1 and
10-12-2 may be carried out. The Zoning Board shall determine, in their review
of the preliminary plat that the full intent of Sections
10-12-1 and
10-12-2 has been met.
10-12-3: SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1147f5e2e9733f6b2c310ca34bc981edbce4a658/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2290.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1147f5e2e9733f6b2c310ca34bc981edbce4a658/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2292.png]
Notes -Schedule of Regulations
         (a)   See Section
10-12-1, "Subdivision Open Space Plan" and Section
10-12-2, "Average Lot Sizes" regarding exceptions as to lot area, and the
related density controls.
         (b)   The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than
eight feet (8') when there is a common rear yard. In case of a rear yard
abutting a side yard of an adjacent lot, the side abutting a street shall not
be less than the required front yard of that district.
         (c)   The height of any main building or accessory building may exceed
the maximum permitted height by one foot (1') for each additional one foot (1')
by which the width of each yard exceeds the minimum yard requirement.
         (d)   The total number of rooms in a multiple dwelling structure of
two (2) stories or less shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in
square feet divided by nine hundred (900). The total number of rooms in a
multiple dwelling of over two (2) stories shall not be more than the area of
the parcel, in square feet, divided by five hundred forty (540). For the
purpose of computing rooms, the following shall control:
 
Efficiency Apartment Unit 1 room
One-Bedroom Unit          2 rooms
Two-Bedroom Unit          3 rooms
Three-Bedroom Unit        4 rooms
 
         (e)   In RM-2 Districts the minimum front and rear yards shall be
equal to the height of the building, except that where a front lot line abuts a
street, one-half (1/2) the width of the right of way of said street may be
considered as a front yard setback, but in no instance shall any front or rear
yard setback be less than twenty five feet (25'). In all RM-1 and RM-
2 Multiple-Residence Districts, the minimum distance between any two (2)
buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such
buildings. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two (2)
buildings is as follows:
 
S = LA + LB + 2 (HA + HB )
6
Where:  
 S  = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and
       any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either.
 LA = Total length of building A.
       The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions
    of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from
       above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall
       of building B.
 LB = Total length of building B.
       The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions
    of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from
       above, lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall
       of building A.
 HA = Height of building A.
       The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural
       grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the
    length of building A. Natural grade levels shall be the mean level of
       the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of a wall or
       walls along the total length of the building.
 HB = Height of building B.
       The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural
       grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the
    length of building B. Natural grade levels shall be the mean level of
       the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of a wall or
       walls along the total length of the building.
 
         (f)   Any side or rear yard for a principal use or a special use
permitted in this district other than one-family, two- (2) family and multiple-
family dwellings shall not be less than the height of the structure at the side
or rear lot line.
         (g)   For each story in excess of two (2) stories, a side yard of two
and one-half feet (21/2') for each additional story shall be provided, in
addition to the minimum ten foot (10') requirement. The distance between
buildings on the same lot shall be regulated by the building distance formula
specified in subsection (e) of this Section.
         (h)   In a block on one side of a street thirty percent (30%) or more
occupied, the depth of the front yard shall not be less than, and need not be
more than, the average depth of front yards of existing buildings.
         (i)   No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines,
except as otherwise specified in the Building Code. On the exterior side yard
which borders on a Residential District, there shall be provided a setback of
not less than ten feet (10') on the side or residential street. If walls or
structures facing interior lot lines contain windows or other openings, side
yards of not less than ten feet (10') shall be provided. Parking shall be
permitted in the front yard after approval of the parking plan layout and
points of access by the Zoning Board. The setback shall be measured from the
nearest side of the existing and/or proposed right of way lines, whichever is
greater. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
         (j)   (Rep. by Ord. 482Y, 8-13-1997)
         (k)   One-half (1/2) the width of alleys at the rear of the lot may be
considered in computing rear yard setbacks.
         (m)   Parking shall not be permitted in a required front yard.
         (n)   A six foot (6') obscuring wall or fence and a twenty foot (20')
wide greenbelt or a six foot (6') chain link fence and a heavily planted forty
foot (40') wide greenbelt shall be provided on those sides of the property
abutting land zoned for residential use; the planting plan shall be reviewed
and approved by the Building Inspector in conformity with Section
10-14-9 of this Title.
         (o)   Planned developments involving two (2) acres or more shall be
subject to the approval of the Village Board after having received the review
and recommendation of the Zoning Board regarding modification to height and
bulk restrictions of this Chapter; it being the intent hereof to allow for
greater height where adequate site relationship to abutting zones or uses can
be maintained. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
CHAPTER 13
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS
SECTION:
10-13-1: Area, Height and Use Exceptions
10-13-1: AREA, HEIGHT AND USE EXCEPTIONS:
The regulations in this Title shall be subject to the following interpretations
and exceptions:
   (A)   Essential Services: Essential services shall be permitted as
authorized and regulated by law and other provisions of this Code; it being the
intention hereof to exempt such essential services from the application of this
Title.
   (B)   Voting Place: The provisions of this Title shall not be so construed
as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a municipal or other public election.
   (C)   Height Limit: The height limitations of this Title shall not apply to
farm buildings, church spires, flag poles, public monuments or wireless
transmission towers; nor to chimneys not more than three hundred fifty feet
(350') in height; provided, however, that the Zoning Board may specify a height
limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a
special use; or the Board may grant a variance to permit a higher chimney upon
a finding of fact that such greater height is in the public interest.
   (D)   Lots Adjoining Alleys: In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins a
dedicated alley or lane, for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of
this Title, one-half (1/2) the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be
considered as part of such lot.
   (E)   Yard Regulations: When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied
with, as in the case of a planned development in the Multiple Family District,
or where their application cannot be determined on lots existing and of record
at the time this Title became effective, and on lots of peculiar shape,
topography, or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may
be modified or determined by the Zoning Board.
   (F)   Multiple Dwelling Side Yard: For the purpose of side yard regulations,
a two (2) family, a terrace, a row house, or a multiple dwelling shall be
considered as one building occupying one lot.
   (G)   Terraces and Porches: Any open, unenclosed terrace or porch may
project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet (10'), and may
include a fixed canopy or awning, but this shall not be interpreted to include
enclosed sides.
   (H)   Projections Into Yards: Architectural features, such as roof
overhangs, chimneys, and similar features, may extend or project into a
required side yard not more than three inches (3") for each one foot (1') of
width of such side yard; and may extend or project into a required front yard
or rear yard not more than three feet (3'). Architectural features shall not
include those details which are nominally demountable.
   (I)   Residences existing in B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 Districts shall not be
considered as nonconforming uses for the purposes of remodeling or rebuilding
such residences. Businesses or offices existing in I-1 or I-2 Districts shall
not be considered as nonconforming uses for the purposes of remodeling or
rebuilding such offices or business buildings. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82)
CHAPTER 14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-14-1: Conflicting Regulations
10-14-2: Scope
10-14-3: Nonconforming Lots, Uses, Structures
10-14-4: Accessory Buildings
10-14-5: Parking Requirements
10-14-5-1: Scope Of Regulations
10-14-5-2: Off Street Parking
10-14-6: Off Street Parking Space Layout, Standards, Construction And
Maintenance
10-14-7: Off Street Loading And Unloading
10-14-8: Signs
10-14-9: Plant Materials
10-14-10: Uses Not Included Within A Specific Use District
10-14-11: Performance Standards
10-14-12: Regulation Of Satellite Dishes
10-14-13: Regulation Of Transmitting Towers/Poles
10-14-14: Portable Storage Containers
10-14-15: Erosion, Sediment And Stormwater Control
10-14-16: Wind Energy Generation Systems
10-14-17: Solar Energy Systems
10-14-1: CONFLICTING REGULATIONS:
Wherever any provisions of this title impose more stringent requirements,
regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the
provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this title
shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more
stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this title, then the
provisions of such law or ordinance shall govern. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-14-2: SCOPE:
No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected,
constructed or altered, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of
any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the
provisions of this title. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-14-3: NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES:
   (A)   Intent: Within the districts established by this title or amendments
that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures and uses of land and
structures which were lawful before this title was passed or amended, but which
would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this title or
future amendment.
It is the intent of this title to permit these nonconformities to continue
until they are removed. Such uses are declared by this title to be incompatible
with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this
title that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended,
nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere
in the same district.
A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a
nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this title by attachment on a building or premises of
additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition
of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district
involved.
To avoid undue hardships, nothing in this title shall be deemed to require a
change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which
actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this title and upon which actual building construction has been
diligently carried on. "Actual construction" is hereby defined to include the
placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a
permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing
building has been substantially begun preparatory to actual construction
provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the
building involved.
   (B)   Nonconforming Lots: In any district in which single-family dwellings
are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
title, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be
erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this title. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails
to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally
applicable in the district; provided that yard dimension and other requirements
not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard
requirements shall be obtained through approval of the zoning board.
   (C)   Nonconforming Uses Of Land: Where, at the effective date of adoption
or amendment of this title, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer
permissible under the terms of this title as enacted or amended, such use may
be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following
provisions:
      1.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date or amendment of this title.
      2.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this title.
      3.   If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period
of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in
which such land is located.
   (D)   Nonconforming Structures: Where a lawful structure exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this title that could not be built
under the terms of this title by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage,
height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the
lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
      1.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which
increases its nonconformity;
      2.   Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more
than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it
shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
title;
      3.   Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
   (E)   Nonconforming Uses Of Structures And Land: If a lawful use of a
structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this title, that would not be allowed in the
district under the terms of this title, the lawful use may be continued so long
as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
      1.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this title
in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, or moved, except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located;
      2.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which
existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this title, but no such use
shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building;
      3.   If no structural alterations are made, and nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming
use provided that the zoning board, either by general rule or by making
findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally
appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming
use. In permitting such change, the zoning board may require appropriate
conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this title;
      4.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform
to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed;
      5.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises
in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six (6) consecutive
months or for eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period, the
structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be
used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is
located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this
provision;
      6.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises
in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
   (F)   Repairs And Maintenance: On any building devoted in whole or in part
to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12)
consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of
nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding fifty
percent (50%) of the assessed value of the building, provided that the cubic
content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of
this title shall not be increased.
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring
to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by
any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such
official.
   (G)   Uses Under Exception Provisions Not Nonconforming Uses: Any use for
which a general exception or special approval is permitted as provided in this
title shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action
be deemed a conforming use in such district.
   (H)   Change Of Tenancy Or Ownership: There may be a change of tenancy,
ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures
and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of such
nonconforming uses except in conformity with the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-14-4: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS:
Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this title shall be
subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main
building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all yard regulations of
this title, applicable to main buildings.
   (B)   Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required yard, except
a rear yard. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
   (C)   An accessory building may not occupy more than twenty five percent
(25%) of a required rear yard, plus twenty percent (20%) of any nonrequired
rear yard, nor exceed twenty four feet by thirty feet (24' x 30'), whichever is
the lesser. An accessory building or garage may be built on a vacant lot that
has no dwelling only with the approval of the zoning board, which zoning board
shall take into consideration the character of the neighborhood and the impact
upon said neighborhood from the proposed accessory building or garage to be
erected upon the vacant lot. (Ord. 482D, 1988)
   (D)   No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet
(10') to any main building nor shall it be located closer than five feet (5')
to any side or rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory structure be
located within a dedicated easement right of way. (Ord. 482-N, 12-13-1995)
   (E)   No detached accessory building in an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-T, RM-1,
RM-2, O-1 or B-1 district shall exceed one story or fifteen feet (15') in
height. Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal
the permitted maximum height of structures in said districts, subject to zoning
board review and approval.
   (F)   When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot
line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot
to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard line
required on the lot in rear of such corner lot. When an accessory building is
located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a
continuation of the side lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall
not project beyond the side yard line of the lot in the rear of such corner
lot. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
10-14-5: PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
10-14-5-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The off street parking and loading provisions of this section
10-14-5 shall apply as follows:
   (A)   For all buildings and structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date hereof, accessory parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required in this section
10-14-5.
However, where a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date
hereof and provided that construction is begun within six (6) months of the
effective date and diligently prosecuted to completion (completion to be
accomplished within 18 months of the effective date hereof), parking and
loading facilities required for the issuance of the building permit may be
provided in lieu of any different amounts required by this section
10-14-5.
   (B)   Except as provided below, when the intensity of use of any building,
structure, or premises shall be increased through the addition of dwelling
units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other units of measurement
specified herein for required parking or loading facilities, additional parking
and loading facilities shall be provided for the increase in intensity of use
and for any existing deficiency in parking or loading facilities; according to
the following schedule:
 
Percent Expansion Of Intensity Or Size Parking And Loading Required
Of Existing Structure
   0 – 10%                        No additional parking
   10 – 49%                       100% compliance on new addition; 50%
                                       compliance on existing deficiency
   50%+                             100% compliance for all existing and new
                                       space
 
The requirements of this subsection may be reduced by the zoning board when
they would result in a hardship to the owner of the property if the reduction
would not adversely impact the surrounding property. (Ord. 656A, 11-10-2009)
10-14-5-2: OFF STREET PARKING:
   (A)   General Requirements:
      1.   Location Of Parking Spaces: All parking spaces shall be located on
the same zoning lot as the building or use served, except that parking spaces
to serve business, commercial, industrial, and office buildings or uses may be
located within three hundred feet (300') of the use if the spaces are located
in a business, commercial or industrial or office district.
Residential off street parking spaces shall consist of a paved parking strip,
driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises
they are intended to serve and shall be subject to requirements of section
10-14-4, "Accessory Buildings", of this chapter.
      2.   Control Of Off Street Parking Facilities: In cases where parking
facilities are permitted on land other than the zoning lot on which the
building or use served is located, the facilities shall be in the same
possession as the zoning lot occupied by the building or use to which the
parking facilities are accessory.
Private possession may be either by deed or long term lease, the term of the
lease to be approved by the zoning board; and the deed or lease shall be filed
with the zoning board. The deed or lease shall require the owner to maintain
the required number of parking facilities for the duration of the use served or
the deed or lease, whichever ends first.
      3.   Handicapped/Accessible Parking: Any required parking area shall
provide parking spaces designated and located to adequately accommodate the
disabled, and these shall be clearly marked as such. The markings shall include
yellow striping on the pavement designated as the accessible parking space and
shall provide a clearly posted sign as provided by section 11-301 of the
Illinois vehicle code. The sign shall clearly announce the fine for illegal
parking in the accessible space. Accessible parking spaces shall be the parking
spaces located closest to nearest accessible entryway to the facility. One
handicapped/accessible space shall be required for the first twenty five (25)
(or less) parking spaces required on a site. When more than twenty five (25)
spaces the number of required handicapped/accessible parking spaces shall be
provided as indicated in the schedule of handicapped/accessible parking
requirements at subsection (C) of this section. The schedule of handicapped/
accessible parking spaces applies to all zoning districts.
      4.   Access: All off street parking facilities shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movement.
      5.   Collective Parking For Separate Uses:
         (a)   Off street parking facilities for separate uses may be provided
collectively if the total number of spaces is not less than the sum of the
separate requirements of each use and all regulations governing the location of
parking spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to. Further, no
parking space or portion thereof shall be counted as a required space for more
than one use unless authorized by the zoning board.
         (b)   The zoning board may authorize a reduction in the total number
of required parking spaces for two (2) or more nonresidential uses jointly
providing off street parking when their respective hours of operation do not
overlap. (See schedule for shared parking listed in subsection (C) of this
section.) The approval of joint use parking shall be subject to the following
conditions:
            (1)   Building Or Use: No more than fifty percent (50%) of the
parking spaces required for a building or use may be supplied by parking
facilities required for any other building or use.
            (2)   Distinguishable Land Uses: The number of shared spaces for
two (2) or more distinguishable land uses shall be determined by the following
procedure:
   A. Multiply the minimum parking required for each individual use, as set
forth in the schedule of required parking, by the appropriate percentage
indicated in the shared parking percentages schedule, for each of the six (6)
designated time periods.
   B. Add the resulting sums for each of the six (6) columns.
   C. The minimum parking requirement shall be the highest sum among the six
(6) columns.
            (3)   Conformance; Conflict: If one, or all of the land uses
proposing to make use of joint parking facilities do not conform to one of the
general land use classifications in the shared parking percentages schedule as
determined by the zoning board, then the petitioner shall submit sufficient
data to indicate that there is not substantial conflict in the principal
operating hours of the uses.
            (4)   Legal Agreement: The property owners involved in the joint
use of off street parking facilities shall submit a legal agreement approved by
the village attorney guaranteeing that the parking spaces shall be maintained
so long as the use of the property is in existence or unless the required
parking is provided elsewhere in accordance with the provisions of this section
10-14-5. The instrument shall be recorded by the property owner with the
recorder of deeds, and a copy filed with the zoning board.
            (5)   Fractional Parking Spaces: When the calculation of the number
of off street parking spaces results in fractional space, any fraction of less
than one-half (1/2) may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half (1/2) or
more, shall be counted as one parking space. Parking spaces required on an
employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or
present on the premises at any one time.
            (6)   Use Of Required Parking Spaces: Except as provided in special
use, required parking spaces are solely for the parking of passenger vehicles
of patrons, occupants, or employees for the legal use. The storage of
merchandise, materials, inoperable motor vehicles, recreational vehicles and
boats, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, trailers, or equipment is not
permitted.
               A. Obscuring Fences Or Shrubs: Where the parking area is
contiguous to a residential district, the line or lines of contiguity of the
property shall be provided with a continuous and completed obscuring wood or
masonry wall, fence, or shrubbery six feet (6') in height, measured from the
surface of the parking area. Each entrance and exit from a parking lot shall be
at least twenty feet (20') from any adjacent property located in a residential
district.
               B. Landscaping And Screening: Landscaping and screening shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of the zoning code.
               C. Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking
areas shall be down-lit away from residential properties and public streets in
such a way as not to create a nuisance. However, in no case shall the lighting
exceed three (3) foot-candles measured at the lot line, nor shall the lighting
be installed at a height exceeding twenty feet (20'). Lighting for off street
parking shall be arranged to reflect the light away from all adjoining
residential buildings, and residential streets and property.
   (B)   Specific Requirements:
      1.   All off street parking shall be calculated using the off street
parking schedule listed in subsection (C) of this section.
      2.   In addition to the requirements of the off street parking schedule,
nonresidential uses must also provide one space for each vehicle that is parked
at the property by the owner.
      3.   Parking spaces for accessory uses not specifically enumerated within
a parking class shall be assumed to be included in the principal (permitted or
special) use requirement. If, for any reason the classification of any use, for
the purpose of determining the amount of off street parking is not readily
ascertainable, the parking requirements for the use shall be established by the
zoning board. To determine the number of spaces required for a proposed use the
zoning board shall consider the number of parking spaces required for the
listed use most similar to the proposed use.
      4.   When computing the number of required parking spaces for a zoning
lot, the total number of required spaces shall be based upon all of the uses on
the zoning lot. Therefore, one principal use may actually contain two (2) or
more parking class uses (e.g., retail sales and warehousing, or warehousing and
offices).
   (C)   Parking Requirements Tables:
   OFF STREET PARKING SCHEDULE - ALL ZONING DISTRICTS
Residential:                              
 Apartment hotel                        1 space per unit.
 Bed and breakfast                      2 for the operator and 1 space per
                                         guestroom.
 Boarding house, dormitory, fraternity, 1 space per sleeping accommodation.
  lodging house, rooming house
 Convalescent home, nursing home,       1 space per 3 residents plus 1 space
  elderly housing                        per employee.
                                         1 parking space per employee plus 1
                                         parking space per resident. The
  Family care facility and group care    resident parking requirement may be
 facility                               waived by the zoning board for those
                                         facilities that prohibit ownership or
                                         operation of motor vehicles by
                                         residents of the facility.
 Group family                           1 parking space for each resident.
                                         1.25 spaces per guestroom plus 12
 Hotel/motel                            spaces per 1,000 square feet for
                                         convention facilities.
 Mobile home park                       1.25 spaces per unit.
 Multi-family                           2 spaces per unit.
                                         2 spaces per unit for all single-
                                         family and two-family (units)
                                         constructed after June 4, 1991.
 Single- and two-family                 Structures built prior to June 4,
                                         1991, shall be required to have 1 off
                                         street parking space for each dwelling
                                         unit, plus 1 for each permitted
                                         gratuitous guest.
Commercial:                               
                                         6 stacking spaces for 1 ATM on a site
 ATM                                    and 8 stacking spaces for 2 ATMs on a
                                         site.
 Auto service                           3 spaces per service bay.
                                         4 stacked spaces per bay or stall, 15
 Car wash                               stacking spaces for automated bay or
                                         stall plus 1 parking space per
                                         employee that works on site.
                                         8 stacking spaces for the first
                                         window, plus 2 stacking spaces for
 Drive-through facility, non-ATM        each additional window in addition to
                                         the parking required for that specific
                                         land use.
 Durable goods, furniture, appliances,  2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
  etc.                                   floor area.
 Eating/drinking                        12 spaces per 1,000 feet gross floor
                                         area.
 Retail, freestanding                   4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                         floor area.
                                         A minimum of 4.0 spaces per 1,000
                                         square feet of GLA for centers having
                                         a GLA of 25,000 to 400,000 square
                                         feet; and 4.5 to 5.0 spaces in a
                                         linear progression, for centers having
 Shopping center                        from 400,000 to 600,000 square feet of
                                         GLA; and 5.0 spaces per 1,000 square
                                         feet of GLA for centers having a GLA
                                         of over 600,000 square feet.
                                         Adjustments to these requirements can
                                         be considered on a case by case basis
                                         pursuant to the special use process.
                                         2 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                         floor area for the first 10,000 square
                                         feet, plus 1/2 per 1,000 square feet
 Wholesale                              gross floor area for the remaining
                                         space. Office area parking
                                         requirements shall be calculated
                                         separately based on office parking
                                         rates.
Business and professional:                
 Beauty/barber shop                     3 spaces per chair.
 Business and professional office       4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                         floor area.
 Financial                              4 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                         floor area.
                                         1 space per 50 square feet public
 Funeral services                       access rooms plus 1 space per vehicle
                                         used in connection with the
                                         enterprises.
                                         5 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
 Gym/health club                        floor area plus additional spaces for
                                         outdoor accessory uses based on their
                                         requirements.
 Hospital                               2 spaces per bed plus outpatient areas
                                         calculated at medical/dental rate.
 Medical/dental                         6 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
                                         3 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
 Personal services                      floor area (tailor, shoe repair,
                                         tanning spa, dry cleaners).
 Religious institution                  1 space per 4 seats.
Schools and libraries:                    
                                         1 space per employee plus 2 spaces for
 Dance/music/vocational/trad e          each 3 students based on the maximum
                                         number of students attending classes
                                         on the premises at any one time.
 Daycare/nursery                        4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
                                         gross floor area.
 K - 9th grades                         1 space per employee plus 4 spaces for
                                         visitors.
 Library                                3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
                                         gross floor area.
 Senior high school                     1 space per employee plus 1 space per
                                         8 students.
Culture/entertainment:                    
 Amusement establishment                1 space per 3 persons capacity plus 1
                                         space per employee.
 Arena/stadium                          1 space per 4 seats.
 Bowling alley                          5 spaces per lane.
 Club/lodge                             7 spaces per 1,000 square feet gross
                                         floor area.
 Cultural institution                   1 space per 400 square feet gross
                                         floor area.
 Golf course                            60 spaces per 9 holes.
                                         1 for every 15 square feet of shallow
                                         water (5 feet or less) or wading area
                                         per bather; and 25 square feet of deep
 Swimming pool                          water (deeper than 5 feet) per bather;
                                         and for every 50 square feet of deck,
                                         1 bather may be added to overall
                                         capacity.
 Tennis court                           4 spaces per court.
 Theater                                1 space per 4 seats.
Industrial:                               
                                         3/4 space per airplane tie-down plus 1
 Airport                                space for each 3 passengers whose
                                         departure originates from the
                                         facility.
 Bus facility                           1 space per 2 employees plus 1 space
                                         per bus.
 Commuter train/bus station             2 spaces per 3 passengers whose
                                         departure originates from facility.
 Manufacturing/utility                  1 space per 2 employees plus 1 space
                                         per company vehicle.
 Radio/TV studio                        4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
 Research and development               4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
                                         2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of
                                         gross floor area for the first 10,000
                                         square feet plus 1/2 space per 1,000
 Warehouse                              square feet for the remaining space.
                                         Office area parking requirements shall
                                         be calculated separately based on
                                         office parking rates.
 
   HANDICAPPED/ACCESSIBLE PARKING STALL REQUIREMENTS
                                         Required Minimum Number Of Accessible
Total Off Street Parking Spaces Provided Parking Spaces (With Exception Of The
                                         Below Medical Facilities Requirements)
Total Off Street Parking Spaces Required Minimum Number Of Accessible
Provided                        Parking Spaces (With Exception Of The
                                Below Medical Facilities Requirements)
   1 - 25                    1
   26 - 50                   2
   51 - 75                   3
   76 - 100                  4
   101 - 150                 5
   151 -- 200                6
   201 - 300                 7
   301 - 400                 8
   401 - 500                 9
   501 - 1,000               2 percent of total number
   Over 1,000                20 plus 1 for each 100 spaces over 1,000
                                spaces
 
Medical facilities that care for or treat patients with mobility impairments
must designate ten percent (10%) of the required parking spaces as handicapped
for an outpatient facility or twenty percent (20%) of the required parking
spaces for a facility that specializes in treatment or services for persons
with mobility issues. Please reference the Illinois accessibility code for more
information. Any regulations required by the Illinois accessibility code that
are above and beyond the scope of this section
10-14-5 will apply.
   SCHEDULE OF SHARED PARKING CALCULATIONS
How To Use The Schedule Of Shared Parking Calculations: For each applicable
general land use category, calculate the number of spaces required for a use if
it were freestanding (refer to the regular schedule of parking requirements).
Use those figures for each land use to calculate the number of spaces required
for each time period for each use (6 time periods per use). For each time
period, add the number of spaces required for all applicable land uses to
obtain a grand total for each of the six (6) time periods. Select the time
period with the highest total parking requirement and use that total as your
shared parking requirement.
 
               Weekdays                      Weekends
General Land   Night    Day 7:00  Evening 6: Night       Day 7:00   Evening 6:
Use            Midnight A.M.To 6: 00 P.M. To Midnight To A.M. To 6: 00 P.M. To
Classification To 7:00  00 P.M.   Midnight   7:00 A.M.   00 P.M.    Midnight
               A.M.
Office and     5%       100%      5%         0%          100%       10%
industrial
Retail         0%       100%      80%        0%          100%       60%
Restaurant     50%      70%       100%       70%         45%        100%
Hotel          100%     65%       100%       100%        65%        100%
 
(Ord. 656A, 11-10-2009)
10-14-6: OFF STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT, STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE:
Wherever the off street parking requirements in section
10-14-5 of this chapter require the building of an off street parking facility,
such off street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the following standards and regulations:
   (A)   All spaces shall be laid out in the dimension of nine feet by twenty
feet (9' x 20'), or one hundred eighty (180) square feet of space (exclusive of
subsection (B) of this section).
   (B)   All space shall be provided adequate access of means and maneuvering
lanes.
   (C)   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly
limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles.
   (D)   Plans for the layout of the parking lot shall show a total dimension
across two (2) tiers of spaces and one aisle (maneuvering lane) of at least the
following for the various patterns:
      1.   A 90 Degree Pattern: Sixty feet (60') for two (2) tiers of spaces
and one aisle (maneuvering lane), with the minimum aisle being twenty feet
(20') in width. This minimum aisle width shall permit two-way traffic movement.
      2.   A 60 Degree Pattern: Fifty nine feet (59') for two (2) tiers of
spaces and one aisle (maneuvering lane), with the minimum aisle being fifteen
feet (15') in width. This minimum aisle width shall permit one-way traffic
movement.
      3.   A 45 Degree Pattern: Fifty three feet (53') for two (2) spaces and
one aisle (maneuvering lane), with the minimum aisle being twelve feet (12') in
width. This minimum aisle width shall permit one-way traffic movement.
      4.   A 45 Degree Herringbone Pattern: Forty seven feet (47') for two (2)
tiers of spaces and one aisle (maneuvering lane), with the minimum aisle being
twelve feet (12') in width. This minimum aisle width shall permit one-way
traffic movement.
   (E)   The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering
lanes, required under this chapter, shall have asphaltic or concrete surfacing,
or some other acceptable surface, in accordance with specifications approved by
the village engineer. Such facilities shall be so drained so as to dispose of
all surface water accumulated in the parking area. Variances from these
requirements may be granted for special circumstances, including, without
limitation for parking areas not visible from the street where there will be
little or no impact on neighboring properties.
   (F)   The parking area shall be provided with a continuous and completely
obscuring wood or masonry wall or fence four feet six inches (4'6") in height
measured from the surface of the parking area. This wall or fence shall be
provided on all sides where the next zoning district is designated as a
residential district.
   (G)   All lighting used to illuminate any off street parking area shall not
exceed twenty feet (20') in overall height above ground level and shall be so
installed as to be confined within and directed on the parking area, and shall
be directed away from abutting streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1147f5e2e9733f6b2c310ca34bc981edbce4a658/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2294.png]
(amd. Ord. 881, 7-10-2019)
10-14-7: OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING:
On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, involving
the receipt of distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there
shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing,
loading and unloading. Such space shall be provided as follows:
   (A)   All spaces in B-1 and B-2 Districts may be provided as rear yard as
required in Chapter 12 of this Title.
   (B)   All spaces in I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be laid out in the dimension
of at least ten feet by forty feet (10' x 40'), or four hundred (400) square
feet in area. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a permanent,
durable and dustless surface. All spaces shall be provided in the following
ratio of space to useable floor area:
 
Gross Floor Area Loading and Unloading Space Required in Terms of Square  Feet
(In Square Feet) of Useable Floor Area
0 - 20,000       One space
20,000 - 100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess
                 of the first 20,001 square feet
100,001 and over Five (5) spaces
 
10-14-8: SIGNS:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this Section, unless the content otherwise
clearly indicates:
                    Banners affixed to poles, wires or ropes, streamers, wind-
ADVERTISING DEVICE: operated devices, flashing lights and other similar
                    devices.
AWNING SIGN:        Any sign which is affixed to, painted on, or suspended from
                    a canopy or awning.
                    Any illuminated sign on which there is artificial light
FLASHING SIGN:      which is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity
                    or color at all times when such sign is in use.
                    Any sign erected, constructed or maintained for the purpose
                    of displaying outdoor advertising by means of posters,
GROUND SIGN:        pictures, pictorial or reading matter when such sign is
                    supported by two (2) or more uprights, posts or braces
                    placed or affixed in the ground and not supported
                    principally by a building.
                    Any canopy or other covered structure (other than a
MARQUEE SIGN:       projecting sign) projecting from and wholly or
                    substantially supported by a building and extending beyond
                    the building wall.
                    Any sign that is not permanently attached to the ground, a
PORTABLE SIGN:      structure, or a building and which is designed to be
                    transported to another location, including, but not limited
                    to, chalkboard signs, flag signs, and poster holders.
                    Any letter, word, model sign, device or representation used
POST SIGN:          in the nature of an advertising or announcement not
                    attached to a building and which is supported by a single
                    stationary pole or designed structure.
                    Any sign which is attached to a building or other structure
PROJECTING SIGN:    and extends more than twelve inches (12") beyond the face
                    of such building or structure.
ROOF SIGN:          Any sign erected, constructed or maintained upon the roof
                    of any building.
                    An identification, description, illusion or device which is
                    affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a
SIGN:               building, structure or land, and which directs attention to
                    a product, place, activity, person, institution or
                    business.
                    The total area of the space to be used for advertising
                    purposes, including the space between open-type letters and
                    figures, including the background structure, or other
SIGN AREA:          decoration or addition which is an integral part of the
                    sign. Sign supports shall be excluded in determining the
                    area of the sign. A double-faced sign shall have twice the
                    total area of a single face sign.
WALL SIGN:          Any sign or poster on any surface or plane that may be
                    affixed to the front, side or rear wall of any building.
 
   (B)   Signs Permitted in the Several Zoning Districts:
      1.   In addition to the signs permitted by subsection (D) (Exemptions)
only the following signs may be erected in the zoning districts hereinafter
named:
         (a)   The following signs are allowed in all districts:
            (1)   Temporary signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area
advertising the sale or lease of real estate when located upon property to
which the sign refers and when not located closer than ten feet (10') to a lot
line, which said sign shall be removed upon sale of the property.
            (2)   Temporary ground signs advertising future use or development
or property on which such signs are located may be maintained subject to the
provisions of this Section, provided such signs do not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in area or remain longer than eighteen (18) months. “For Rent” or
“For Sale” signs in office, business and industrial districts for new buildings
shall not exceed forty eight (48) square feet. All signs advertising sales,
including “For Sale” and “For Rent” signs, shall be removed within twenty-four
(24) hours following completion of the sale or other transaction being
advertised.
            (3)   Church or public building bulletin boards not exceeding
twenty (20) square feet.
            (4)   Traffic and official signs. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82)
         (b)   In B-1 Business Districts there may be roof signs, wall signs,
projecting signs, post signs, marquee signs, awning signs, and portable signs
when displaying no advertising matter except pertaining to the business
conducted in the building or on the premises on which such sign is placed. The
total square foot area of roof signs, wall signs, projecting signs, marquee
signs and awning signs shall not exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the total square
foot area of the face of the building on which they are placed. There shall not
be more than one post sign for each one hundred feet (100') of street frontage,
and shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area. No post sign shall
extend closer than the lot line. All portions of post signs shall be erected
and maintained behind the building line.
         (c)   In B-2 Business and Industrial Districts, there may be any sign
allowed in subsection (B)1(b), and ground signs provided that no ground sign
shall exceed five hundred (500) square feet in area; not more than one ground
sign shall be erected on any one lot or tract of land, or one sign for each
three hundred feet (300') of street frontage when located at least three
hundred feet (300') apart on such lot or tract of land; and no ground sign when
erected on a lot fronting on intersecting streets shall be erected within fifty
feet (50') of the intersection of the streets.
      2.   The following additional sign regulations shall be observed:
         (a)   Ground Signs: No ground sign shall be at any point over fifty
feet (50') above the ground level. The end of such signs shall be at least six
feet (6') from any wall or fence or any obstruction that would prevent a clear
passage around the ends and shall not block or obstruct the view of traffic in
any direction.
         (b)   Wall Signs: No wall sign shall extend beyond the building.
         (c)   Projecting Signs: Projecting signs may extend not more than four
feet six inches (4'6") from the building into the front yard, or project into
street pavement right of way. No such sign or part thereof shall extend nearer
the curb line than two feet (2'), under any circumstances.
         (d)   Post Signs: No post sign shall extend downward nearer than ten
feet (10') to the ground or pavement. The maximum square foot area for each
face of a post sign shall not exceed a total area of thirty two (32) square
feet per face or a total of one hundred (100) square feet for all faces.
         (e)   Marquee Signs:
            (1)   Marquees projecting beyond the property line shall be erected
with a clearance of not less than ten feet (10') above the adjacent sidewalk
level, shall not exceed three feet (3') in the vertical plane two feet (2')
inside the curb line.
            (2)   Signs on a marquee shall not exceed twenty feet (20') square
on any side or front section of the marquee. Such signs may extend above the
top of the marquee, providing the vertical dimension of the structure including
both marquee and sign shall not exceed three feet (3'). If such signs are to be
illuminated, indirect type lighting must be used.
         (f)   Portable Signs: Portable signs shall not exceed twenty (20)
square feet per face and shall not exceed a total of forty (40) square feet for
all faces total. Portable signs shall not obstruct the view of traffic in any
direction.
         (g)   Roof Signs: No part of a roof sign shall be higher than fifteen
feet (15') from roof level.
   (C)   Prohibited Signs: The following signs are prohibited within the
Village.
      1.   Except as otherwise permitted hereunder, any sign affixed to, hung
or placed or painted on any fence, tree, public utility pole, radio, television
or similar tower, except call letters or decorative emblems on commercial radio
or television towers.
      2.   Any sign across a public right of way, other than official highway
signs.
      3.   Any sign where by reason of its position, wording, flashing nature,
illumination, size, shape, color or condition, may obstruct, impair, obscure,
interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control
sign, signal or device.
      4.   No sign or any illumination, lamp or bulb shall be permitted that
could in any way tend to blind, reflect a light that might interfere with
vision.
      5.   No sign shall make use of the words “Stop”, “Look”, “Danger” or any
other word, phrase, symbol or character that may interfere with, mislead, or
confuse traffic; provided that safety signs with words like “Caution” or
“Children at Play” shall be allowed.
      6.   Any paper posters applied directly to the wall or building or pole
or other support and letters or pictures in the form of advertising, printed or
applied directly on the wall of a building. Temporary signs may be displayed in
or attached to the inside of show or display windows provided the total sign
area does not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the show or display window area.
      7.   Except for traffic and municipal signs, any sign erected within six
(6) feet of a roadway, or erected in such a manner as to obstruct the line of
sight of traffic in any direction.
   (D)   Exemptions: No permit shall be required for the following signs,
provided they are installed in compliance with the provisions of this Section
and all other applicable Village code provisions.
      1.   Real estate signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area which
advertise for sale or rental the land and/or building upon which such signs are
located. Such signs shall not be illuminated and shall not be more than four
feet (4') in height.
      2.   Real estate “open house” signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in
area which are removed immediately after said “open house”. Such signs shall
not be illuminated.
      3.   Professional name plates not exceeding one square foot in area when
placed flat against the wall of the building and not more than ten feet (10')
in height.
      4.   Bulletin boards not over twenty (20) square feet in area for
municipal and governmental buildings or for buildings used for religious
purposes when erected upon the building or land upon which such building is
located.
      5.   Monumental inscriptions, memorial signs or tablets containing names
of buildings and/or dates of erection, etc., when cut into masonry or when
constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials.
      6.   Signs denoting the architect, engineer, roofer, landscaper, and/or
contractor when placed upon work under construction. In the Business and
Industrial Districts, such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet
in area per project. In Residential Districts, such signs shall not exceed four
(4) square feet in area per project and shall not remain standing after a
period of thirty (30) days. Such signs shall not be illuminated.
      7.   Traffic or Municipal signs, railroad crossing signs, danger, safety,
temporary, emergency, nonadvertising or decorative signs as may be authorized
by the President.
      8.   Signs painted on the exterior of the building but only in business
and industrial zoning districts and then only when they comply as to size and
type with the provisions of this Section, relating to such zoning districts.
      9.   (a)   A temporary, non-illuminated sign not exceeding thirty two
(32) square feet on each surface for special events such as community affairs,
grand openings, church-sponsored events and election installed in compliance
with the provisions of this Section. No such sign shall remain standing after a
period of ten (10) days, excepting election signs being allowed for thirty (30)
days and shall not occur with respect to the same business or organization more
frequently than once every six (6) months.
         (b)   Garage sale signs which are otherwise in compliance with Section
3-5-20 of this Code.
         (c)   Political candidate signs not to exceed six (6) square feet in
area. Said signs to be removed within three (3) days after an election.
         (d)   Any temporary sign pertaining to special events not covered in
this Section not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet on each surface may be
erected with approval of the Mayor. Such sign shall remain standing no longer
than ten (10) days.
      10.   Informational signs located on a building or fence related to the
health and safety of guests or visitors to the premises, including, but not
limited to, “Beware of Dog” or “No Smoking Oxygen In Use” signs, which do not
exceed a size of four (4) square feet with a height of no more than two (2)
feet, provided there is no more than one (1) such sign in any twelve (12) foot
area.
      11.   Signs advertising home occupations provided such signs are in
compliance with Section
10-4-3(E).
   (E)   Maintenance: The owner of any sign shall be required to maintain such
sign, including any illumination sources, in compliance with all applicable
laws and Village ordinances and in a neat and orderly condition and good
working order at all times. Every sign, including all supports for such sign,
shall be maintained so as to prevent the development of any rust, corrosion,
rotting or other deterioration such as faded, peeling, and broken lettering,
chips and dents or discoloration on a painted surface, or tattered or torn
material. Every sign shall be maintained in a safe and secure condition so as
to prevent danger to the public. The premises around ground signs and post
signs shall be kept clean and free of all rubbish and weeds.
   (F)   Removal of Signs: Any sign which is hereafter unlawfully installed or
maintained, or which ceases to be used for a period of sixty (60) days, shall
be taken down and removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial
use of the building or structure, or land upon which such sign may be found,
within ten (10) days after written notification from the Building Inspector.
Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified therein, the
Building Inspector may cause the removal of such sign. Any expense incident
thereto shall be paid for by the owner of the building or structure or of the
land upon which such sign is erected. Nothing herein shall prevent the
prosecution of any owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the
premises, from being prosecuted against by fine, or both.
   (G)   Obstruction to Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes: No sign shall be
erected, replaced, relocated or permitted to exist so as to prevent free
ingress or egress from any door, window or fire escape, nor shall it obstruct
from any window the light and ventilation required by other ordinances of this
Village. No sign of any kind shall be attached to any standpipe or fire escape,
other than necessary identifying signs approved by the Fire Chief. (Ord. 482,
4-7-82)
   (H)   Illumination: When exposed incandescent lamps are used for ground
signs, marquees, roof signs, or wall signs, they shall be equipped with
gooseneck reflectors or other devices arranged so as to concentrate the
illumination upon the area of the sign and prevent glare. No flashing sign or
sign which changes color may be hereafter erected, other than time or weather.
Each outline lighting installation and each illuminated sign shall be
controlled by a time switch or externally operated switch which will open all
underground conductors and shall be suitable for conditions of installation,
such as exposure to weather. No flashing sign may be closer than ten feet (10')
to the ground level. (Ord. 482-A, 8-22-1985)
   (I)   Loads And Allowable Stresses: All signs shall be designed and
constructed to withstand wind pressures applied to the projected exposed area,
allowing for wind in any direction, in accordance with the following table:
 
HEIGHT FROM GROUND      WIND PRESSURE
TO TOP OF SIGN, IN FEET POUNDS PER SQUARE FOOT
                        Solid Signs Open Signs
Less than 30            17          23
30 - 49                 22          31
50 - 99                 28          39
100 - 499               33          46
 
For ground signs thirty feet (30') to forty feet (40') in height the tabular
values for heights of less than thirty feet (30') may be used.
Allowable stresses and materials shall conform to the latest approved
specifications of the American standard building code requirements for
structural steel, approved by the American standard association, and of the
national design specification for stress-grade lumber and its fastenings,
recommended by the national lumber manufacturers association. The working
stress of chains, wire ropes and steel guy rods and their fastenings shall not
exceed one-quarter (1/4) of their ultimate strength.
   (J)   Permits Required: After the effective date of this section, it shall
be unlawful for any person to erect, structurally alter, rehang or replace any
sign or outdoor display structure within this village without first submitting
applications for erection permits to the building inspector and, when
applicable, to the electrical inspector. Such applications shall be accompanied
with plans and specifications showing the dimensions, materials, location and
all details of construction. The applications shall contain the written consent
of the owner or lessee of the land and/or building upon which the sign is to be
erected.
A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall accompany each application, with an
additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) if electrical permit is needed. A permit
shall not be required, for mere changing of painting, or reposting of
advertising copy or display matter on signs or theater marquees designed for
use of replaceable copy, provided such change does not violate the provisions
of this section.
   (K)   Nonconforming Signs: Signs which are nonconforming based upon the
above provisions, shall be eliminated not later than October 31, 2023. No
nonconforming sign shall be rebuilt, altered, moved or rehung without being
brought into strict compliance with the requirements of this section.
Prohibited signs, as defined in subsection (C) of this section, shall not be
determined “nonconforming” but shall be considered in violation immediately
upon the effective date of this section.
   (L)   Bonds And Liability Insurance: No person shall erect, structurally
alter, rehang, maintain or replace any sign which projects over the street line
unless he has filed with the building inspector a bond of at least one hundred
thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00)
for approved public liability issued by an approved insurance company for said
amount and naming the village as an insured party, agreeing to indemnify and
hold harmless the village from loss sustained as the result of said sign. Such
bond shall be conditioned upon the construction, erection and maintenance of
such sign in accordance with the provisions of this section, and shall save
harmless the village, its agents and officials, from any and all claims or
damages by reason of such sign or any part thereof, and such policy shall be
kept in full force, with proof of insurance furnished the village clerk, so
long as such sign shall remain.
   (M)   Modification Of Requirements: Whenever any sign to be erected or
structurally altered is surrounded by such development or unusual condition as
to make strict compliance difficult, or work a material hardship and an
injustice, the building inspector on request of the applicant, shall forward
the application, together with his recommendations to the village board.
Thereupon the village board shall refer the application to the village zoning
board of appeals for report and recommendations, which the board may, after
report received, vary or modify the requirements so that the applicant may
erect or structurally alter such sign in a reasonable manner, but at the same
time, that the public welfare and interests of the village are protected and
the general purpose and intent of this section are preserved.
   (N)   Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section, shall upon conviction, be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a
separate offense and shall be punished accordingly.
   (O)   Conflicting Ordinances And Regulations: Wherever there is a difference
with the provisions of this section with any other ordinance of this village,
the ordinance, code or regulation imposing the greater restriction, excepting
as herein altered, and as so changed, then this section shall govern. (Ord.
482, 4-7-1982; amd. Ord. 482-A, 8-22-85; Ord. 575-A, 1-23-2002; Ord. 964, 11-9-
2022)
10-14-9: PLANT MATERIALS:
Wherever in this title a greenbelt or planting is required, it shall be planted
within six (6) months from the date of insurance of a certificate of occupancy
and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant materials to
provide a screen to abutting properties. Suitable materials equal in
characteristics to the plant materials listed with the spacing as required
shall be provided.
   (A)   Plant Material Spacing:
      1.   Plant material shall not be closer than four feet (4') from the
fence line or property line.
      2.   Where plant materials are planted in two (2) or more rows, plantings
shall be staggered in rows.
      3.   Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than thirty feet (30') on
centers.
      4.   Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than three feet (3') on
centers.
      5.   Deciduous trees shall be planted not more than thirty feet (30') on
centers.
      6.   Tree like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten feet (10') on
centers.
      7.   Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four feet (4')
on centers.
   (B)   Suggested Plant Materials:
Suggested Plant Material Minimum Size
Suggested Plant Material  Minimum Size
1. Evergreen trees
Juniper
Red cedar                 Five feet (5') in height
White cedar
Pines
2. Narrow evergreens
Pyramidal arborvitae      Three feet (3') in height
Columnar juniper
Irish juniper
3. Tree like shrubs
Flowering crabs
Russian olives
Mountain ash              Four feet (4') in height
Dogwood
Redbud
Rose of Sharon
4. Large deciduous shrubs
Honeysuckle
Viburnum
Mock orange               Six feet (6') in height
Forsythia
Lilacs
Ninebark
5. Large deciduous trees
Oaks
Hard maples               Eight feet (8') in height
Ash
Hackberry
Sycamore
 
   (C)   Trees not permitted.
   Box Elder
   Soft Maples
   Elms
   Poplars
   Ailanthus (tree of heaven)
   Willows
10-14-10: USES NOT INCLUDED WITHIN A SPECIFIC USE DISTRICT:
Because the uses hereinafter referred to possess unique characteristics making
it impractical to include them in a specific use district classification, they
shall be permitted by the Zoning Board of Appeals under the conditions
specified, and after public hearing.
These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger than
the Village and require sizable land areas, creating problems of control with
reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling
specifically within the intent of this Section is as follows:
   (A)   Outdoor Theaters: Because outdoor theaters possess the unique
characteristic of being used only after darkness and since they develop a
concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their
parking area, they shall be permitted in I-1 District only. Outdoor theaters
shall further be subject to the following conditions:
      1.   The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the
Building Inspector and Village Engineer as to adequacy of drainage, lighting
and other technical aspects.
      2.   Points of ingress and egress shall be available to the outdoor
theater from abutting major thoroughfares and shall not be available from any
residential street.
      3.   All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be
provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or
stand within a dedicated right of way.
      4.   The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from
being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All
lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so installed as to be confined
within and directed to the premises of the outdoor theater site.
   (B)   Commercial Television and Radio Towers and Public Utility Microwaves,
and Public Utility T.V. Transmitting Towers: Radio and television towers,
public utility microwaves and public utility T.V. transmitting towers, and
their attendant facilities shall be permitted in I-1 and I-2 Districts provided
said use shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of not less than one
times the height of the tower measured from the base of said tower to all
points on each property line.
   (C)   Benching and Terracing:
      1.   Permit Required: No person shall strip, excavate, grade or otherwise
remove top or underearth (hereinafter called land removal) except in connection
with the construction or alteration of a building on such premises and
excavating or grading incidental thereto, except after securing a permit from
the Building Inspector of the Village.
      2.   Plans and Specifications: All plans and specifications for land
removal shall be submitted with applications for a permit to conduct said land
removal. At the discretion of the Building Inspector, or upon request by the
Village Board, the applicant may be required to furnish a topographic map
showing the original and the proposed final contours of the final site. The
topographic map shall be drawn to a minimum horizontal scale of one inch equals
fifty feet (1" = 50') and two foot (2') contour intervals shall be indicated.
After the excavation is completed, the site shall be graded to conform to the
approved topographic map. The applicant has the right to appeal to the Village
Board if in disagreement with the Building Inspector.
The application shall be accompanied by the applicant's proposed methods for
the prevention of erosion. Such work may involve the construction of berms,
dams, sediment basins, slope drains, seeding and mulching or other methods to
prevent erosion. This erosion prevention schedule must be approved by the
Building Inspector prior to the start of work.
The Village Engineer shall review the site plan prior to approval and make
recommendations to the Building Inspector.
      3.   Prevention of Public Nuisances: During the period of land removal
authorized under paragraph 2 above, the permit holder shall erect such
temporary and permanent fences and take other measures as may be necessary to
keep said land removal area from becoming a public nuisance, including but not
limited to a control of blowing soil particles and the inundation of lower
lands because of the loss of vegetation in the land area. The Building
Inspector shall have the right to inspect the work at any time. When in the
opinion of the Building Inspector the land has a high potential for erosion,
the areas that can be exposed by land removal operations at any one time shall
be subject to approval by the Inspector and the duration of the exposure of the
uncompleted operation shall be as short as practicable.
      4.   Protection Of Yard Areas: At all times during land removal
authorized under subsection (C)2 of this Section, no part of said land removal
area can extend into what is defined as a yard area for use classification of
the land in question as described in Section 10-12-3 of this Title.
      5.   Specifications For Slopes, Benches And Vegetation: Benching and
terracing shall conform to the following:
         (a)   Slopes created by land removal shall not exceed a vertical rise
of one foot per horizontal two feet (1':2'); for each twenty five feet (25') of
elevation, a minimum twelve foot (12') berm or bench must be incorporated in
any terrace created or altered through land removal. If in the opinion of the
Village Engineer, the soil conditions do not allow these slopes, they may be
changed as directed. These changes may be required at any time it is deemed
necessary.
         (b)   Upon completion of land removal, the site shall be planted by
seeding or plugging with crown vetch or vegetation with equal qualities as
approved by the Building Inspector. The area shall be prepared to accept seed
or planting, fertilizer applied, and enough seed or plugs applied to
satisfactorily produce a suitable cover.
         (c)   The permit holder will be required to incorporate all permanent
erosion control features at the earliest practicable time as outlined in his
approved schedule.
      6.   Prevention Of Erosion: The Building Inspector has the authority to
limit the surface area of erodible material exposed by excavation and to direct
the permit holder to provide immediate permanent or temporary control measures
as necessary to prevent erosion. After completion of authorized land removal
under subsection (C)2 of this Section, the permit holder must, to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector, cover all exposed earth with vegetation
leaving said land as near as possible to its former state but with vegetation
at least sufficient to prevent erosion of the land and to prevent the land from
being detrimental to or endangering public health, safety, comfort or general
welfare, considering the zoning use authorized for surrounding land. (The
standard used in considering what is detrimental or a danger to the public
after the land removal operation is completed is increased in severity over the
standard used in subsection (C)2 of this Section due to performance of the
condition.)
      7.   Bond Required: No permit to move over one thousand (1,000) cubic
yards shall be effective unless there is on file with the Village a cash bond
with a corporate surety in the penal sum equal to ten dollars ($10.00) per one
hundred (100) cubic yards of earth to be moved or portion thereof, but not less
than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to assure that:
         (a)   The permit holder, its agents and servants, will comply with all
the terms, conditions, provisions, requirements and specifications contained in
this subsection (C).
         (b)   The permit holder, his agents and servants, will save harmless
the Village from any expense incurred through the failure of the permittee, his
agents and servants to operate and maintain land removal operations as required
by this subsection (C), including any expense the Village may be put to for
correcting any condition or violation of this subsection (C) by the Village's
own labor and equipment, whenever the Village Board of Trustees determines it
is necessary for the Village to correct any condition in violation of this
subsection (C) or from any damages growing out of the negligence of the
permittee or his agents or servants; and
         (c)   Before acceptance, all bonds must be approved by the Village
Board of Trustees. If a corporate bond is offered, it is to be executed by a
company authorized to transact business in this State as a surety. If a cash
bond is offered, it shall be deposited with the Treasurer of the Village who
shall give his official receipt therefor, reciting that said cash has been
deposited in compliance with and subject to the provisions of this subsection
(C)7. No bond or surety shall be released until the requirements of these
regulations have been complied with. The permit holder will pay all costs for
engineering and inspection as approved by the Village. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982)
      8.   Filing Fee: A filing fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for
each permit required to be secured from the Building Inspector of the Village
in accordance with the Benching and Terracing Act shall be paid to the Village
at the time of application for the permit. (Ord. 482Z, 8-13-1997)
10-14-11: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any use district which does
not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy and operation, which
standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained
within said area:
   (A)   Open Storage: The open storage of any equipment, and all materials
including wastes, shall be screened from abutting residential property by an
enclosure consisting of an obscuring wall or fence not less than six feet (6')
high or by a ten foot (10') wide greenbelt planting not less than six feet (6')
high. The obscuring fence may be eliminated where such fence will interfere
with traffic movement on public streets or thoroughfares.
   (B)   Glare: Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or
acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful rays shall be performed in such a
manner as not to extend beyond the property line, and as not to create a public
nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
   (C)   Grading: Grading, as it relates to residential structures, shall be so
developed as to drain surface water away from residential dwellings. A minimum
slope of one-fourth inch in one foot (1/4":1') shall be provided. (Ord. 482, 4-
7-1982)
10-14-12: REGULATION OF SATELLITE DISHES:
   (A)   Definition: For the purposes of this Section, a satellite dish subject
to regulation is defined as an "outdoor dish antenna" in excess of two feet
(2') in diameter, more than twelve feet (12') in height, if not attached to a
structure, or more than four feet (4') above the roof of any structure, used
for the purpose of receiving television and/or other signals from orbiting
satellites or other sources. Outdoor dish antennas that do not exceed the
limitations stated in the preceding sentence are not subject to regulations set
forth in subsection B of this Section. (Ord. 564, 1-28-1998)
   (B)   Regulations: "Outdoor dish antennas" as herein defined shall not be
installed within the corporate limits of the Village, except in accordance with
the provisions of this Section:
      1.   An outdoor dish antenna shall not be greater than five meters (5 m)
(16 feet, 4.8 inches) in diameter.
      2.   No outdoor dish antenna shall have a height greater than the height
of the main building on the zoning lot on which it is located. The height of an
outdoor dish antenna shall be measured from the highest point of the dish when
positioned for operation to the average finished grade of the property on which
the antenna is located.
      3.   All cables leading to or from an outdoor dish antenna which run
between any structure and the antenna shall be buried. All cables to or from
any outdoor dish antenna which carry electricity shall be equipped with a
ground fault circuit interrupter.
      4.   No more than one outdoor dish antenna shall be located on any one
zoning lot.
      5.   No ground dish antenna shall be located within the front yard or
side yard of the zoning lot on which it is located.
If located in the rear yard, it shall not be located within five feet (5') to
the rear lot line or within three feet (3') of any side lot line. Any ground
dish antenna located on a reverse corner lot shall not be located beyond the
front yard required on the adjacent lot to the rear nor nearer than five feet
(5') to the side lot line of said adjacent lot.
      6.   No outdoor dish antenna shall be installed within the corporate
limits of the Village unless a permit therefore has been obtained from the
Building Inspector. Application for such a permit shall be made by submitting
to the Building Inspector a site plan showing the location of the proposed
outdoor dish antenna and the specifications for that antenna. If the Building
Inspector is satisfied that the proposed outdoor dish antenna will comply with
the provisions of this Section, he shall forthwith issue the permit. (Ord.
482C, 2-13-1986)
10-14-13: REGULATION OF TRANSMITTING TOWERS/POLES:
Transmitting facilities and/or studios for commercial and noncommercial radio
stations, television stations or other transmitting entities including
necessary appurtenances such as a tower or towers may be erected above the
maximum height otherwise applicable to the location in question, upon approval
of an application for a special use for the transmitting tower or pole.
Provided, however, that no such special use may be authorized or continued
after authorization unless subsections (A) and (B) of this Section, are met by
all towers except self-supporting or monopole towers which are subject to
subsection (C) of this Section.
   (A)   Restrictions: No building other than nonhabitable accessory buildings
and structures and no public roadways shall be allowed within the zoned lot or
within the fall zone of the tower.
   (B)   No Buildings On Zoning Lot: The distance between the base of any
transmitting or other tower and the nearest property line of the zoning lot on
which the tower is located shall not be less than the height of the tower. The
owner or owners of record of the zoning lot on which the tower is located shall
prepare and execute in recordable form, a fall zone easement agreement
indicating that the property owners shall not construct a dwelling or habitable
structure on any portion of the easement so long as the tower remains in place
on the zoning lot. The intent of this provision is to ensure that for so long
as a tower remains in place, no dwelling or habitable structure shall be placed
on the zoning lot within the fall zone. The aforesaid easement agreement shall
be recorded against the property where the tower is located in the office of
the Tazewell County recorder of deeds prior to the actual erection of the
tower.
   (C)   No Roadways Within Fall Zone: The distance between the base of any
self-supporting or monopole tower shall be no less than the total height of the
structure from any public roadway. The lot upon which the tower is erected may
be smaller than the height of the tower as long as the owners of record
surrounding the zoning lot in which the monopole or self-supporting tower is
located shall execute a fall zone easement agreement covering the entire fall
zone prohibiting the construction of any habitable structure or dwelling within
the fall zone. The fall zone established by the easement agreement shall be not
less than one hundred percent (100%) of the height of the monopole or self-
supporting tower. The fall zone easement agreement shall be prepared and
executed by the owner or owners of record of the lot and all properties
affected by the fall zone easement agreement and the agreement shall be
recorded against the properties in the office of the Tazewell County recorder
of deeds prior to the actual erection of the tower. The fall zone easement
agreement will remain effective so long as the monopole or self-supporting
tower remains in place on the lot. The intent of this provision is to ensure
that for so long as a monopole or self-supporting tower remains in place then
no buildings or habitable structures or public roadways will be located within
the fall zone.
   (D)   Additional Requirement: Any applicant for a special use pursuant to
this section must submit a site plan indicating the tower building and fencing
and any and all improvements existing or to be included within the site and
within the required fall zone. In addition the proposed fall zone easement
agreement shall also be submitted with the special use application. (Ord. 549,
4-12-1995)
10-14-14: PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS:
   (A)   Definition: For the purposes of this section, a "portable storage
container" is a nonself-propelled fully enclosed trailer unit designed or used
to store goods, materials and equipment and is placed on property zoned or used
for residential purposes. (Ord. 482-AE, 9-14-2005)
   (B)   Requirements:
      1.   A permit must be acquired from the village clerk for a fee, the
amount of which is established by the village board annually and is published
at the office of the village clerk, at least twenty four (24) hours prior to
the time the portable storage container is placed on the property.
      2.   The application must provide:
         (a)   The applicant's name.
         (b)   The address of the property to which the portable storage
container will be placed.
         (c)   Date the portable storage container is to be placed on the
property.
         (d)   A description of the intended use of the portable storage
container.
      3.   The permit will allow the owner to have the portable storage
container on the property for duration of no longer than sixty (60) days after
it has been initially placed on the property.
      4.   The village clerk may approve an extension by permit up to thirty
(30) days beyond the initial permit deadline for reasons such as, but not
limited to:
         (a)   The principal residential structure is damaged or dilapidated.
         (b)   The principal residential structure will undergo renovation,
repair or reconstruction.
      5.   Failure to obtain a valid permit or failure to remove the storage
unit after the permit expires will result in a fine not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) but not greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day the
storage unit remains on the property. (Ord. 806, 3-9-2016)
   (C)   Restrictions:
      1.   No more than two (2) portable storage containers shall be located on
a single lot or parcel of land without the express authorization of the village
building inspector.
      2.   Portable storage containers as defined in this section may not be
used to store or transport solid waste, hazardous materials, explosives,
unlawful substances or other such material defined as "garbage" in section
7-2-1-1 of this code. (Ord. 482-AE, 9-14-2005)
10-14-15: EROSION, SEDIMENT AND STORMWATER CONTROL:
   (A)   Definitions:
   ADJACENT LANDS: Land surrounding a site that may either substantially impact
that site, or be substantially impacted by potential soil erosion, sediment
and/or stormwater runoff as a result of land disturbing activities conducted on
that site.
   APPEALS BOARD: The zoning board.
   AREAS OF CONCENTRATED FLOW OR BODIES OF WATER: Any area where water may
accumulate or flow, whether continual or as the result of a storm event,
including, but not limited to, lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, ponds, ditches,
swales, gullies, ravines, street gutters and other similar features.
   CONTROL MEASURE: Any proposed temporary or permanent measures to be
installed to control erosion, sediment and stormwater runoff from a project
area.
   DEPARTMENT: The department of planning and zoning of the village.
   DEVELOPMENT: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, land fill,
or land disturbing activity; and any use or extension of the use of land.
   DISTURBED AREA: Any area of land on which the predevelopment ground surface
will be affected or altered by development. This includes, but is not limited
to, grading, clearing, stockpiling, tracking and other similar activities.
   EROSION CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR: The village building inspector or the person
or persons appointed by the mayor and approved by the village board to
administer this section.
   5-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM EVENT: The storm event rainfall depth during a twenty
four (24) hour period which is exceeded, on the average, once every five (5)
years.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): Maps prepared by the federal emergency
management agency (FEMA) that depict the special flood hazard areas (SFHA)
within a community. These maps include insurance rate zones and floodplains and
may or may not depict floodways.
   INSTITUTIONAL USE: A religious, or public use, such as a church, library,
public or private school, hospital, or government owned or operated building,
structure or land use for public purpose.
   LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY: Any change in land within the village, which may
result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into
waters of the state or onto lands in the village, or a change in the amount
and/or intensity of stormwater runoff, including, but not limited to, the
covering with an impervious surface, stockpiling, clearing, grading,
excavating, rehabilitating, transporting, depositing or filling of land.
   NORMAL AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES: Activities associated with the preparation
and tilling of land for the purposes of growing crops, or raising livestock,
which may include, but are not limited to, the construction of conservation
measures, plowing, disking and cultivating.
   PERIMETER CONTROL: Any control measure installed between the downslope side
of the disturbed area and the property line and/or between the downslope side
of the disturbed area and any area of concentrated flow.
   PREPROJECT CONDITION: The characteristics of a site prior to the initiation
of any land disturbing activity. The preproject condition shall be based on the
predominant land use for the past five (5) years. For example, if a site has
been cropland for four (4) of the past five (5) years, and in grass just prior
to development, the land use would be cropland for the preproject condition.
   PROJECT: Any development involving modification to land which involves a
land disturbing activity.
   REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: A system which is designed,
constructed, and maintained to provide stormwater control for multiple
landowners.
   ROAD: Any right of way that has been improved for the purposes of providing
a surface for vehicular traffic, including any federal, state, county,
township, and municipal controlled facilities.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building designed for residential occupancy by one
family.
   SITE: The lot or parcel on which the project is to be developed.
   STANDARDS: The Illinois environmental protection agency's "Illinois Urban
Manual", a technical manual designed by Urban Ecosystem Protection and
Enhancement published in 1995, and "Illinois Procedures And Standards For Urban
Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control", published in 1988 by the urban
committee of the Association of Illinois Soil and Water Conservation District
now in effect or as hereafter amended, which is incorporated by reference
herein, and the village standards for stormwater design analysis, found in
appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, and the erosion and
sediment control criteria and specifications found in appendix B attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
   SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION: The point at which all exterior work is completed
and the site can be used for the use intended.
   25-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM EVENT: The storm event rainfall depth during a
twenty four (24) hour period which is exceeded, on the average, once every
twenty five (25) years.
   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: A building designed for residential occupancy by two
(2) families.
   2-YEAR FREQUENCY STORM EVENT: The storm event rainfall depth during a twenty
four (24) hour period which is exceeded, on the average, once every two (2)
years.
   UTILITY SERVICE LINE: By which utility service is provided to service users,
such as electric, telephone and television cable, or gas, water and sewer
pipes.
   VILLAGE: The village of Creve Coeur, Tazewell County, Illinois.
   WORKING DAY: Shall not include Saturday, Sunday or any holiday when village
offices are closed.
   (B)   Applicability Of Section: This section shall apply to:
      1.   All projects within the boundaries or jurisdiction of the village.
No project shall be initiated within the boundaries or jurisdiction of the
village unless an erosion and sediment control permit, or an erosion sediment
and stormwater control permit, has first been issued for that project, except
as follows:
         (a)   Land disturbing activities for which the disturbed area is less
than five thousand (5,000) square feet;
         (b)   Normal agricultural practices;
         (c)   Projects undertaken by the village's department of public works;
         (d)   Routine maintenance of roads and utility service lines; or
         (e)   Any land within the boundaries or jurisdiction of the village on
which there is located a permanent stormwater control measure which was
installed pursuant to this section.
      2.   The erosion control administrator reserves the right to require any
land disturbing activity, regardless of disturbed area or type of activity, to
comply with this section if it is determined to be the cause of, or a
contributor to, substantial existing or potential erosion, sediment, or
stormwater impact.
   (C)   Permanent Soil Erosion, Sediment And Stormwater Control Measures:
      1.   Erosion And Sediment Control Measures: All control measures required
under this section shall conform to the design criteria, standards, and
specifications provided in the applicable standards, referenced in appendix B
attached to the ordinance codified herein, now in effect or as hereafter
amended. All control measures installed shall be sufficient to prevent
observable sediment from leaving the site during a 5-year frequency storm
event. All sediment that moves off site due to construction activity will be
cleaned up before the end of the same workday. All sediment that moves off site
due to storm events will be cleaned up before the end of the next workday. For
example, installing a rock construction drive or cleaning tires could be used
to minimize tracking of sediment onto public roads.
      2.   Permanent Stormwater Control Measures: Stormwater detention
facilities shall be designed for a minimum 25-year rainfall event and ten (10)
minute duration. Each stormwater detention area shall be provided with a method
of emergency overflow in the event that a rainfall event in excess of a 25-year
rainfall event occurs. This emergency overflow facility shall be designed to
function without attention or maintenance. Detention facilities shall be
designed to have a dry bottom except when inundated immediately following a
storm event. The stormwater runoff rate from the site shall not exceed the 2-
year predevelopment stormwater runoff rate from the site. Evaluation of
submitted plans shall be based on the stormwater design analysis and example in
appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein.
      3.   Regional Stormwater Control Systems: To allow for the beneficial
development and maintenance of regional stormwater management systems, where
they are available and they are appropriate, an applicant may submit a design
dependent on such a system. The applicant may submit documentation of the
approval for the use of the regional stormwater management facility from the
governmental agency having jurisdiction over it. The applicant shall submit
evidence showing that there will be no adverse flooding impact to any receiving
stream between the point of discharge and the regional stormwater facility. If
the erosion control administrator approves the use of a regional stormwater
management system, the applicant shall be exempt from the requirements in this
section for permanent on site stormwater controls. Such exemption shall not
apply to any temporary stormwater control measures required by this section.
   (D)   Temporary Soil Erosion, Sediment And Stormwater Control Measures:
      1.   Temporary Control Measures Required: On site sediment control
measures shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating land
disturbing activities on the site. Fully functioning temporary sediment control
measures (including, but not limited to, perimeter sediment controls) shall
remain in place until the ground is stabilized with permanent ground cover. In
cases where it is not practical to leave the temporary sediment control
measures in place prior to establishing permanent ground cover (for example,
when control measures need to be removed in order to grade the area or install
pavement or sod), an exception will be made only if one of the conditions
listed below will be met. In no way does adhering to one of the conditions
below relieve the owner of responsibility to clean up or repair any damages
caused from sediment or stormwater runoff leaving the site.
      2.   Permanent Ground Cover: Permanent ground cover shall be established
with pavement, aggregate or sod within three (3) working days of the removal of
temporary sediment barriers; or
      3.   Permanent Vegetation: Permanent vegetation shall be established by
seeding with anchored mulch or erosion control blanket within three (3) working
days of final grading in the spring or fall seeding periods. All disturbed
areas must have permanent ground cover established within six (6) months of the
project completion, or within six (6) months of occupancy, whichever comes
first. Summer seeding is acceptable on project areas which shall be watered.
This does not apply to concentrated flow areas.
      4.   Maintenance: Sediment control measures and temporary stormwater
control measures are to be maintained so they are operating effectively until
permanent ground surface protection and permanent stormwater control measures
are established in a manner specified in the applicable permit issued pursuant
to this section.
      5.   Additional Control Measures: The erosion control administrator may
require additional control measures pursuant to the standards if determined as
necessary after site inspection, and prior to issuing the permit.
   (E)   Retrofitting Presently Developed Sites: In instances where the project
involves a presently developed site, the applicant may request an exemption
from fully complying with the stormwater control requirements. The erosion
control administrator shall determine the type and extent of compliance
required based on existing and proposed site conditions, and the impact of
stormwater runoff on the surrounding area. This exemption will only be granted
in cases where the proposed condition of the site will not be significantly
different from the existing condition as determined by the erosion control
administrator. The purpose of this subsection is to allow for alterations to
presently developed sites without a major redesign of the existing (or
nonexisting) stormwater system, while assuring that all projects will be moving
closer to compliance with the stormwater control requirements of this section.
   (F)   Residential; Erosion And Sediment Control Permit: Before commencing
any project involving construction of a new single- or two-family dwelling,
addition, garage or foundation, or commencing on any project disturbing an area
greater than five thousand (5,000) square feet, the owner of the land, or his
representative, shall file an application for a residential (1- and 2-family
dwelling) erosion and sediment control permit, accompanied by a residential
erosion and sediment control site plan. See appendix B attached to the
ordinance codified herein for erosion, sediment and stormwater control
standards.
If more than one acre of ground is being disturbed, the project must comply
with the Illinois environmental protection agency (IEPA) by submitting to the
IEPA a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) and notice of intent. A
copy of the approved permit by the EPA must be submitted to the village of
Creve Coeur before the village will issue a permit.
See appendix D attached to the ordinance codified herein for the village of
Creve Coeur residential erosion and sediment control permit requirements flow
chart. (Ord. 661, 9-10-2008)
      1.   Application: The applicant shall file the application and
residential site plan with the department on forms provided by the department
and an application fee for a residential erosion and sediment control permit of
twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 700, 1-28-2009)
      2.   Application Review: The erosion control administrator shall not take
any action on a request until a complete application is received by the
department. Upon receipt of a complete application, the erosion control
administrator shall initiate the review process for a residential erosion and
sediment control site plan. Once the review process is complete, the erosion
control administrator shall either issue or deny the permit. If the permit is
denied, it shall be returned to the applicant with a written explanation of its
denial.
      3.   Duration: The residential erosion and sediment control permit shall
expire upon completion of the project and inspection and approval by the
erosion control administrator.
      4.   Content Of Residential Erosion And Sediment Control Permit: The
residential erosion and sediment control permit shall contain, at a minimum,
the following general conditions:
         (a)   Written Approval: That written approval be obtained from the
erosion control administrator prior to making any modification to the erosion
and sediment control plan as set forth in the application; and
         (b)   Installation Of Control Measures: That all control measures
identified in the application shall be installed; and
         (c)   Maintenance Of Control Measures: That all control measures shall
be maintained during construction; and
         (d)   Other Conditions: Such other conditions as the erosion control
administrator deems appropriate to ensure compliance with the specific
requirements and the intent of this section.
         (e)   Permanent Ground Surface Cover: Under all circumstances,
temporary control measures shall be maintained. Without exception, all
disturbed areas must have permanent ground cover within six (6) months of
project completion, or within six (6) months of occupancy, whichever comes
first. Temporary erosion control measures shall remain in place until permanent
ground cover has been established.
   (G)   Standard Erosion, Sediment And Stormwater Control Permits: Before
commencing any commercial, institutional, multi-family or industrial project
disturbing more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground; or a project
requiring subdivision approval by a unit of local government disturbing more
than five thousand (5,000) square feet of ground, the owner of the land, or his
representative, shall file a standard erosion, sediment, and stormwater control
permit application. (Ord. 661, 9-10-2008)
      1.   Application: The applicant shall file the application with the
department on forms provided by the department and an application fee for
standard permits of fifty dollars ($50.00) per disturbed acre, with a minimum
fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and maximum fee of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) (fractional areas shall be rounded to the nearest whole
acre). (Ord. 700, 1-28-2009)
      2.   Contents Of Application: The applicant shall file the application
with the department on forms provided by the department. The applicant shall
supply the number of copies of application documents as set forth in the
application. Each application shall be accompanied by the following
information:
         (a)   Copy of the NPDES permit from the IEPA for all projects that
disturb more than one acre.
         (b)   Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for all projects
that disturb more than one acre.
         (c)   Detailed site plan including items outlined in appendix C
attached to the ordinance codified herein.
         (d)   Design calculations and information related to the permanent
stormwater detention system for any project with a net increase of impervious
area greater than one-fourth (1/4) of an acre (10,890 square feet) in the past
five (5) years. For example, in year 1, a commercial site increases the parking
lot by five thousand (5,000) square feet. In year 2, the same commercial site
adds a building with an area of six thousand (6,000) square feet. In year 1, no
permanent stormwater control measures (or calculations) are required by this
chapter. In year 2, stormwater calculations shall be submitted and shall be
based on the total increase of eleven thousand (11,000) square feet of
impervious area.
         (e)   The stormwater detention facility shall be sized according to
the stormwater design analysis in appendix A attached to the ordinance codified
herein.
         (f)   A licensed professional engineer must sign and seal the
detention calculations and design.
         (g)   Developments which are large, complex, or extra sensitive to
drainage considerations may require more sophisticated analysis. The village of
Creve Coeur maintains the sole right to determine adequacy of stormwater
detention.
         (h)   A plan of the continued management and maintenance of such
permanent control measures shall also be provided by the applicant.
      3.   Application Review: The erosion control administrator shall respond
in writing to the sediment and erosion control practices portion. The erosion
control administrator shall also respond to the stormwater control portion of
the application by either issuing a permit, issuing a request for additional
information, or issuing a statement denying the permit with an explanation of
cause.
      4.   Duration: An erosion, sediment and stormwater control permit shall
expire upon completion of the project and final inspection and approval of the
erosion control administrator.
      5.   Permit Conditions: The standard erosion, sediment and stormwater
control permit shall contain, at a minimum, the following general conditions:
         (a)   Written approval shall be obtained from the erosion control
administrator prior to making any modification to the approved erosion and
sediment control plan as set forth in the permit;
         (b)   That all control measures required in the permit shall be
installed;
         (c)   That all control measures shall be maintained during
construction;
         (d)   Such other conditions as the erosion control administrator deems
appropriate.
      6.   Permanent Ground Surface Cover: Without exception, all disturbed
areas must have permanent ground cover within six (6) months of project
completion, or within six (6) months of occupancy, whichever comes first.
Temporary erosion control measures shall remain in place until permanent ground
cover has been established.
      7.   Final Inspection; Notice Of Permanent Stormwater Control Measures:
Within fourteen (14) days after completion of construction, the applicant shall
notify the erosion control administrator that the permanent stormwater control
measures are ready for final inspection. No certificate of occupancy with
respect to any improvements located on the site shall be issued in the absence
of compliance with the provisions of this section.
   (H)   Maintenance Of Permanent Stormwater Control Measures: Anyone owning
property with a permanent stormwater control measure existing thereon,
including those installed pursuant to this section, shall maintain the control
measure so that it functions in compliance with the standards.
   (I)   Reimbursement Of Engineering Fees: Should any representative of the
village deem it necessary to obtain the services of a professional engineer to
review or verify the calculations or conclusions submitted to the village in
connection with any application for a permit to undertake construction
activities, to conduct inspections while an applicant engages in construction
activities after issuance of a permit, or to undertake any other reasonably
necessary investigations or activities, the applicant for such permit may be
required to reimburse the village for the reasonable cost of such services. By
submitting an application to undertake construction activities, the applicant
shall be taken to have agreed to pay any such fees. The building inspector
shall refuse to issue a permit for any construction activities within a steep
slope zone until all actual or estimated engineering fees billed under the
provisions of this subsection have been paid in full. The building inspector
shall refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for any improvements until all
engineering fees due under the provisions of this subsection have been paid in
full. The building inspector may, as a condition to commencing the process of
considering an application for a special use under the provisions of this
subsection, require advance payment of the estimated cost of such engineering
fees.
   (J)   Security For Completion Of Improvements: In order to secure compliance
with this section, including the completion of construction activities within a
steep slope zone in accordance with the provisions of any report submitted in
support of an application to undertake such activities and/or to secure
compliance with the terms of any permit or special use authorized under the
provisions of this section, either the village board or the building inspector
may require the applicant to post security in the form of either a performance
bond or a letter of credit. Any such performance bond or letter of credit shall
make funds available to the village in an amount which reasonably approximates
the cost of completing any construction activities commenced under the terms of
any permit or special use and/or the cost of completing the restoration of the
affected property in the event that construction activities are commenced but
not completed. In the event that construction activities are commenced but not
completed in accordance with any applicable permit or special use, the village
may, at its option, either complete any authorized construction activities or
undertake restoration of the affected property. Should it complete the
authorized construction activities or undertake restoration of the affected
property, the village may pay any costs that it incurs by drawing on the
performance bond or letter of credit posted with respect to the affected
property. A performance bond or letter of credit required under this subsection
shall contain such terms and conditions as the village deems reasonably
necessary to insure the availability of funds in the amount of the security
instrument for the purpose of completing any construction activities or
completing any restoration.
   (K)   Enforcement, Penalty And Stop Work Order Fee:
      1.   This section shall be administered and enforced by the erosion
control administrator, who shall make or cause to be made, periodic inspections
of all work authorized by permits issued in accordance with this section to
ensure that said construction is in compliance with the provisions of the same;
he shall make or cause to be made, investigations of violations of this section
and shall cause any violations to be corrected.
      2.   Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be revoked by the
erosion control administrator when he finds from personal inspection or from
competent evidence that the rules, regulations, or standards under which said
permit was issued are being violated.
      3.   Failure to obtain a permit as required by this section or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this title and the violator shall be subject to the fines and
penalties set forth in this subsection.
      4.   Upon due investigation, the building inspector may determine that a
violation of the minimum standards of this section exists. The building
inspector shall notify the owner in writing of such violation. If the owner,
permit applicant or permit holder fails to correct the violation within twenty
four (24) hours or disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who
resists the enforcement of any provisions:
         (a)   The village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring the conformance with this section or make such other order
as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this section.
         (b)   The erosion control officer may issue a stop work order
regarding any work or activity violating this section.
         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation continues or occurs.
         (d)   The village may charge a stop work order or application
revocation fee of seventy five dollars ($75.00) and also require the violator
to reimburse the village for any costs, fees or expenses incurred by the
village for inspection, review or consultation with the village engineer
regarding the violation and nothing herein shall prevent the village from
taking such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
661, 9-10-2008)
10-14-16: WIND ENERGY GENERATION SYSTEMS:
   (A)   Small Wind Energy Systems:
      1.   Special Use: All small wind energy systems shall require a special
use permit to be reviewed by the zoning board and granted by the village board.
      2.   Variance Required: If any portion of the proposed small wind system
does not meet the requirements set forth under this regulation, in addition to
a special use permit, a zoning variance will be required.
      3.   Definitions:
   MINIMUM HEIGHT OF BOTTOM OF BLADES: No less than thirty feet (30') above
ground level.
   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEM: A wind energy conversion system consisting of a
wind turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion electronics, which
has a rated capacity appropriate to the on site electric usage of the end user.
The capacity to generate electricity of a small wind energy system shall not
exceed thirty (30) kilowatts.
   TOWER HEIGHT: The height above grade of the fixed portion of the tower,
excluding the wind turbine and blades.
   TURBINE: The parts of a wind systems including the blades, generator and
tail.
      4.   Special Use Permit Required: Small wind energy systems shall be
allowed upon obtaining a special use permit in zoning classifications where
structures of any type are allowed, subject to the following additional
requirements:
         (a)   Notice of an application for installation of a small wind energy
system shall be provided to property owners within two hundred feet (200') of
the property on which the system is to be located.
         (b)   Tower heights of not more than ninety feet (90') shall be
allowed.
         (c)   Towers shall not be located on parcels less than four (4) acres.
         (d)   Only one small wind generator system will be allowed on a parcel
of land regardless of the size of the parcel.
         (e)   Setbacks for the system tower shall be no closer to the property
line than the height of the system and no part of the system, including guywire
anchors, may extend closer than ten feet (10') to the property boundary.
Additional, the outer and innermost guywires must be marked and clearly visible
to a height of six feet (6') above the guywire anchors.
         (f)   Building permits for applications for small wind energy systems
shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in
sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation
conforms to the National Electrical Code.
         (g)   Decibel levels for the system shall not exceed sixty (60)
decibels (dBA) measured at the closest neighboring inhabited dwelling, except
during short term events such as utility outages and severe windstorms.
         (h)   The application shall include standard drawings and an
engineering analysis of the system's tower, and certification by a professional
mechanical, structural, or civil engineer that the system is designed to meet
the most stringent wind requirements.
         (i)   The system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation
Administration requirements, including part 77 of title 14 of the Code of
Federal Aviation Regulations regarding installations close to airports.
         (j)   Wind turbine towers shall not be climbable up to fifteen feet
(15') above ground level.
         (k)   All access doors to wind turbine towers and electrical equipment
shall be lockable.
         (l)   All wiring between wind turbines and the wind energy facility
substation shall be underground.
         (m)   No individual tower facility shall be installed in any location
along the major axis of an existing microwave communication link where its
operation is likely to produce electromagnetic interference in the link's
operation.
         (n)   No individual tower facility shall be installed in any location
where its proximity with fixed broadcast, retransmission or reception antenna
for radio, television or wireless phone or other personal communications system
would produce electromagnetic interference with signal transmission or
reception.
   (B)   Maintenance And Operation Of Wind Generator Systems:
      1.   Any wind energy system found to be damaged or unsafe by the local
enforcement officer shall be repaired by the owner to meet Federal, State and
local safety standards or removed within thirty (30) days. If any wind energy
system is not operated for a continuous period of three (3) months, the Village
may notify the landowner by U.S. certified mail and provide ten (10) days for a
response. In such a response, the landowner shall set forth reasons for the
operational difficulty and provide a reasonable timetable for corrective
action. If the Village deems the timetable for corrective action as
unreasonable, they must notify the landowner and such landowner shall remove
the turbine within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of the Village.
   (C)   Large Wind Generation Systems:
      1.   The Village of Creve Coeur hereby adopts by reference the terms and
provisions of the Tazewell County large scale wind generator ordinance, 7
Tazewell County Code 3-1 et seq., as and for the Village of Creve Coeur's large
wind generation ordinance. (Ord. 656, 5-28-2008)
10-14-17: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   The provisions of title 7, chapter 7 of the Tazewell County, Illinois Solar
Energy Systems ordinance, as passed, approved, and amended effective September
1, 2018 (the “SES ordinance”), is hereby adopted by reference by the Village of
Creve Coeur as if fully set out herein, subject to the following modifications:
   (A)   All references in the SES ordinance to the “Community Development
Administrator” shall, for purposes of this section, refer to the Village
building inspector.
   (B)   All references to provisions of the Tazewell County zoning ordinances
shall, for purposes of this section, refer to the most similar provision of
this Code addressing the same subject matter as the applicable provision of the
Tazewell County zoning ordinances.
   (C)   Commercial/large scale solar farms incorporating ground mount solar
energy systems that are designed for providing energy to off-site uses or
export to the wholesale market shall be allowed only in the A-1 Agriculture
District, the I-1 Industrial District and the I-2 Industrial District, and
shall require a special use permit.
   (D)   No special use permit shall be issued for any Solar Energy System
without a hearing before the Zoning Board and approval of the Village Board;
provided, however, that if the Zoning Board recommends against approval of any
special use application for a commercial/large scale solar farm, the special
use permit shall only be issued upon a vote of not less than two-thirds (2/3)
of the members of the Village Board. The application fees for special use
permit applications for Solar Energy Systems shall be one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00) for a roof mounted SES in a residential zoning district, and seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for all other SES special use applications.
   (E)   A Village building permit shall be required for all Solar Energy
Systems, and the building permit fees shall be as set forth in section 7-10(j)
of the SES ordinance.
   (F)   Amendments to the SES ordinance occurring after September 1, 2018
shall not be automatically incorporated into this section without formal
adoption of an amendment to the ordinance by the Village Board.
   (G)   All roof mounted Solar Energy Systems shall comply with the following:
      1.   In no instance shall any Solar Energy System be mounted so as to
extend over the roof eave beyond the exterior walls of the structure upon which
it is mounted.
      2.   All Solar Energy Systems shall be mounted so as to provide a set
back of at least 18 inches from either side of any valley of the roof.
(Ord. 868, 12-12-2018; amd. Ord. 996, 4-10-2024)
CHAPTER 15
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-15-1: Building Inspector
10-15-2: Building Permit Application
10-15-3: Certificate Of Occupancy
10-15-4: Display Of Property Identification Number
10-15-5: Variations
10-15-6: Special Uses
10-15-7: Appeals
10-15-1: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the
provisions of this title. The building inspector shall be appointed by the
mayor of the village by and with the consent of the village board. The building
inspector shall have the power to:
   (A)   Issue building permits, and make and maintain records thereof.
   (B)   Issue certificates of occupancy permits, and make and maintain records
thereof.
   (C)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures, and premises necessary
to carry out the duties of administration and enforcement of this title, or
other matters on which the zoning board is required to pass.
   (D)   Receive, file and forward to the zoning board all applications for
appeals, variations, special uses, amendments to this title, or other matters
on which the zoning board is required to pass.
   (E)   Perform such other further functions necessary and proper to enforce
and administer the provisions of this title.
The salary or rate of pay of the building inspector shall be established in
each annual budget of the village. Unless otherwise provided, the building
inspector shall be paid the then current federal minimum wage. The building
inspector may also be reimbursed for the inspector's travel expenses on a basis
to be determined by the village board. Any and all proceeds collected by the
building inspector shall be turned over to the village treasurer. (Ord. 482, 4-
7-1982; amd. Ord. 526-B, 1-11-1995; Ord. 882, - -2019)
10-15-2: BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATION:
   (A)   No building or structure within the village shall hereafter be
erected, moved, altered or razed, nor shall any such work be started to erect,
move, alter or raze until a building permit shall have been obtained from the
building inspector, as required by the village building code; nor shall any
material change be made in the use of any building or land without a building
permit having been obtained from the building inspector. No such building
permit shall be issued to erect a building or structure or make any change of
use of a building or land unless it is in conformity with the provisions of
this title and all amendments hereto. The building inspector shall have the
authority to issue permits for temporary buildings and uses for construction
purposes, when said building or use will not continue for a period exceeding
one year. Unless construction is started within six (6) months after the date
of issuance of a building permit, the building permit shall automatically
become void and fees forfeited. The building inspector may reinstate a building
permit that has become void for failure to commence construction without
payment of further fees in his discretion upon good cause shown. Fees for
inspection and the issuance of permits, certificates or copies thereof required
or issued under the provisions of this title shall be collected by the building
inspector in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established
by ordinance or resolution of the village board.
   (B)   The building inspector shall not refuse to issue a permit when
conditions imposed by this title are complied with by the applicant despite
violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements which may
occur upon the granting of such permit.
   (C)   The building inspector shall require that all applications for
building permits be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot
plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following:
      1.   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot drawn to scale.
      2.   The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures
upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the
building is intended to accommodate.
      3.   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may
be essential for determining whether the provisions of this title are being
observed.
      4.   A site plan and permit application, if required, under section
10-14-15 of this title regarding stormwater and erosion control.
One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building
inspector, after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or
disapproved. The second copy shall be retained in the office of the building
inspector.
   (D)   Upon the completion of the work authorized by a building permit, the
holder thereof shall seek final inspection thereof by notifying the building
inspector. The building inspector shall make such final inspection. (Ord. 482,
4-7-1982; amd. Ord. 661, 9-10-2008; Ord. 882, - -2019)
10-15-3: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
No land, building, or structure, or part thereof shall be occupied by or for
any use for which a building permit is required by this title unless and until
a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such new use. The
following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate:
   (A)   No building or addition thereto constructed after the effective date
of this title, no addition to a previously existing building shall be occupied,
and no vacant land on the effective date of this title shall be used for any
purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building
inspector. No change in a use, other than that of a permitted use, shall be
made until such certificate of occupancy has been issued. Every certificate of
occupancy shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the provisions of
this title.
   (B)   A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the
office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished upon request to
any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved.
   (C)   Accessory buildings to dwellings shall not require separate
certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy
for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same
time as such building.
   (D)   Application For Certificate Of Occupancy: Every application for a
building permit shall be deemed to be an application for a certificate of
occupancy, which shall be made in writing to the building inspector on forms
furnished by the village. An application for a certificate of occupancy for a
new use of land where no building permit is required shall be made in writing
to the building inspector on forms furnished by the village.
   (E)   Issuance Of Certificate Of Occupancy: No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for a building or structure, or portion thereof until
construction has been completed and inspected for conformance with the
submitted plans and specifications and with the provisions of this title.
Nothing in this title shall prevent the building inspector from issuing of a
temporary certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building or structure in
process of erection or alteration, provided that such temporary certificate
shall not be effective for a period in excess of six (6) months from the date
of issuance, and provided further that such portion of the building, structure,
or premises is in conformity with the provisions of this title. If such
certificate is refused the applicant shall be notified in writing of such
refusal and reasons therefor.
   (F)   Certificates of occupancy are not transferable to another operator or
to another location. (Ord. 482, 4-7-1982; amd. Ord. 882, - -2019)
10-15-4: DISPLAY OF PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION NUMBER:
In order to aid in the identification of property locations, it is necessary
that each property in the village of Creve Coeur be adequately and properly
identified by street number and location.
Each owner or person in possession or control of any parcel of property located
within the boundaries of the village shall post the street address
identification number assigned to said property in a conspicuous manner either
upon any improvement located thereon or in the yard immediately adjacent to
said improvement. Such display shall be in a conspicuous manner so as to allow
the easy observation of the same from the roadway immediately adjacent to and
in front of each parcel of property. (Ord. 625, 10-13-2004; amd. Ord. 882, - -
2019)
10-15-5: VARIATIONS:
   (A)   The zoning board, after a public hearing, may recommend a variation
the regulations of this title in harmony with the general purposes and intent
of this title, and where the zoning board makes findings of fact, in accordance
with the standards hereinafter prescribed, that there are practical
difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the regulations of this title.
   (B)   Any person having a freehold interest in land, or a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession thereof, or a contractual interest
which may become a freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory interest which
is specifically enforceable, may file an application to vary the regulations of
this title.
   (C)   Application For Variations And Notice of Hearing: An application for a
variation shall be filed in writing with the building inspector on a form
prescribed by the zoning board. The application shall contain such information
as the zoning board may require by rule. Upon receipt of an application for a
variation, the zoning board shall hold at least one public hearing on the
proposed variation. Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least
once not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. The notice shall
contain the particular location for which the variation is requested, including
the common street address and property index number, as well as brief statement
of what the proposed variation consists of. The published notice may be
supplemented by an additional form of notice as the zoning board, by rule, may
require.
   (D)   Standards For Variations: The zoning board shall not recommend a
variation and village board shall not vary the regulations of this title, as
authorized in this section, unless it makes findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case that:
      1.   Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape,
topographical conditions, or other extraordinary conditions of the specific
property involved, a practical difficulty or particular hardship to the owner
would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter
of the regulations were to be carried out.
      2.   The conditions upon which an application for a variation is based
are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not
applicable, generally, to other property within the same zoning classification.
      3.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a desire
to make more money out of the property.
      4.   The alleged difficulty or hardship is caused by this title and has
not been created by any persons presently having an interest in the property.
      5.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in
which the property is located.
      6.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light
and air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion of the
public street, increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or
substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
   In granting a variance the zoning board shall issue a written
recommendation, which shall include findings of fact specifying the reasons for
granting the variation. The zoning board may also impose such conditions and
restrictions upon the property benefited by the variation as it deems necessary
to comply with the standards established in this section, to reduce or minimize
the effect of such variation upon other properties in the neighborhood, and to
better carry out the general purposes and intent of this title.
   (E)   Authorized Variations: Variations from the regulations of this title
shall be granted by the zoning board only in accordance with the standards
established in this section, and may only be granted with respect to the
following matters:
      1.   To permit any yard or setback less than the yard or a setback
required by the applicable regulations.
      2.   To permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for
public utility purposes, and make exceptions therefore to the height and bulk
district requirements herein established.
      3.   To permit the modification of the automobile parking spaces or
loading space(s) requirements herein established.
      4.   To permit the modification of the height and area regulations herein
established.
   (F)   Decisions: The concurring vote of four (4) members of the zoning board
shall be necessary to recommend approval of a variation. The zoning board shall
only recommend approval of a variation upon evidence that it meets the
standards established in this section. The recommendation of the zoning board
shall be set forth in writing with the findings of fact specifying the reasons
(s) for recommending approval of the variation.
   The village board may grant or deny any application for a variation. The
village board shall only grant a variation upon evidence that it meets the
standards established in this section. The decision of the village board shall
be set forth in writing with the findings of fact specifying the reasons(s) for
granting the variation. In addition, any application for a variation which
fails to receive a recommendation for approval by the zoning board shall not be
approved by the village board except upon a vote of two-thirds of the trustees
then holding office.
   No order of the village board granting a variation shall be valid for a
period longer than one (1) year from the date of such order unless a building
permit is obtained within such period and the erection or alteration of a
building is commenced or the use of the property is commenced and completed in
accordance with the terms of such permit. A property for which a variation has
been granted shall not violate the conditions and restrictions imposed or
findings of fact issued by village board unless changed by further appeal in
accordance with this section. (Ord. 882, - -2019)
10-15-6: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   The development and execution of this title is based upon the division
of the village into districts, within which districts the uses of land and
buildings and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to
the land are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are
special uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly
classified in any particular district or districts without consideration, in
each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land and of the public
need for the particular use at the given location. Such special uses fall into
two (2) categories:
      1.   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest.
      2.   Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities.
   (B)   Any person having a freehold interest in land, or a possessory
interest entitled to exclusive possession thereof, or a contractual interest
which may become a freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory interest which
is specifically enforceable, may file an application to use land for one or
more of the special uses provided for in this title in the zoning district in
which the land is located.
   (C)   Application For Special Use: An application for a special use permit
shall be filed with the building inspector on a form prescribed by the zoning
board. The application shall be accompanied by such plans or data prescribed by
the zoning board, including, but not limited to, a statement in writing by the
applicant and adequate evidence showing that the proposed special use will
conform to the standards set forth in this section.
   In addition, an applicant for a special use permit shall include with the
application a list of the owners, as recorded in the office of the Tazewell
County recorder of deeds and as appears from the authentic tax records of such
county, of all property within two hundred fifty (250) feet in each direction
of the location for which the special use is requested; provided, the number of
feet occupied by all public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall
be excluded in computing the two hundred fifty (250) feet requirement.
   (D)   Hearing On Application: Upon receipt of an application the zoning
board shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed special use. Not
more than thirty (30) days or less than fifteen (15) days in advance of such
hearing, notice of time and place of such hearing shall be published at least
once in a newspaper of general circulation in the village, as prescribed by the
Illinois Municipal Code. The notice shall contain the particular location in
which the special use is requested, including the common street address and
property index number, and a brief statement of the requested special use.
   The zoning board shall also, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing at which the application for special use
is to be considered, send written notice to the persons within two hundred
fifty (250) feet of the subject property appearing on the list required herein
to be furnished by the applicant, which shall contain the time and place of the
hearing, the address of the requested special use, the name and address of the
applicant for special use, and a brief statement of the nature of the requested
special use.
   Supplemental or additional notices may be published or distributed as the
zoning board may, by rule, prescribe from time to time.
   (E)   Authorization Of Special Use: The concurring vote of four (4) members
of the zoning board shall be necessary to recommend approval of an application
for a special use permit. The zoning board shall only recommend approval of a
special use upon evidence that it meets the standards established in this
section. The recommendation of the zoning board shall be set forth in writing
with the findings of fact, and shall include any stipulations or additional
conditions and guarantees, which must be complied with as the zoning board
deems necessary for the protection of the public interest.
   The village board may grant or deny any application for a special use
permit. The village board shall only grant an application for special use upon
evidence that it meets the standards established in this section. The decision
of the village board shall be set forth in writing with the findings of fact,
and shall include any stipulations or additional conditions and guarantees,
which must be complied with as the village board deems necessary for the
protection of the public interest. In addition, any application for a special
use permit which fails to receive a recommendation for approval by the zoning
board shall not be approved by the village board except upon a vote of two-
thirds of the trustees then holding office.
   (F)   Standards: No special use shall be recommended by the zoning board for
approval or granted by village board unless it shall make findings based upon
the evidence presented to it in each specific case that:
      1.   The establishment, maintenance or operation of the special use will
not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or
general welfare.
      2.   The special use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of
other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted,
nor substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.
      3.   The establishment of the special use will not impede the normal and
orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
      4.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and/or necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
      5.   Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and
egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets.
      6.   The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the
applicable regulations of the district in which it is located, except as such
regulations may, in each instance, be modified by the village board pursuant to
the recommendations of the zoning board.
      7.   Where it is found a use not otherwise acceptable to the neighborhood
in which it is located would be acceptable with certain conditions of use
operation and improvement, the zoning board may recommend and the village board
may require the granting of such special use subject to specified conditions.
Such conditions may include:
         (a)   Landscape screening or fencing.
         (b)   Hours of operation.
         (c)   Night lighting (including parking areas) so as not to be
annoying to surrounding properties.
         (d)   Requirements for access lanes and parking areas to protect
pedestrian safety.
         (e)   Restraint on signage so as to be compatible with surrounding
properties.
         (f)   Limitation on outdoor storage.
         (g)   Where any site plan expansion is proposed.
         (h)   Any other such requirements which, in the opinion of the zoning
board of appeals or council, would render the use compatible with surrounding
properties.
   (G)   Termination Of Special Uses: Any special use authorized by the village
board shall be deemed to have automatically terminated upon the occurrence of
any of the following:
      1.   The failure to establish the special use within one (1) year after
authority to establish the special use is granted by the village board.
      2.   After establishment of a special use, the discontinuation of that
use for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months.
      3.   The violation of any condition, stipulation or agreement placed upon
the special use by the village board.
   In the event that a special use authorized with respect to any property
within the village is discontinued, abandoned or terminated as provided in this
section, the only uses which may be established on that property are the
permitted uses authorized under the zoning regulations applicable to that
property or any special use authorized by the village board which has not been
terminated, discontinued or abandoned in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
   (H)   Effect Of Special Use Permit: Upon the authorization of any special
use with respect to a given property, any person entitled by any possessory
interest to utilize that property may establish the authorized special use but
only in accordance with any conditions, stipulations or agreements applicable
to such special use. In the alternative, any such person may establish with
respect to such parcel any permitted use authorized by the zoning regulations
applicable to the district in which the parcel is located. (Ord. 882, - -2019)
10-15-7: APPEALS:
An appeal may be taken to the zoning board by any person or by any office,
department, board or bureau within the village aggrieved by a decision of the
building inspector or other authorized official. Such an appeal shall be taken
within forty-five (45) days from the date of the action complained of, by
filing with the building inspector and with the zoning board a notice of appeal
in accordance with Title 2, Chapter 9 of this code. (Ord. 882, - -2019)
CHAPTER 16
AMENDMENTS; INTERPRETATION
SECTION:
10-16-1: Amendments
10-16-2: Filing of Petition
10-16-3: Hearing On Petition
10-16-4: Interpretation
10-16-1: AMENDMENTS:
The Village Board may from time to time amend, supplement or change by
ordinance the boundaries of districts or regulations herein established for the
purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, comfort and general
welfare. Any amendment, supplement or change shall first be submitted to the
Zoning Board for its recommendation and report as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 882, - -2019)
10-16-2: FILING OF PETITION:
Any person having a freehold interest in land, or a possessory interest
entitled to exclusive possession thereof, or a contractual interest which may
become a freehold interest, or an exclusive possessory interest which is
specifically enforceable, may file a petition to amend, supplement or change
the boundaries of districts or regulations herein established or to reclassify
any property. Such petition must be filed with the Building Inspector on a form
prescribed by the Zoning Board together with payment of the sum of fifty
dollars ($50.00) to cover the approximate cost of this procedure, and under no
condition shall said sum, or any part thereof, be refunded for failure of said
amendment to be enacted by the Zoning Board or Village Board. (Ord. 882, - -
2019)
10-16-3: HEARING ON PETITION:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a petition for an amendment, the Zoning Board shall
hold a public hearing on the petition at such time and place as established by
the Zoning Board. The hearing shall be conducted and a record of the hearing
shall be preserved in such manner as the Zoning Board shall, by rule, prescribe
from time to time. Not more than thirty (30) days or less than fifteen (15)
days in advance of such hearing, notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village, as prescribed by the Illinois Municipal Code. The notice shall contain
a description of the affected area in which the amendment is requested,
including the common street address and property index number, if applicable.
   (B)   The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Zoning Board shall be
necessary to recommend approval of petition for amendment. The recommendation
of the Zoning Board shall be set forth in writing and including findings of
fact. Where the proposed amendment is to change the boundaries of a district,
the Zoning Board shall make findings of fact based upon the evidence presented
to it in each specific case with respect to the following:
      1.   The existing uses of property within the general area.
      2.   The zoning classification of the property within the general area.
      3.   The trend of development, if any, in the general area.
      4.   The public interest, including, but not limited to, the conservation
of property values.
   Upon receipt of a written report and recommendation from the Zoning Board,
the Village Board shall grant or deny any petition for amendment in a timely
manner. The decision of the Village Board shall be set forth in writing.
   In case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the
regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to
be altered, is filed with the Building Inspector, the amendment shall not be
passed except upon a vote of two-thirds of the trustees of the Village Board
then holding office. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall be
served by the protestor(s) on the applicant for the proposed amendment and a
copy upon the applicant’s attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of
such applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed
amendment. (Ord. 882, - -2019)
10-16-4: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this Title shall be
held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health,
morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by
this Title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with
any existing provision or law or ordinance other than the herein described
Zoning Title, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or
issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the
use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this Title imposes
a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules,
regulations or permits, the provisions of this Title shall control. (Ord. 482,
4-7-82; amd. Ord. 882, - -2019)
CHAPTER 17
DEVELOPMENT IN FLOODPLAIN AREAS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Purpose
10-17-2: Definitions
10-17-3: Base Flood Elevation
10-17-4: Duties Of The Building Inspector
10-17-5: Development Permit
10-17-6: Preventing Increased Flood Heights And Resulting Damages
10-17-7: Protecting Buildings
10-17-8: Subdivision Requirements
10-17-9: Public Health And Other Standards
10-17-10: Carrying Capacity And Notification
10-17-11: Variances
10-17-12: Disclaimer Of Liability
10-17-13: Penalty
10-17-14: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
10-17-15: Severability
10-17-16: Effective Date
10-17-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village
by the Illinois Municipal Code 1  in order to accomplish the following
purposes:
   (A)   To prevent unwise developments from increasing flood or drainage
hazards to others;
   (B)   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   (C)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens from the hazards of flooding;
   (D)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control, repairs to
public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief operations;
   (E)   Maintain property values and a stable tax base by minimizing the
potential for creating blight areas;
   (F)   Make Federally subsidized flood insurance available; and
   (G)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2.
10-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
   BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
flood. The base flood elevation at any location is as defined in section
10-17-3 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
   CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk.
Examples of critical facilities where flood protection should be required
include: emergency services facilities (such as fire and police stations),
schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care facilities, major roads
and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone switching stations or electrical
transformers), and hazardous material storage facilities (chemicals,
petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances).
   DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change to real estate including, but not
necessarily limited to:
   (A)   Demolition, construction, reconstruction, repair, placement of a
building, or any structural alteration to a building;
   (B)   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
   (C)   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year;
   (D)   Installation of utilities, construction of roads, bridges, culverts or
similar projects;
   (E)   Construction or erection of levees, dams, walls or fences;
   (F)   Drilling, mining, filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, or
other alterations of the ground surface;
   (G)   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid storage
tanks and channel modifications or any other activity that might change the
direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters.
"Development" does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings and
facilities, resurfacing roads, or gardening, plowing, and similar practices
that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations
adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow, the unusual and rapid
accumulation, or the runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that depicts the floodplain or special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and may or may not depict
floodways and show base flood elevations.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood plus one
foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the floodplain.
   FLOODPLAIN AND SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): These two (2) terms are
synonymous. Those lands within the jurisdiction of the Village of Creve Coeur,
the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Creve Coeur, or that may be
annexed into the Village of Creve Coeur, that are subject to inundation by the
base flood. The floodplains of the Village of Creve Coeur are generally
identified as such on panel number(s) 20, 40, 160 of the Countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Tazewell County prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and dated February 17, 2017. Floodplain also includes those
areas of known flooding as identified by the community.
The floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Tazewell County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village of Creve Coeur or that
may be annexed into the Village of Creve Coeur are generally identified as such
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for Tazewell County by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated February 17, 2017.
   FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural or nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate, property and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
   FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain required to store and convey the
base flood. The floodway for the floodplains of the Illinois River shall be as
delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Tazewell County
prepared by FEMA and dated February 17, 2017. The floodways for each of the
remaining floodplains of the Village of Creve Coeur shall be according to the
best data available from the Federal, State, or other sources.
   FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
   (C)   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the
Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources/Office of Water
Resources.
   IDNR/OWR JURISDICTIONAL STREAM: Illinois Department of Natural Resource
Office of Water Resources has jurisdiction over any stream serving a tributary
area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more in an urban area, or in the
floodway of any stream serving a tributary area of six thousand four hundred
(6,400) acres or more in a rural area. Construction on these streams requires a
permit from the department. (Ill. Admin. Code tit. 17, pt. 3700.30.) The
department may grant approval for specific types of activities by issuance of a
Statewide permit which meets the standards defined in section
10-17-6 of this chapter.
   LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. Provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of section
10-17-7 of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to required utilities.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two (2) or more lots for rent or sale.
   NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced
or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements of such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less in size;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SFHA: See definition of floodplain.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date
the building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or
other improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date.
The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage
of excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE: See definition of "building".
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination. The term
includes "repetitive loss buildings" (see definition).
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: (A) Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
improvement of a structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter in which the cumulative percentage of improvements:
      1. Equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the
structure before the improvement or repair is started, or
      2. Increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%).
   (B)   "Substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the structure. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive
loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work done.
The term does not include:
      1. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or
      2. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places.
   VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the required Federal, State, and/or local permits
and elevation certification is presumed to be in violation until such time as
the documentation is provided. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is the base flood. The best available base
flood data are listed below. Whenever a party disagrees with the best available
data, the party shall finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
the existing data with better data and submit it to the FEMA and IDNR/OWR for
approval prior to any development of the site.
   (A)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the Illinois River
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Countywide Flood
Insurance Study of Tazewell County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated February 17, 2017.
   (B)   The base flood elevation for each floodplain delineated as an "AH
Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the
Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Tazewell County.
   (C)   The base flood elevation for each of the remaining floodplains
delineated as an "A Zone" on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of
Tazewell County shall be according to the best data available from Federal,
State or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering study must
be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
   (D)   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of those parts of
unincorporated Tazewell County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village of Creve Coeur, or that may be annexed into the
Village of Creve Coeur, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles
in the Flood Insurance Study of Tazewell County prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated February 17, 2017. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-4: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR:
The building inspector shall be responsible for the general administration of
this chapter and ensure that all development activities within the floodplains
under the jurisdiction of the Village of Creve Coeur meet the requirements of
this chapter. Specifically, the building inspector shall:
   (A)   Process development permits in accordance with section
10-17-5 of this chapter;
   (B)   Ensure that all development in a floodway (or a floodplain with no
delineated floodway) meets the damage prevention requirements of section
10-17-6 of this chapter;
   (C)   Ensure that the building protection requirements for all buildings
subject to section
10-17-7 of this chapter are met and maintain a record of the "as-built"
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) or flood proof certificate;
   (D)   Assure that all subdivisions and annexations meet the requirements of
section
10-17-8 of this chapter;
   (E)   Ensure that water supply and waste disposal systems meet the public
health standards of section
10-17-9 of this chapter;
   (F)   If a variance is requested, ensure that the requirements of section
10-17-11 of this chapter are met and maintain documentation of any variances
granted;
   (G)   Inspect all development projects and take any and all penalty actions
outlined in section
10-17-13 of this chapter as a necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter;
   (H)   Assure that applicants are aware of and obtain any and all other
required local, State, and Federal permits;
   (I)   Notify IDNR/OWR and any neighboring communities prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse;
   (J)   Provide information and assistance to citizens upon request about
permit procedures and floodplain construction techniques;
   (K)   Cooperate with State and Federal floodplain management agencies to
coordinate base flood data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
   (L)   Maintain for public inspection base flood data, floodplain maps,
copies of State and Federal permits, and documentation of compliance for
development activities subject to this chapter;
   (M)   Perform site inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and
make substantial damage determinations for structures within the floodplain;
and
   (N)   Maintain the accuracy of floodplain maps including notifying IDNR/OWR
and/or submitting information to FEMA within six (6) months whenever a
modification of the floodplain may change the base flood elevation or result in
a change to the floodplain map. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-5: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by law shall
commence any development in the floodplain without first obtaining a
development permit from the building inspector. The building inspector shall
not issue a development permit if the proposed development does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   The application for development permit shall be accompanied by:
      1.   Drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions;
      2.   Existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from
excavation or filling;
      3.   The location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings;
      4.   The elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
10-17-7 of this chapter; and
      5.   Cost of project or improvements as estimated by a licensed engineer
or architect. A signed estimate by a contractor may also meet this requirement.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a development permit, the building
inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation.
Any development located on land that is shown by survey elevation to be below
the current base flood elevation is subject to the provisions of this chapter.
In addition, any development located on land shown to be below the base flood
elevation and hydraulically connected to a flood source, but not identified as
floodplain on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the
provisions of this chapter. Any development located on land that can be shown
by survey data to be higher than the current base flood elevation and which has
not been filled after the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map is
not in the floodplain and therefore not subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
The building inspector shall maintain documentation of the existing ground
elevation at the development site and certification that this ground elevation
existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map
identification.
The building inspector shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other Federal, State, and local permits, approvals or permit-not-
required letters that may be required for this type of activity. The building
inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other Federal, State, and local
permits have been obtained. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-6: PREVENTING INCREASED FLOOD HEIGHTS AND RESULTING DAMAGES:
Within any floodway identified on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map, and
within all other floodplains where a floodway has not been delineated, the
following standards shall apply:
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, no development
shall be allowed which, acting in combination with existing and anticipated
development will cause any increase in flood heights or velocities or threat to
public health and safety. The following specific development activities shall
be considered as meeting this requirement:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting the
conditions of the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources Statewide permit number 2;
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 3;
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 4;
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting the following conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 5;
      5.   Minor, non-obstructive activities such as underground utility lines,
light poles, sign posts, driveways, athletic fields, patios, playground
equipment, minor storage buildings not exceeding seventy (70) square feet and
raising buildings on the same footprint which does not involve fill and any
other activity meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 6;
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting the conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 7;
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 8;
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit number 9;
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 10;
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 11;
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widening
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 12;
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide permit number 13;
      13.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
   (B)   Other development activities not listed in subsection (A) of this
section may be permitted only if:
      1.   Permit has been issued for the work by IDNR/OWR (or written
documentation is provided that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required), or
      2.   Sufficient data has been provided to FEMA when necessary, and
approval obtained from FEMA for a revision of the regulatory map and base flood
elevation. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-7: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
   (A)   In addition to the State permit and damage prevention requirements of
section
10-17-6 of this chapter, all buildings located in the floodplain shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection requirement applies to the following situations:
      1.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
      2.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this section.
      3.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section within twenty four (24) months of the date the damage
occurred.
      4.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. (The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.)
      5.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year.
      6.   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in section
10-17-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Residential or non-residential buildings can meet the building
protection requirements by one of the following methods:
      1.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
         (c)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
         (d)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporated
debris or refuse material, and
         (e)   Shall not adversely affect the flow of surface drainage from or
onto neighboring properties and when necessary stormwater management techniques
such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      2.   The building may be elevated on solid walls in accordance with the
following:
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts, piles,
walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters.
         (b)   All components located below the flood protection elevation
shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
         (c)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
         (d)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood protection
elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the automatic entry
and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening on each
wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2) openings.
The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one square inch
for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the base
flood elevation, and
         (e)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (1)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (2)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space, or
            (3)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
      3.   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest adjacent
exterior grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed four feet
(4') at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, and
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (C)   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed (in
lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
certifies that:
      1.   Below the flood protection elevation the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood.
      2.   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration, rate of
rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and the
impact from debris and ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building design
and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
      4.   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered
floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
   (D)   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed on
site shall be:
      1.   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation in accordance
with subsection (B) of this section, and
      2.   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by being
tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the Illinois Mobile
Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code section 870.
   (E)   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirements of
subsection (D) of this section unless the following conditions are met:
      1.   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a light duty
truck.
      2.   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
      3.   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such as
decks and porches.
      4.   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping, travel,
or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
      5.   The vehicle's largest horizontal projections must be no larger than
four hundred (400) square feet.
      6.   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
      7.   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to be
safe for movement of the floodplain.
      8.   Propane tanks as well as electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect.
      9.   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational vehicle or
park model, and
      10.   Must either:
         (a)   Entirely be supported by jacks, or
         (b)   Have a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching
the ground and be supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to
be easily removed by use of the hitch jack.
   (F)   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be permitted provided the
following conditions are met:
      1.   The garage or shed must be non-habitable.
      2.   The garage or shed must be used only for the storage of vehicles and
tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
      3.   The garage or shed must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate State and/or Federal permits.
      4.   The garage or shed must be on a single family lot and be accessory
to an existing principal structure on the same lot.
      5.   Below the base flood elevation, the garage or shed must be built of
materials not susceptible to flood damage.
      6.   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
      7.   The garage or shed must have at least one permanent opening on each
wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of opening
for every one square foot of floor area.
      8.   The garage or shed must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24' x 24').
      9.   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and overturning.
      10.   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation.
      11.   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS:
The Village Board shall take into account hazards, to the extent that they are
known, in all official actions related to land management use and development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements,
planned unit developments, and additions to manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall meet the damage prevention and building protections
standards of sections
10-17-6 and
10-17-7 of this chapter. Any proposal for such development shall include the
following data:
      1.   The base flood elevation and the boundary of the floodplain, where
the base flood elevation is not available from an existing study, the applicant
shall be responsible for calculating the base flood elevation;
      2.   The boundary of the floodway when applicable; and
      3.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
proposed plat or plan accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act 1 .
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
10-17-9: PUBLIC HEALTH AND OTHER STANDARDS:
   (A)   Public health standards must be met for all floodplain development. In
addition to the requirements of sections
10-17-6 and
10-17-7 of this chapter the following standards apply:
      1.   No development in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, flammable liquids, pollutants, or
other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood protection elevation unless
such materials are stored in a floodproofed and anchored storage tank and
certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed building constructed
according to the requirements of section
10-17-7 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      4.   New and replacement on-site sanitary sewer lines or waste disposal
systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding. Manholes or other above ground
openings located below the flood protection elevation shall be watertight.
      5.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permitted within the floodplain only if no
feasible alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within
the SFHA shall be elevated or structurally dry floodproofed to the 500-year
flood frequency elevation. In situations where a 500-year flood elevation has
not been determined the flood protection elevation shall be three feet (3')
above the 100-year flood frequency elevation. Floodproofing and sealing
measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances will not be displaced by
or released into floodwaters. Access routes elevated to or above the level of
the base flood elevation shall be provided to all critical facilities.
   (B)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages. (Ord. 828, 11-9-
2016)
10-17-10: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill, or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained.
In addition, the Village of Creve Coeur shall notify adjacent communities in
writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration
or relocation of the watercourse. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-11: VARIANCES:
Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a specific
development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Zoning Board of Appeals
for a variance. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Village
Board. The Village Board may attach such conditions to granting of a variance
as it deems necessary to further the intent of this chapter.
   (A)   Conditions: No variance shall be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates that all of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the floodplain.
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted.
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary.
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety or
creation of a nuisance.
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
rescue or relief operations, policing, or repairs to roads, utilities, or other
public facilities.
      6.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP, and
      7.   All other State and Federal permits have been obtained.
   (B)   Notification: The Zoning Board of Appeals shall notify an applicant in
writing that a variance from the requirements of the building protections
standards of section
10-17-7 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a
building will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to twenty
five dollars ($25.00) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risk to life and property, and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that the applicant acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk and
liability.
   (C)   Historic Structures: Variances to the building protection requirements
of section
10-17-7 of this chapter which are requested in connection with reconstruction,
repair, or alteration of a historic site or historic structure as defined in
"historic structures", may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of sections
10-17-6 and
10-17-7 of this chapter subject to the conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure.
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
   (D)   Agriculture: Any variance granted for an agricultural structure shall
be decided individually based on a case by case analysis of the building's
unique circumstances. Variances granted shall meet the following conditions as
well as those criteria and conditions set forth in this chapter.
In order to minimize flood damages during the 100-year flood and the threat to
public health and safety, the following conditions shall be included for any
variance issued for agricultural structures that are constructed at-grade and
wet-floodproofed.
      1.   All agricultural structures considered for a variance from the
floodplain management regulations of this chapter shall demonstrate that the
varied structure is located in wide, expansive floodplain areas and no other
alternate location outside of the special flood hazard area exists for the
agricultural structure. Residential structures or animal confinement
facilities, such as farm houses, cannot be considered agricultural structures.
      2.   Use of the varied structures must be limited to agricultural
purposes in Zone A only as identified on the community's Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM).
      3.   For any new or substantially damaged agricultural structures, the
exterior and interior building components and elements (i.e., foundation, wall
framing, exterior and interior finishes, flooring, etc.) below the base flood
elevation, must be built with flood-resistant materials in accordance with
section
10-17-7 of this chapter.
      4.   The agricultural structures must be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structures in accordance with
section
10-17-7 of this chapter. All of the building's structural components must be
capable of resisting specific flood-related forces including hydrostatic,
buoyancy, and hydrodynamic and debris impact forces.
      5.   Any mechanical, electrical, or other utility equipment must be
located above the base flood elevation or floodproofed so that they are
contained within a watertight, floodproofed enclosure that is capable of
resisting damage during flood conditions in accordance with section
10-17-7 of this chapter.
      6.   The NFIP requires that enclosure or foundation walls, subject to the
100-year flood, contain openings that will permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters in accordance with subsection
10-17-7(B) of this chapter.
      7.   The agricultural structures must comply with the floodplain
management floodway provisions of section
10-17-6 of this chapter. No variances may be issued for agricultural structures
within any designated floodway.
      8.   Wet-floodproofing construction techniques must be reviewed and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator and a registered professional engineer
or architect prior to the issuance of any floodplain development permit for
construction. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for
regulatory purposes and is based on available information derived from
engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur or flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that development either inside or outside of the floodplain will be free
from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on the part of
the Village of Creve Coeur or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from proper reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Village Attorney may
determine that a violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exists. The
Village Attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The Village of Creve Coeur shall make application to the Circuit
Court for an injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such
other order as the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this
chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues, and
      4.   The Village of Creve Coeur shall record a notice of violation on the
title of the property.
   (B)   The Village Attorney shall inform the owner that any such violation is
considered a willful act to increase flood damages and therefore may cause
coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be suspended.
The Village Attorney is authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension
of the subject development. The stop-work order shall be in writing, indicate
the reason for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to
resolve the circumstances requiring the stop-work order. The stop-work order
constitutes a suspension of the permit.
No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
      1.   The grounds for the complaint, reasons for suspension or revocation,
and
      2.   The time and place of the hearing.
At such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning Board of Appeals
shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village of Creve Coeur from taking
such other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs
connected therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord.
828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Village Board
to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program including:
ordinance 466-B, August 10, 1994. However, this chapter does not repeal the
original resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program.
Nor does this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other ordinance
easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-15: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
10-17-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, and publication as required by law. (Ord. 828, 11-9-2016)
CHAPTER 18
VALIDITY
SECTION:
10-18-1: Validity
10-18-1: VALIDITY:
Should any chapter, section, subsection or provisions of this Title be decided
by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the Title as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part
so decided to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 482, 4-7-82)
CHAPTER 19
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
10-19-1: Violations And Penalties
10-19-1: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with,
or who resists the enforcement of any provisions of this title shall be fined
not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 575, 11-14-2001)
CHAPTER 20
RECREATIONAL ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
10-20-1: Purpose
10-20-2: Conditional Use Permits
10-20-3: Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower
10-20-4: Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center
10-20-5: Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization
10-20-6: Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization
10-20-7: Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization
10-20-8: Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization
10-20-9: Co-Location
10-20-10: Security And Other Improvements
10-20-11: Application Procedure
10-20-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of this Chapter to provide regulations regarding
the cultivation, processing, transporting, and dispensing of adult-use cannabis
occurring within the corporate limits of the Village of Creve Coeur. Such
facilities shall comply with all regulations provided in the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (410 ILCS 705/1-1, et. seq), as it may be amended from
time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the regulations
provided below. In the event that the Act is amended, the more restrictive of
the state or local regulations shall apply. (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
10-20-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
   (A)   Standards: An adult-use cannabis business establishment shall require
approval as a conditional use in the respective zoning use district in which
such organization is to be located. In determining compliance with this chapter
and eligibility as a conditional use, the following standards shall be
evaluated for the proposed adult use cannabis business establishment based on
the entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular property for which
the conditional use is sought in the context of the existing and intended
future use of the adjacent and nearby properties:
      1.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
      2.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including
co-tenancy (if in a multi-tenant building), total square footage, security
installations/security plan and building code compliance.
      3.   Hours of operation, and anticipated number of customers and
employees.
      4.   Anticipated parking demand and available private parking supply.
      5.   Anticipated traffic generation in the context of adjacent roadway
capacity and access to such roadways.
      6.   Site design, including access points and internal site circulation.
      7.   The adequacy of security measures.
      8.   Proposed signage plan.
      9.   Compliance with all requirements provided in this Chapter as
applicable.
      10.   Other criteria determined to be necessary to assess compliance with
this Chapter.
   (B)   Conditions: Upon application to and approval by the Board of Trustees
an adult-use cannabis business establishment may be allowed by a conditional
use permit, but only under the following conditions:
      1.   No adult-use cannabis business establishment shall permit or cause
to be permitted the on-site consumption of adult-use cannabis, in any form.
      2.   No adult-use cannabis business establishment shall conduct any sale
or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by applicable State and
local laws and regulations, including the CRTA and the provisions of this
Chapter.
      3.   All adult-use cannabis business establishments shall operate the
establishment in compliance with all applicable State and local laws and
regulations, including the CRTA and the provisions of this Chapter.
      4.   All adult-use cannabis business establishments shall have and
maintain an exterior door which is primary entrance to said establishment. No
adult-use cannabis business establishments shall have or maintain any pass-
through entrance or entrance which connects said establishment to another
business.
      5.   No adult-use cannabis business establishment nor any other person or
entity shall engage in advertising that contains any statement or illustration
that:
         (a)   Is false or misleading;
         (b)   Promotes overconsumption of cannabis or cannabis products;
         (c)   Depicts a person under twenty-one (21) years of age consuming
cannabis;
         (d)   Makes any health, medicinal or therapeutic claims about cannabis
or cannabis-infused products;
         (e)   Includes the image of a cannabis leaf or bud; or
         (f)   Includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors,
including cartoons, toys, animals, or children, or any other likeness to
images, characters, or phrases that is designed in any manner to be appealing
to or encourage consumption of persons under twenty-one (21) years of age.
      6.   No adult-use cannabis business establishment nor any other person or
entity shall place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, an
advertisement of cannabis or cannabis-infused product in any form or through
any medium, including any sign under Section
10-14-8:
         (a)   In violation of the Village sign ordinance under Section
10-14-8;
         (b)   Within one thousand (1,000) feet of the perimeter of school
grounds, a playground, a recreation center or facility, a child care center, a
public park or public library, or a game arcade to which admission is not
restricted to persons twenty-one (21) years of age or older;
         (c)   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter;
         (d)   On or in publicly owned or publicly operated property; or
         (e)   That contains information that:
            (1)   Is false or misleading;
            (2)   Promotes excessive consumption;
            (3)   Depicts a person under twenty-one (21) years of age consuming
cannabis;
            (4)   Includes the image of a cannabis leaf; or
            (5)   Includes any image designed or likely appeal to minors,
including cartoons, toys, animals, or children, or any other likeness to
images, characters, or phrases that are popularly used to advertise to
children, or any imitation of candy packaging or labeling, or that promotes
consumption of cannabis. (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
10-20-3: ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis craft grower may
be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   (A)   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis craft grower shall be granted
a conditional use under this Chapter or otherwise permitted in the Village.
   (B)   Facility shall not be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500)
feet of another adult-use cannabis craft grower or adult-use cannabis
cultivation center; or
   (C)   Facility shall not be located such that the entrance to the facility
is closer than 500 feet from the entrance to the primary structure of any
preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or secondary school or
daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility,
public park, public library, residential substance abuse treatment facility, or
place of worship located within the Village. (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
10-20-4: ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis cultivation center
may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the following:
   (A)   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis cultivation center shall be
granted a conditional use under this Chapter or otherwise permitted to operate
in the Village.
   (B)   Facility shall not be located such that the entrance to the facility
is closer than five hundred (500) feet from the entrance to the primary
structure of any preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the Village. (Ord. 895,
11-13-2019)
10-20-5: ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZAITON:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   (A)   No more than two (2) adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations shall
be granted a conditional use under this Chapter or otherwise permitted to
operate in the Village.
   (B)   Facility shall not be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500)
feet of the property line of a pre-existing adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization.
   (C)   Facility shall not be located such that the entrance to the facility
is closer than five hundred (500) feet from the entrance to the primary
structure of any preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the Village.
   (D)   No person shall reside in or permit a person to reside in the
facility.
   (E)   Facility shall not permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21)
to enter a dispensing organization; provided, however, that if the facility is
also licensed as a Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization, persons under the
age of twenty-one (21) may be permitted to enter only if accompanied by a
parent or guardian.
   (F)   No drive-through services or sales shall be permitted.
   (G)   No outdoor seating shall be permitted.
   (H)   Hours of operation shall not be earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
and not later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
   (I)   Facility shall not operate if its video surveillance equipment is
inoperative.
   (J)   Facility shall not have fewer than two people working at the facility
at any time while the facility is open to the public.
   (K)   Consumption of adult-use cannabis on the premises, including the
parking area, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
10-20-6: ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis infuser
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   (A)   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis infuser organization shall be
granted a conditional use under this chapter or otherwise permitted to operate
in the village.
   (B)   Facility shall not be located such that the entrance to the facility
is closer than five hundred (500) feet from the entrance to the primary
structure of any preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the village.
   (C)   Hours of operation shall not be earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
and not later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
10-20-7: ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis processing
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   (A)   No more than one (1) adult-use cannabis processing organization shall
be granted a conditional use under this Chapter or otherwise permitted in the
Village.
   (B)   Facility shall not be located such that the entrance to the facility
is closer than five hundred (500) feet from the entrance to the primary
structure of any preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the Village.
   (C)   Hours of operation shall not be earlier than six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
and not later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
10-20-8: ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION:
In those zoning use districts in which an adult-use cannabis transporting
organization may be located, the proposed facility must comply with the
following:
   (A)   Facility shall not be located such that the entrance to the facility
is closer than five hundred (500) feet from the entrance to the primary
structure of any preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school or daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility, public park, public library, residential substance abuse
treatment facility, or place of worship located within the Village. (Ord. 895,
11-13-2019)
10-20-9: CO-LOCATION:
If an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization seeks to co-locate with an
adult-use cannabis craft grower, an adult-use infuser organization, or both,
such establishment must include such a statement and plan for its impact and
operation in its application for conditional use. The Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consider the application and may take appropriate action to impose
additional conditions as necessary and make recommendations to the Village
Board of Trustees. Upon recommendation by the Zoning Board of Appeals, the
Village Board of Trustees may deny or authorize the co-location of such
establishments by final approval by a majority vote of the Village Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
10-20-10: SECURITY AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS:
Upon approval of a conditional use, the owner or operator of the adult-use
cannabis business establishment shall install building enhancements, such as
security cameras, lighting or other improvements, as set forth in the
conditional use permit, to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the
adult use cannabis business establishment, as well as surrounding property
owners. Said improvements shall be determined based on the specific
characteristics of the floor plan for an adult use cannabis business
establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent with the
requirements of the CRTA. (Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
10-20-11: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
An adult-use cannabis business establishment shall require approval as a
conditional use in the respective zoning district in which such establishment
is sought to be located. An application for a conditional use permit under this
Section shall be processed in the same manner and with the same review and
approval process as required for a special use permit under Section
10-15-6, except the standards set forth in Section
10-20-2(A) shall apply in lieu of the special use standards set forth in
Section
10-15-6(F). Further, the other provisions of Section
10-15-6 shall apply to a conditional use granted under this Chapter except as
otherwise provided herein. The application for a conditional use permit shall
include an affidavit of the applicant affirming compliance with the applicable
section of this Section, all requirements of the CRTA, and any restrictions,
stipulations or conditions imposed during the review and approval process.
(Ord. 895, 11-13-2019)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Purpose
11-1-2: Definitions
11-1-1: PURPOSE:
The land regulations and control herein adopted and established have been made
for the purpose of:
   (A)   Establishing reasonable rules and regulations governing the location,
width, and course of streets, highways, and storm or floodwater runoff
channels, basins and tubes;
   (B)   Providing for necessary public grounds for schools, parks or
playgrounds on any map, plat or subdivision;
   (C)   Establishing reasonable requirements with respect to water supply, and
sewage collection and treatment;
   (D)   Guiding and facilitating the orderly, beneficial development of the
Village; and
   (E)   Establishing procedures for approving maps, plats, subdivisions and
resubdivisions of any block, lot or sublot, or any part thereof or any parcel
of land or place within the Village and within one and one-half (11/2) miles
thereof and not lying within any other municipality or an area where mutual
division of control has been established with such other municipality.
11-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the purpose
of this Title, have the meaning herein indicated. Any pertinent word or term
not a part of this listing but vital to the interpretation of this Title, shall
be construed to have its usual legal definition:
The present tense includes the future tense, and the future the present; the
masculine gender includes the feminine gender and the neuter gender; the
singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular; and the word
“shall’ is always mandatory and the word “may” is always permissive. The word
“person” includes a partnership, association, firm, trust, club, institution,
company or corporation as well as an individual.
              The word “access” shall mean the way over which traffic moves to and/or from the
ACCESS:       property abutting a street or alley and the way over which traffic moves to and/or
              from a major street to a minor street or from a street to an alley.
              The word “alley” shall mean a permanent service right-of-way which affords only a
ALLEY:        secondary means of access from such right-of-way to abutting property and is not
              intended for general traffic circulation.
AREA LOT:     The term “area lot” shall mean the total area within the lot lines.
              The word “block” shall mean property abutting on one side of a street and lying
BLOCK:        between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or between the nearest
              intersecting or intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway,
              unsubdivided area, or other definite boundary.
              The word “building” shall mean an enclosed structure having a roof supported by
BUILDING:     columns, walls, arches, or other devices, used for housing, shelter or enclosure of
              persons, animals or chattels.
              The term “Comprehensive Plan” shall mean the complete plan or any of its parts for
COMPREHENSIVE the development of the Village as prepared by the Zoning Board or any other
PLAN:         planning agency and adopted by the Village Board as the Official Plan of the
              Village.
DWELLING:     The word “dwelling” shall mean a building designated for residential living
              purposes and containing one or more dwelling units.
              The term “dwelling unit” shall mean one or more rooms constituting all or part of a
DWELLING      dwelling exclusively as living quarters for one family and not more than two (2)
UNIT:         roomers or boarders, and which contains cooking facilities, sink or other kitchen
              facilities.
DWELLING,     The term “dwelling, single family” shall mean a dwelling containing one dwelling
SINGLE        unit.
FAMILY:
DWELLING,     The term “dwelling, multi-family” shall mean a dwelling containing two (2) or more
MULTI-FAMILY: dwelling units.
EASEMENT:     The word “easement” shall mean a right or privilege held by the public, a
              corporation or person for the use of the land of another for specified purposes.
VILLAGE       The term “Village Engineer” shall mean a qualified person appointed by the
ENGINEER:     President, with the consent of the Village Board of Trustees, to act as such for
              this Village.
VILLAGE       The term “Village Board” shall mean the President and Trustees of the Village of
BOARD:        Creve Coeur.
ZONING        The term “Zoning Commission” shall mean the Zoning Commission appointed by the
COMMISSION:   Village.
COUNTY:       The word “County” shall mean Tazewell County, Illinois.
              The word “family” shall mean:
              (A)   An individual; or
FAMILY:       (B)   Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or
              (C)   Not more than five (5) persons not so related;
              together with his or their domestic servants and gratuitous guests maintaining
              common household in a dwelling unit.
              The word “grade” shall mean the ascending or descending inclination with a
GRADE:        horizontal of a street, measured along the center line of the right-of-way,
              expressed by stating the vertical rise or fall of a percentage of the horizontal
              distance.
              The word “lot” shall mean a tract of land within a subdivision on a plat as a
LOT:          numbered, lettered or other identified tract of land to be offered for sale,
              dedication or development.
LOT LINES:    The term “lot lines” shall mean the lines bounding the lot.
              The word “owner” shall mean an individual, firm, association, syndicate,
OWNER:        partnership, corporation, company, organization, trust or other legal entity having
              a proprietary interest in a use, structure, lot, tract or parcel of land.
PARK:         The word “park” shall mean a public area for recreation, rest and relaxation in the
              open air.
PLANNED       The term “planned development” shall mean a tract of land developed as a unit under
DEVELOPMENT:  single ownership or control which includes two (2) or more main or principal
              structures.
PLAT:         The word “plat” shall mean a map, plan or layout showing the subdivision of land
              into lots.
PLAT OFFICER: The term “Plat Officer” shall mean the Chairman of the Zoning Board.
              The word “property” shall mean the general term denoting either singularly or in
PROPERTY:     combination, an area, lot, parcel, tract, plot, or otherwise designated portion of
              land.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The term “right-of-way” shall mean the entire dedicated tract or strip of land
              which is to be used by the public for circulation or service.
SANITARY      The term “sanitary sewer” shall mean a constructed conduit for the collection and
SEWER:        carrying of liquid or solid sewage wastes, other than storm water, to a sewage
              treatment plant.
              The word “school” shall mean a building or group of buildings and all associated
SCHOOL:       structures, facilities and grounds in or on which instruction in subjects which are
              fundamental and essential in general education is offered under the supervision of
              the Tazewell County Superintendent of Schools.
SIDEWALKS:    The word “sidewalks” shall mean that paved portion of the right-of-way which
              affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
STORM SEWER:  The term “storm sewer” shall mean a constructed conduit for the collection and
              carrying of surface waters to a drainage course.
              The word “street” shall mean a public thoroughfare within the right-of-way which
              affords the principal means of access to abutting property, a street may be
              designated as an avenue, boulevard, drive, highway, lane, parkway, place, road,
              thoroughfare, court, or other appropriate name. Streets are identified according to
              type of use as follows:
              (A)   Major Streets:
                 1.   Major Thoroughfare, Intermediate Thoroughfare: A street so designated on
              the Thoroughfare Plan.
                 2.   Limited Access Street: A major or intermediate thoroughfare along which
              exits and entrance ways, provided only at controlled intersections, and from which
STREET:       there is no direct access to abutting properties.
                 3.   Collector Streets: A street planned to facilitate the collection and
              routing of traffic from minor streets to major streets, or intermediate
              thoroughfares.
              (B)   Minor Streets:
                 1.   Direct Access Street: A street providing direct access to and/or from
              streets, alleys and abutting properties.
                 2.   Marginal Access Street: A street parallel to a limited access street
              providing direct access to and/or from streets, alleys, and abutting properties,
              and providing ways for traffic to reach access points along a limited access
              street.
              The word “structure” shall mean anything constructed or erected with a fixed
STRUCTURE:    location on the surface of the ground or underground, or affixed to something
              having a fixed location on the surface of the ground.
SUBDIVIDER:   The word “subdivider” shall mean an owner who presents a subdivision plat for
              approval hereunder.
              The word “subdivision” shall mean any division of any lot, area, tract or parcel of
              land into two (2) or more lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of
              conveyance, transfer, improvement, or sale, with the appurtenant streets, alleys
              and easements, dedicated or intended to be dedicated to public use, or for the use
SUBDIVISION:  of the purchasers or subdividers or others, within the part, lot, area or tract
              divided, except that divisions exempted from the provisions of an Act of the
              Illinois Legislature entitled: “An Act to Revise the Law in Relation to Plats”,
              approved March 21, 1874, as amended, and as set forth in Section 1(b) thereof, are
              not deemed subdivisions for the purpose of this Title.
              The term “Thoroughfare Plan” shall mean a part of the Comprehensive Plan which sets
THOROUGHFARE  forth the general location, alignment, and dimensions and the identification and
PLAN:         classification of existing and proposed streets. (Ord. 351, 10-1-69; amd. Ord. 962,
              10-26-2022)
 
CHAPTER 2
PROCEDURE
SECTION:
11-2-1: Preliminary Considerations
11-2-2: Pre-Application Procedure
11-2-3: Procedure For Conditional Approval of Preliminary Plat
11-2-4: Procedure For Approval of Final Plat
11-2-5: Boundary Maps
11-2-1: PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS:
   (A)   Regulatory: No land, after the effective date of this Title, shall be
subdivided within the Village or within one and one-half (11/2) miles thereof
over which the Village has jurisdiction, the plats thereof filed or recorded,
nor any street laid out, nor any improvement made to such subdivision or
subdivided land, until the plat or plats of the subdivision have been certified
to and approved by action specified herein.
   (B)   Conformity With Comprehensive Plan: The layout of the subdivision
shall be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan.
No land shall be subdivided for any use unless access to the land over streets
exists or shall be provided for by the subdivider in the manner as provided
herein.
   (C)   Advisory: In order to conserve time, effort and expenses, the
subdivider may consult with the Zoning Board and the Plat Officer prior to the
preparation of the tentative plan of the subdivision. Requirements for streets,
school, parks or recreational sites; shopping centers, community facilities,
sanitation, water facilities, and drainage, and relation to other developments,
existing and proposed, in the vicinity shall be analyzed in advance of the
preparation of the preliminary plat. (Ord .962, 10-26-2022)
11-2-2: PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Prior to the filing of an application for conditional approval of the
Preliminary Plat, the subdivider may submit to the Plat Officer, a sketch plan
showing the proposed layout of the entire tract in relation to existing
topography, together with a copy of existing covenants, if known. This step
shall not require formal application, nor any fee nor the filing of a plat with
the Clerk.
Within ten (10) days after receipt of the sketch plan, the Plat Officer shall
inform the subdivider in writing that the plans and data as submitted or as
modified do, or do not meet the requirements of this Title. When the plans and
data do not meet such requirements, the Plat Officer shall state the reasons in
writing and deliver a copy to the subdivider.
11-2-3: PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
The subdivider shall, after the above preapplication procedure, cause to be
prepared a preliminary plat together with improvement plans and other
supplementary material as specified in Chapter 5, Section 2, of this Title,
including an alternate layout in sketch form of the entire tract owned by the
subdivider, if not submitted under Section
11-2-2 hereof.
Sufficient copies, not less than three (3) of the preliminary application, the
preliminary plat and all required supplementary material shall be filed with
the Plat Officer, to meet the distribution requirements of the Village.
The Plat Officer shall forthwith transmit one copy to the Village Engineer and
one copy to the Zoning Board and he shall retain the third copy for his office.
The Village Engineer and the Zoning Board shall review the plat, and each shall
submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the Plat Officer. Such
report shall be submitted within twenty (20) days of the receipt of the plat.
Failure to submit a report within the specified time limit or a mutually agreed
extension thereof, shall be deemed a recommendation of approval of the plat.
Following review of the preliminary plat and accompanying supplemental
material, and review and consideration of the reports provided for herein, the
Plat Officer shall take action accordingly, approving, revising or rejecting
the proposed subdivision, and he shall in writing so notify the subdivider, the
Zoning Board, and the Village Engineer.
If the action of the Plat Officer is that of approving the preliminary plat, he
shall properly endorse his approval and date of such approval on all copies of
the plat. One copy of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy
shall be furnished the Village Engineer and one copy shall be retained by the
Plat Officer. If revisions are to be made, said revisions shall be indicated on
the plats before and prior to their endorsement. Such preliminary plat shall
bear the certificate of approval as follows:
   “STATE OF ILLINOIS )
      ) ss.
   County of Tazewell   )
   I,                    Plat Officer of the Village of Creve Coeur, do hereby
approve this Preliminary Plat in accordance with the provisions of the
Subdivision Ordinance of Creve Coeur, Illinois, this          day of          ,
A.D.       . This approval is not authority for recording of the above Plat.
                                                                 
   Plat Officer, Village of Creve Coeur, Ill.”
If the Plat Officer rejects the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall have the
right to appeal the decision to the Village Board, which Board may suspend the
Plat Officer’s decision or may modify or reverse, in whole or in part, his
decision. If the Village Board approves the preliminary plat, then the Plat
Officer shall be directed by motion passed in a meeting of the Village Board,
to endorse the plat.
Approval of the preliminary plat shall be construed to be an expression of
approval of the general layout submitted as a guide to the preparation of the
final plat, and to be assurance to the subdivider that the final plat will be
approved if it conforms to the terms of the conditional approval and this
Title, in force at the time of submitting and obtaining approval of the
preliminary plat. (Ord. 962, 10-26-2022)
11-2-4: PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT:
Not later than one year after approval of the preliminary plat, or such
additional time as the Plat Officer may allow, the subdivider may submit the
original tracing of an intended final plat, together with a print thereof to
the Plat Officer.
The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and it may
constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the
subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time; provided however, that
such portion conforms to all requirements of this Title.
Within twenty (20) days after receipt of plats and supplementary material, the
Plat Officer shall inform the subdivider that the plans and data submitted or
as modified, do or do not meet the requirements of this Title. When the plans
and data do not meet the requirements of this Title, the Plat Officer shall, in
writing, state the reasons and deliver a copy to the subdivider.
Final approval of a final plat shall be granted by the Plat Officer on the
basis of its conformity with the preliminary plat as approved, and with all
pertinent laws, rules, regulations and particularly with the requirements of
Chapters 4 and 5 of this Title, and with the Comprehensive Plan. The Plat
Officer shall notify the subdivider and his Engineer of the action taken, and
also the Village Engineer and Zoning Board.
In the event that only a portion of the approved preliminary plat is presented
for final approval, the Plat Officer may notify the subdivider in writing
whether or not the preliminary approval of the unrecorded portion has been
renewed for one year. In the absence of such written notification, the
subdivider may within one year after conditional approval of the preliminary
plat apply to the Plat Officer for extension of the conditional approval of the
preliminary plat without being required to pay additional fees.
An estimate of expenditures, covering the cost of the improvements required by
this Title shall be submitted with the final plat. This estimate of
expenditures shall be verified by the Village Engineer for accuracy and
adequacy, which verification shall be submitted with the final plat and data
required in this Title when presented to the Village Board for approval.
No final plat of any subdivision shall be approved for recording in the Office
of the Tazewell County Recorder of Deeds, unless (1) the improvements required
in this Title have been completed and approved prior to final recording
approval, or (2) the subdivider shall file with the Village Clerk a surety
bond, cashier’s or certified check of the amount determined from the estimate
of expenditures, guaranteeing to the Village that such improvements shall be
constructed and completed in a satisfactory manner, within the period of time
specified by the Plat Officer, but not to exceed one year. Property owners
signator of surety bonds, shall provide guaranteed evidence of their ownership
of real estate pledged and that it is free and clear of other obligations,
including the payments of real estate taxes and special assessments. The form
of said bonds and checks shall be approved to the satisfaction of the Village
Attorney and shall be made payable to the Village of Creve Coeur, Illinois, or
its benefit.
When approved, the final plat shall bear the following certificate:
   “STATE OF ILLINOIS )
      ) ss.
   County of Tazewell   )
   I,                    Village of Creve Coeur Plat Officer, do hereby approve
this Final Plat in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance
of the Village of Creve Coeur, Tazewell County, Illinois, this          day of
         , A.D.         .
                                            
   Creve Coeur Plat Officer.”
Within sixty (60) days after approval of the final plat by the Plat Officer,
said plat shall be filed by the subdivider with the County Recorder, and if not
so filed, shall have no validity and shall not thereafter be recorded without
recertification by the Plat Officer. All plats (original tracings of said
plats) after being recorded, shall become the property of the County, and kept
by them for safe keeping.
For the approval of any final plat, as hereinabove required, the subdivider
shall pay into the General Fund of the Village as a fee for such approval, the
sum of one dollar ($1.00) for each lot, sublot, tract or parcel of land shown
upon any plat to be approved as a subdivision, and provided, further, that the
said fee for the approval of any plat shall be not less than ten dollars
($10.00). In addition to said fees set forth above, the subdivider shall
reimburse the Village for all engineering expenses of checking plats, water,
sewer and other plans, specifications, data, contours and for inspection of
construction of the facilities required by this Title, and all legal fees in
connection with said subdivision or relating thereto or to checking titles,
bonds, financial matters or the like; all costs to be paid prior to final
approval of the plat. (Ord. 962, 10-26-2022)
11-2-5: BOUNDARY MAPS:
Any parcel of land may be divided into two (2) parts, either of which part is
less than five (5) acres, for the purpose of ownership, transfer or building
development provided no new street or easement of access is required, by
submitting an adequate map, certified by a Licensed Illinois Land Surveyor.
Such boundary map shall bear the certification of the County Clerk that there
are no delinquent taxes and/or assessments against the land or parcel described
in the boundary plat or map.
Such boundary shall bear a certificate of approval, signed by the Plat Officer,
as follows:
   “STATE OF ILLINOIS )
      ) ss.
   County of Tazewell   )
   I,                   , Creve Coeur Plat Officer, do hereby approve the above
boundary map in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance of
Creve Coeur, Illinois, this       day of         , A.D.       .
                                            
   Creve Coeur Plat Officer.”
No such boundary map shall be recorded or have any validity until it has been
signed and approved by the Plat Officer. The Plat Officer shall file one copy
of such boundary map in his office, the Plat Officer shall make a record of
such map and he shall not sign another boundary map further dividing said land
within two (2) years of the date of the approval thereof. In addition, any such
boundary map must otherwise comply with zoning requirements, lot sizes and the
like, if for other than merely increasing one’s needed or desired lot size.
Any survey plat of a parcel of land, which parcel is not part of a subdivision
as defined for the purpose of this Title, shall be entitled to recording,
provided it shall be endorsed with the following certification, signed and
sealed by the Illinois Registered Land Surveyor preparing the plat: “I hereby
certify at this parcel of land is not part of a subdivision requiring Village
approval under the Subdivision Ordinance of the Village of Creve Coeur,
Illinois, designated as Ordinance No. 351.” The certificate shall be signed by
the Surveyor, with his Illinois Registration number and date. Any violation or
failure to strictly comply with this Title shall be basis for action against
such Surveyor. (Ord. 351, 10-1-69; amd. Ord. 962, 10-26-2022)
CHAPTER 3
DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-3-1: General
11-3-2: Streets
11-3-3: Easements
11-3-4: Blocks
11-3-5: Lots
11-3-6: Parks, Public Sites and Open Spaces
11-3-1: GENERAL:
The following standards and principals of design shall guide the laying out of
subdivisions:
The design of the subdivision shall be in harmony with and shall conform with
the Comprehensive Plan and shall be in accordance with good subdivision design
principles not otherwise set forth herein.
Natural features, such as distinctive trees or vegetation, streams, ponds,
hilltops, bluffs, creek bottoms and outlook stations or views shall be
preserved and enhanced wherever possible. In laying out a subdivision due
consideration shall be given to aesthetic features existing within the tract
being subdivided and which may add to the aesthetic quality of existing nearby
subdivisions.
11-3-2: STREETS:
The course, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and
planned streets, to topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety,
and their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by
such streets and they shall conform to the following design standards:
Where not shown on the Comprehensive Plan, the arrangement of streets in a
subdivision shall either:
   (A)   Provide for the continuation of projection of existing principal
streets in surrounding area; or
   (B)   Conform to Thoroughfare Plan where applicable; or
   (C)   Conform to topographic or other conditions where continuance or
projection of existing streets is impractical or undesirable from the community
standpoint.
Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be
discouraged.
All new subdivisions along State and County Highways shall be arranged to
provide direct access to such Highways at intervals not less than one thousand
three hundred twenty feet (1,320'), except where impractical or impossible due
to existing property divisions or topography or due to undue traffic
concentration at points of such access. Also, roads and streets within such
subdivision shall be arranged to permit access to adjacent future subdivisions
without encroachment upon this regulation.
No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent (.5%). No street
grade on major streets shall be more than five percent (5%) and on minor
streets shall not exceed nine percent (9%).
   (A)   Street Intersections: Streets shall be laid out to intersect at nearly
as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at
less than seventy degrees (70°).
Street intersections with center line offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') are prohibited.
   (B)   Horizontal Deflection of Street Lines: Where connecting street lines
deflect from each other more than ten degrees (10'), they shall be connected
with a curb with a radius adequate to assure sight distance.
A tangent at least one hundred feet (100') long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on major and collector streets, where the curve radius is less
than five hundred feet (500').
   (C)   Alleys should not be permitted in residential districts.
   (D)   Right-of-Way: Street right-of-way widths not shown in the
Comprehensive Plan should not be less than the following:
 
Collector Street              80 feet
Minor (direct access streets) 60 feet
Marginal Access Streets       40 feet
Alleys                        25 feet
 
In a subdivision that adjoins or includes an existing street that does not
conform to the right-of-way width required above, one-half (1/2) of the
additional width shall be provided along each side of such street for the
entire frontage included within the land being subdivided, or as the Plat
Officer may determine is proper.
Dead-End Streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than six
hundred feet (600'), unless limitation of the site by reason of topography or
existing development make impractical development except with a longer length.
They shall be provided with a circular turn around having an outside surface
diameter of at least one hundred feet (100'). The center of the turn around
shall be located between the center line of the street and its right-of-way
line, facing into the turn around.
All streets shall be public and dedicated to the Village.
Reserve strips controlling access to street right-of-way shall not be permitted
except upon approval of the Plat Officer and when control and disposition of
the reserved strip is vested in the Village.
   (E)   Street Names and Numbers: The continuation of an existing street shall
have the same name. The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an
existing street within the area. The name shall be submitted for approval by
the Village Board.
All lots within the subdivision shall be assigned street numbers in accordance
with the numbering system of the Village.
11-3-3: EASEMENTS:
Easements across lots for utilities, water course drainage ways, channels for
streams, where provided, shall not be less than ten feet (10') wide and shall
be adjacent to or centered on lot lines where practicable.
11-3-4: BLOCKS:
The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard to:
   (A)   Provision for adequate building sites for the special type of use
contemplated.
   (B)   Requirements as to lot size and dimensions.
   (C)   Needs for convenient access circulation, control and safety of street
traffic.
   (D)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
In cases where the block length exceeds six hundred feet (600') and where
deemed essential by the Plat Officer to provide pedestrian circulation to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities, a right-
of-way dedicated to the public use for a walk way not less than ten feet (10')
wide shall be provided and dedicated.
11-3-5: LOTS:
All provisions of the Zoning Ordinance (Title 10 of this Code) concerning lots
shall apply, including lot area, width, and depth. No parcel, remainder, gore,
outlot or remnant of land which is part of the tract being subdivided shall be
created which by reason of lot width, depth, area, frontage, topography, or
lack of access thereto, cannot be used as a zoning lot, or be subject to
further subdivision in accordance with the terms of this Title. Any remaining
parcel or outlot which cannot be made to comply with the foregoing shall be
eliminated by combining the area thereof with one or more adjoining lots which
do comply, or by conveying the same for appropriate public use, subject to
acceptance of the same by some public body.
The lot shape and orientation shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided, except where
essential to provide separation or residential development from major streets
or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines
except where topography or drainage conditions warrant angling lot lines, or
where turn arounds of a permanent type are required.
11-3-6: PARKS, PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES:
When a proposed park, playground or school is shown in the Comprehensive Plan,
or in the opinion of the Plat Officer is necessary for the public welfare, the
Plat Officer may require the reservation of the appropriate area, not to exceed
fifteen percent (15%) of the area within the subdivision. Upon the approval of
a final plat containing the reservation for such public use, the corporate
authorities having jurisdiction of such use, be it a school board, park board,
or other authority, shall acquire the land so designated by purchase, or
commence proceedings to acquire such land by condemnation, within one year from
the date of the filing of such plat; and if it does not do so, the land so
designated may then be used by the subdivider in any other manner consistent
with this Title and the Comprehensive Plan. (Ord. 351, 10-1-69)
CHAPTER 4
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: General
11-4-2: Monuments
11-4-3: Streets
11-4-4: Sanitary Sewers
11-4-5: Storm Sewers
11-4-6: Water
11-4-7: Storm Drainage
11-4-8: Underground Utilities
11-4-9: Modification
11-4-10: Inspection and Acceptance
11-4-11: Water and Sewer Fees
11-4-1: GENERAL:
It is recommended that no grading, tree removal, site work or installation of
any required improvements be commenced until the preliminary plat has been
approved.
All grading, site work or installation of any required improvements shall be
done in the manner as to prevent flooding, washing, erosion, silting, or other
impairment of adjacent properties, storm drainage channels, bodies of water or
adjoining streets.
No trees, tree stumps, brush or similar material shall be buried or used as
fill in any area of a subdivision to be traversed by a street or road.
11-4-2: MONUMENTS:
Monuments shall be placed under the direction of an Illinois Registered Land
Surveyor at all block corners, angle points, points of tangency of curves in
streets, and at such intermediate points as shall be required by the Plat
Officer. The monuments shall be of such material, size and length as may be
approved by the Plat Officer and in addition, monuments shall be indicated on
the plat that relate to other established monuments and those of adjoining
subdivisions shall be shown on the plat, naming such other established
subdivision.
11-4-3: STREETS:
Street improvement plans for streets (and alleys where provided) shall be
prepared by the subdivider's registered engineer and shall be submitted to the
Village Engineer for approval. Upon approval of the street improvement plans by
the Village Engineer, the streets and alleys shall be constructed by the
subdivider in accordance with such plan, under the supervision of the Village
Engineer, who shall certify the completion in accordance with the approved
plans.
All utilities under the paved portion of the streets shall be provided or
installed before surfacing of the streets, except where they may be installed
without disturbing the surface of the streets. Wherever possible, utilities
shall be installed so as not to require disturbing the street surface in
repairing, maintaining or servicing such utilities.
After the completion of the street improvements, the Village Engineer shall
inspect the same and submit a written report to the Village Board, stating
whether or not the streets are completed and ready for acceptance by the
Village.
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with street signs erected at the
intersections of all streets.
Street Improvements: Street improvements shall be provided in each new
subdivision in accordance with standards and requirements described in the
following schedule:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1147f5e2e9733f6b2c310ca34bc981edbce4a658/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2296.png]
Notwithstanding the requirements set forth above, no additional paved width,
curb, gutter, base course or surface shall be required on an existing improved
street which is a part of the state, county or township road system, where the
land being developed abuts said street. A sidewalk, however, shall be required
for the full frontage of the subdivision on collector streets. (Ord. 351, 10-1-
1969)
11-4-4: SANITARY SEWERS:
When the sanitary sewer system is conveniently available, the subdivider shall
connect the subdivision with that sanitary sewer or some other municipally
owned sanitary sewer system.
Under special conditions, the subdivider may be permitted to construct a
separate sanitary sewer system to serve the subdivision, provided he complies
with the requirements of the Illinois department of public health in the
construction of such sanitary sewer facilities, and upon the further direction
and recommendation of the village engineer. Upon satisfactory completion
thereof, the entire installation, mains, connectors, disposal plant and system
shall be turned over to the village or Creve Coeur sanitary district, who
shall, at no cost to either the village or district, be and become the owner in
fee and such municipality shall then be the operator thereof, together with all
easements, rights, lands and facilities. (Ord. 351, 10-1-1969)
11-4-5: STORM SEWERS:
Storm sewers, footing drains and downspouts shall not be connected with or to
any sanitary sewer. (Ord. 351, 10-1-1969)
11-4-6: WATER:
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with a complete water supply
system which shall be connected to the village water supply or to that of some
other municipality. Under special difficulties a subdivider may provide an
independent water supply system approved by the Illinois department of public
health and on specifications and requirements of the village engineer. Upon the
completion of construction and acceptance thereof, the entire system, mains,
valves, hydrants, storage tanks, pumps, controls and the like, shall be turned
over to the village within one year, together with all easements, land or
rights, without cost to the village, and thereafter and upon acceptance
thereof, the village shall be the owner in fee of all said property and
facilities and shall thereafter operate and maintain said system. (Ord. 351,
10-1-1969)
11-4-7: STORM DRAINAGE:
The subdivider shall provide the subdivision with an adequate storm sewer
system and stormwater controls including submitting any necessary plans and
drawings in conformity with the village stormwater control ordinance as
described in section
10-14-15 of this code. Such system shall be designed by a registered,
professional engineer authorized to practice in this state. Such plans then
shall be submitted to and examined by the village engineer for approval,
correction or modification. (Ord. 351, 10-1-1969; amd. Ord. 661, 9-10-2008)
A storm sewer system shall be provided wherever curbs are installed, and where
the evidence available indicates to the plat officer that the natural surface
drainage is inadequate.
Where the surface drainage is deemed adequate, easements for such surface
drainage may be required to be obtained by the subdivider. (Ord. 351, 10-1-
1969)
All storm drainage facilities, land, easements and rights shall remain the
responsibility and property of the subdivision and shall not become the
property of the village, upon acceptance of the subdivision plat, and
thereafter the subdivision shall maintain and operate such systems unless the
village board specifically accepts ownership, responsibility and control of the
stormwater drainage facilities and easements. If the subdivision retains
responsibility for stormwater drainage facilities, land, and improvements, the
subdivider shall submit for approval and then record as part of the
restrictions for the subdivision provisions providing for the maintenance,
repair and replacement of the improvements and easements. If the subdivision
fails to keep the improvements maintained and in proper repair, the village may
make any necessary repairs, replacement and maintenance and may charge the
subdivider if the subdivider retains any interest in the subdivided property
and the owners of the lots in the subdivision. The subdivision plans submitted
for approval by the village engineer shall include any required plans for
erosion control required under section
10-14-15 of this code. (Ord. 661, 9-10-2008)
11-4-8: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
All utilities, electric, telephone, water, sewer, cablevision and all other
utilities, shall be placed underground or if such cannot reasonably be done in
the opinion of the village, then such installations so far as is possible,
shall be placed on easements at the rear of the lots or such other place as the
village engineer and plat officer determine to be necessary either because of
circumstances, topography or undue hardships. (Ord. 351, 10-1-1969)
11-4-9: MODIFICATION:
Where the subdivider can show that the strict application of a provision of
this chapter would cause undue hardship because of unusual topographical or
other physical conditions peculiar to the site, the Zoning Board, together with
the recommendations of the village engineer and plat officer, may authorize
minor modifications in the application of such provisions as, in their opinion
and for reasons set forth in minutes of the commission, will not materially
impair the intent of this title and subject, also, to approval of the village
board as provided for in chapter 6 of this title. (Ord. 351, 10-1-1969; amd.
Ord. 962, 10-26-2022)
11-4-10: INSPECTION AND ACCEPTANCE:
The subdivider shall provide an Illinois registered engineer who shall be
responsible for inspecting all phases of construction to ensure compliance with
approved plans, general laws and construction procedures of the village. The
village engineer should be kept informed of construction developments and may,
at any time during construction, inspect the improvements. The developer's
engineer should allow no connections, backfilling or covering of critical areas
of construction without prior approval of the village engineer. The village
engineer, upon receipt of an acceptable certificate by the subdivider or
developer's engineer attesting to the compliance of construction, shall inspect
said construction and submit a written report to the village board stating
readiness for acceptance of the improvements. (Ord. 451, 6-7-1978)
11-4-11: WATER AND SEWER FEES:
A combined fee for sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water service shall be paid
by the subdivider or developer prior to connection to any existing mains,
trunks or other village facilities. This fee shall be three hundred dollars
($300.00) per lot except in the case of multiple-unit dwellings which shall be
one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per unit. (Ord. 451, 6-7-1978)
CHAPTER 5
PLATS AND DATA
SECTION:
11-5-1: Plats and Data For Conditional Approval of Preliminary Plat
11-5-2: Topographic Data
11-5-3: Plats and Data For Final Approval
11-5-1: PLATS AND DATA FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT:
A preliminary plat of the subdivision shall be accurately drawn to a scale of
one hundred feet (100') to one inch (1").
11-5-2: TOPOGRAPHIC DATA:
The topographic data shall include the following information:
   (A)   Approximate boundary lines and lot lines.
   (B)   Existing Easements: Location, width and purpose, with ownership,
depth, etc.
   (C)   Existing Streets: On and adjacent to the tract by name, right-of-way
width, location, type, width and elevation of surfacing, curbs, gutters,
culverts and sidewalks, if any.
   (D)   Existing Utilities: On and adjacent to the tract; location, size and
invert elevation of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and where existing, location
and size of water mains; location of gas mains; fire hydrants; electric and
telephone poles and street lights; if any of the above are not available at the
site, indicate the direction and distance to the nearest ones and furnish a
statement of availability.
   (E)   Other Existing Conditions; Water courses, marshes, wooded areas,
dwellings, buildings and other significant features.
   (F)   Ground Elevations: On tracts based on U.S.G.S. datum, show contours at
verticle intervals as follows:
Slope of six percent (6%) or less -- two foot (2') intervals;
Slope over six percent (6%) but less than fifteen percent (15%) -- five foot
(5') intervals;
Slope over fifteen percent (15%) -- ten foot (10') intervals.
   (G)   Title and Certificates: Present tract designation; title under which
subdivision is to be recorded names and addresses of owners, acreage, scale,
North point; datum, benchmarks; relation to other known monuments; certificate
of registered land surveyor and date of survey.
The preliminary plat shall show all existing conditions required above in
topographic data and all proposals, including, but not limited to the
following:
   (A)   Streets: Names, right-of-way width, approximate grade and gradients;
   (B)   Lots: Lot lines, numbers and block numbers;
   (C)   Sites (Public): If any, to be dedicated or reserved for parks,
playgrounds, schools, churches or other public uses, showing the approximate
acreage of each site;
   (D)   Sites (Non-Public): If any, for shopping centers, churches, industry,
multi-family dwellings or any other non-public use including indication of
proposed use, showing approximate acreage of each site;
   (E)   Setback Lines: Give location of minimum setback lines.
   (F)   Other Preliminary Plans: When required by the Village Engineer the
preliminary plat shall be accompanied by profiles showing existing ground
surface and proposed street grades; typical cross-sections of the streets and
sidewalks.
   (G)   Zoning: Show zoning classifications of the subdivision and adjacent
areas.
11-5-3: PLATS AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL:
The final plat shall meet the following specifications:
The final plat may include all or only a part of the area of the preliminary
plat as proposed in the application.
The original drawing of the final plat of the subdivision shall be eighteen
inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24"), or larger in six inch (6") multiples.
It shall be drawn to a scale of one hundred feet (100') to the inch. Four (4)
black or blue line prints shall be submitted with the final plat.
The following information shall be shown on the final plat:
   (A)   Land reference concurs in accordance with State Plat Act, to which all
dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the final plat shall be
referred.
   (B)   Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
other right-of-way, and property lines or residential lots and other sites;
with accurate dimensions, bearings of deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and
central angels of all curves;
   (C)   Names of east street or other rights-of-way;
   (D)   Location and right-of-way widths or existing and/or platted streets
adjacent to the tract;
   (E)   Location and dimensions of all easements;
   (F)   Consecutive numbers for each lot or site within all subdivisions
having the same name or extensions, or the like;
   (G)   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots, are dedicated or
reserved;
   (H)   Minimum setback line on all lots and other sites;
   (I)   Location and descriptions of monuments;
   (J)   Reference to recorded subdivision plats of adjoining platted land,
designating the name thereof;
   (K)   Certification by Illinois Registered Land Surveyor as to the accuracy
of survey and plat;
   (L)   Statement by subdivider dedicating streets, or rights-of- way,
reserving easements and any other sites for dedication or conveyance to the
public uses;
   (M)   Title, scale, North arrow, and date;
   (N)   Other data including such certificates, affidavits, endorsements or
dedications as may be required by applicable codes, ordinances and/or statutes
pertaining to zoning, dedicated streets, utilities and drainage facilities.
A certificate by the Plat Officer certifying that the subdivider has posted a
good and sufficient bond with the Village Clerk in a penal sum sufficient to
cover the estimate by a qualified engineer and approved by the Village Engineer
of the probable expenditures necessary to enable the subdivider to conform with
the standards of construction established pursuant to the provisions of this
Title. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful adherence to the rules
and regulations contained in this Title and within the time specified.
Protective covenants in form of recording.
Street and utility improvement plans shall be submitted and approved before the
final plat is approved. (Ord. 351, 10-1-69)
CHAPTER 6
MODIFICATION
SECTION:
11-6-1: General
11-6-2: Large Scale Development
11-6-3: Action by Village Board
11-6-4: Appeals
11-6-1: GENERAL:
Where, on appeal, the Zoning Board finds that extra-ordinary hardships may
result from strict compliance with this Title, it may recommend to the Village
Board a modification of the regulations so that substantial compliance and
justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such
modification will not have the effect of nullifying the purpose of the
Comprehensive Plan, nor be a change that others may take generally, nor
otherwise violate this Title. (Ord. 962, 10-26-2022)
11-6-2: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT:
The standards and requirements of this Title may be modified by the Zoning
Board in the case of a plan or a program for a planned development for the
Village, or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the Zoning Board
shall exceed the minimum requirements for adequate public space and
improvements for circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the
tract when fully developed and populated and which also provides such covenants
or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to the purpose of the
Comprehensive Plan. (Ord 962, 10-26-2022)
11-6-3: ACTION BY VILLAGE BOARD:
In recommending modifications wherever provided for in this Title, the Zoning
Board may prescribe such conditions, as will, in its judgment, secure
substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified. The
recommendations of a modification by the Zoning Board shall be conditional and
shall be subject to final approval of the Village Board. (Ord 962, 10-26-2022)
11-6-4: APPEALS:
Whenever a subdivider is aggrieved by the decision of the Plat Officer with
regard to a final plat, he may file an appeal to the Village Board from such
decision within ten (10) days of the date thereof; such appeal shall be filed
with the Village Clerk and by him forwarded immediately to the Zoning Board for
their recommendation for action by the Village Board. The Village Board shall
hold a hearing and may affirm or reverse, in whole or in part, the decision of
the Plat Officer, and in that instance shall have all the powers and duties of
the Plat Officer, including the right to modify such order. (Ord. 351, 10-1-69;
amd. Ord. 962, 10-26-2022)
CHAPTER 7
ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES
SECTION:
11-7-1: Enforcement
11-7-2: Penalties
11-7-3: Policy
11-7-1: ENFORCEMENT:
The Village President, with the concurrence of the Village Board, shall appoint
the Plat Officer who shall serve at the pleasure of said Board. They shall fix
his salary. No officer so designated by the Board as its Plat Officer shall
engage, either directly or indirectly in the business of surveying, and no map,
plat, or subdivision shall be received for record, nor shall the same have any
validity, which has been prepared by or under the direction of any such Plat
Officer in violation of the provisions of this Section.
11-7-2: PENALTIES:
No map, plat or subdivision shall be entitled to record in the County or have
any validity until it has been approved by the Village Board in accordance with
the provisions of this Title.
Whenever it comes to the knowledge of the Plat Officer that any provisions of
this Title have been violated, it shall be his duty to notify the Village
Attorney of this fact; furnishing all pertinent information and report of the
matter, and the Village Attorney shall then take appropriate action to enforce
this Title or effect compliance therewith.
11-7-3: POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Village Board, in adopting this
Title to provide for the health, welfare and orderly development of the
Village, and as such this Title is necessary in the interest of the public
benefit, health and welfare. (Ord. 351, 10-1-69)
